


CITY OF BROOKINGS CHARTER OF 1993

Effective January 1, 1993    

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PREAMBLE

CHAPTER I    	NAMES AND BOUNDARIES

Section 1.    	Title of Charter.

Section 2.    	Name of City.

Section 3.    	Boundaries.

CHAPTER II    	POWERS

Section 4.    	Powers of the City.

Section 5.    	Construction of Powers.

Section 6.    	Distribution of Powers.

CHAPTER III    	FORM OF GOVERNMENT

Section 7.    	Council.

Section 8.    	Councilors.

Section 9.    	Mayor.

Section 10.    	Terms of Office.

Section 11.    	Appointive Offices.

CHAPTER IV    	COUNCIL

Section 12.    	Rules.

Section 13.    	Meetings.

Section 14.    	Quorum.

Section 15.    	Record of Proceedings.

Section 16.    	Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings. 

Section 17.    	Council President.

Section 18.    	Vote Required.

Section 19.    	Vacancies: Occurrence.

Section 20.    	Vacancies: Filling.

CHAPTER V    	POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS

Section 21.    	Mayor.

Section 22.    	City Manager. 

CHAPTER VI    	PERSONNEL

Section 23.    	Qualifications. 

Section 24.    	Compensation. 

Section 25.    	Merit System.

Section 26.    	Political Contributions.

Section 27.    	Oath.

CHAPTER VII    	ELECTIONS

Section 28.    	State Law.

Section 29.    	Nominations.

CHAPTER VIII    	ORDINANCES

Section 30.    	Ordaining Clause.

Section 31.    	Adoption by Council.

Section 32.    	Effective Date.

CHAPTER IX    	PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Section 33.    	Procedures for Public Improvements.

Section 34.    	Special Assessments.

CHAPTER X    	MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 35.    	Debt.

Section 36.    	Continuation of Ordinances.

Section 37.    	Repeal.

Section 38.    	Severability.

Section 39.    	Time of Effect.

CHAPTER XI    	WATER INTAKE RELOCATION

Section 40.    	Authorization to Expend Proceeds from Sale of Bonds.

Section 41.    	Issuance and Sale of Bonds.

Section 42.    	Authorization to Effect Amendment; Establishment of “Water Bond Sinking Fund.”

Section 43.    	Bonds to be General Obligation Bonds of the City of Brookings.

Section 44.    	Authorization to Levy Taxes.

Section 45.    	Authorization to Adopt Plans and Specifications.

CHAPTER XII    	WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT FACILITIES PLAN

Section 46.    	Authorization to Issue and Sell Bonds.

Section 47.    	Bonds to be Known as “City of Brookings Sewage Disposal Bonds, Series of 1988.”

Section 48.    	Establishment of “Brookings Sewage Disposal Construction Fund.”

Section 49.    	Authorization to Adopt Plans and Specifications.

Section 50.    	Authorization to Levy Taxes.

PREAMBLE       

We, the people of Brookings, Oregon, in order to avail ourselves of self-determination in municipal affairs to the fullest extent now or hereafter possible under the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon, through this charter confer upon the city the following powers, subject it to the following restrictions, prescribe for it the following procedures and governmental structure, and repeal all previous charter provisions of the city, except as provided in Chapter X, Section 37.


CHAPTER I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1. Title of Charter.

This charter may be referred to as the 1993 Brookings Charter.


Section 2. Name of City.

The city of Brookings, Oregon, continues under this charter to be a municipal corporation with the name city of Brookings.


Section 3. Boundaries.

The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to state law. The custodian of the city’s records shall keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a copy of it available for public inspection in the city during regular city office hours.


CHAPTER II POWERS


Section 4. Powers of the City.

The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5. Construction of Powers.

In this charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or restricts authority that the city would have if the power were not specified. The charter shall be liberally construed, so that the city may exercise fully all its powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law. All powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the contrary.


Section 6. Distribution of Powers.

Except as this charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the city, all powers of the city are vested in the council.


CHAPTER III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


Section 7. Council.

The council consists of a mayor and four councilors nominated and elected from the city at large or, in case of one or more vacancies in the council, the council members whose offices are not vacant.


Section 8. Councilors.

The term of office of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term of office for which the councilor has been elected before adoption of the charter (or is elected at the time of the adoption). At each general election after the adoption, two councilors shall be elected, each for a four-year term.


Section 9. Mayor.

The term of office of the most recently elected mayor at the time this charter takes effect begins at the first council meeting of the year 1993. At the general election of the year 1994 and at each subsequent general election, a mayor shall be elected for a two-year term, whose term of office shall commence at the first council meeting in January immediately following such general election.


Section 10. Terms of Office.

The term of office of an elective officer who is elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the calendar year immediately after the election and continues until the successor to the office assumes the office.


Section 11. Appointive Offices.

A majority of the council shall appoint and may remove a city manager, municipal judge, city attorney and city recorder. A majority of the council may:

(1)    Create, abolish, and combine additional appointive offices and,

(2)    Except as the majority prescribes otherwise, fill such offices by appointment and vacate them by removal.


CHAPTER IV COUNCIL


Section 12. Rules.

The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe rules to govern its meetings and proceedings.


Section 13. Meetings.

The council shall meet in the city regularly at least once a month at a time and place designated by council’s rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules.


Section 14. Quorum.

A majority of the council constitutes a quorum for its business.


Section 15. Record of Proceedings.

A record of council proceedings shall be kept and authenticated in a manner prescribed by the council.


Section 16. Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

(1)    When present at council meetings the mayor shall:

(a)    Preside over deliberations of the council,

(b)    Preserve order,

(c)    Enforce council rules, and

(d)    Determine the order of business under the rules.

(2)    Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the mayor may temporarily cease to chair a council meeting and delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to the council president or, in the president’s absence, to another council member.

(3)    The mayor is a voting member of the council.


Section 17. Council President.

(1)    At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall appoint a president from its councilors.

(2)    Except in voting on questions before the council, the president shall function as mayor when the mayor is:

(a)    Absent from a council meeting, or

(b)    Unable to function as mayor.


Section 18. Vote Required.

Except as Section 31 of this charter prescribes otherwise, the express concurrence of a majority of the council members present and constituting a quorum is necessary to decide affirmatively a question before the council.


Section 19. Vacancies: Occurrence.

The office of a member of the council becomes vacant:

(1)    Upon the incumbent’s:

(a)    Death,

(b)    Adjudicated incompetence, or

(c)    Recall from office; or

(2)    Upon declaration by the council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent’s:

(a)    Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within ten days after the time for his or her term of office to begin.

(b)    Absence from the city for 30 days without notifying the council or from all meetings of the council within a 65-day period.

(c)    Ceasing to reside in the city.

(d)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law.

(e)    Conviction of a felony crime, a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any other offense pertaining to the public office.

(f)    Resignation from the office.


Section 20. Vacancies: Filling.

A vacancy in the council shall be filled within 60 days by:

(1)    Appointment by a majority of the council;

(2)    Special election when the number of vacancies in the council exceeds the number of members holding office.

The terms of office of those appointed or elected run from the time of their qualifying for office after appointment or election and until expiration of the terms of their predecessors who have left the offices vacant.


CHAPTER V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 21. Mayor.

The mayor shall appoint the committees in adherence to the rules of the council. The mayor shall sign all approved records of proceedings of the council and countersign all checks and vouchers. The mayor shall have no veto power and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council within three days after their passing. Upon the approval of the council, the mayor shall endorse all bonds of city officers and all bonds for licenses, contracts, and proposals.


Section 22. City Manager.

(1)    The city manager is the administrative head of the city government.

(2)    A majority of the council shall appoint and may remove the city manager. The appointment shall be without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of administrative qualifications.

(3)    The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed by the council at its pleasure. Within six consecutive months after a vacancy occurs in the office, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment.

(4)    The duties of the city manager shall be established by ordinance.

(5)    The city manager and other personnel whom the council designates may sit with the council but may not vote on questions before it. The city manager may take part in all council discussions.

(6)    When the city manager is absent from the city or disabled from acting as city manager, or when the office of city manager becomes vacant, the council shall appoint a city manager pro tem, who has the powers and duties of city manager, except that the city manager pro tem may appoint or remove personnel only with approval of the council. No person may be city manager pro tem more than six consecutive months.


CHAPTER VI PERSONNEL


Section 23. Qualifications.

(1)    An elective city officer shall be a qualified elector under the state constitution and shall have resided in the city during the 12 months immediately before being elected or appointed to the office. In this subsection “city” means area inside the city limits at the time of the election or appointment.

(2)    No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one elective city office.

(3)    An elective officer may be employed in a city position that is substantially volunteer in nature. Whether the position is so may be decided by the municipal court upon the request of the city council.

(4)    Except as subsection (3) of this section provides to the contrary, the council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members.

(5)    The qualifications of appointive officers of the city are whatever the council prescribes or authorizes.


Section 24. Compensation.

(1)    The council shall prescribe the compensation of city officers. The council may prescribe a plan for reimbursing city personnel for expenses that they incur in serving the city.

(2)    No establishment of compensation of the mayor or councilors, or increase in such compensation once established, may take effect, however, until the first of the odd-numbered year immediately following the first general election after the increase is authorized.


Section 25. Merit System.

Subject to council approval and to all collective bargaining agreements between the city and one or more groups of its employees, the city manager shall prescribe rules governing recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of city employees, all of which shall be based on merit and fitness.


Section 26. Political Contributions.

No person shall attempt to or actually coerce, command or require any appointed city official or employee to influence or give money, service or anything of value to promote or oppose any political committee, the nomination or election of a candidate, the adoption of a measure, or the recall of a member of the council.


Section 27. Oath.

Before assuming city office, an officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitution and laws of the United States and of the state of Oregon and the charter and ordinances of the city of Brookings.


CHAPTER VII ELECTIONS


Section 28. State Law.

Except as this charter or a city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a city election shall conform to state law applicable to the election.


Section 29. Nominations.

A qualified elector who shall have resided in the city during the 12 months immediately preceding the election or the appointment may be nominated for an elective city office. Nomination petitions shall be in the form and filed in the manner and within the time prescribed by general ordinance. The custodian of city records shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name and address of the person by whom it is filed.


CHAPTER VIII ORDINANCES


Section 30. Ordaining Clause.

The ordaining clause of an ordinance shall be “The city of Brookings ordains as follows:”.


Section 31. Adoption by Council.

(1)    An ordinance shall be fully and distinctly read in open council meeting on two different days before being adopted by the council, except that:

(a)    The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the express unanimous votes of all council members present and entitled to vote, provided the ordinance is read first in full and then by title.

(b)    Any reading of an ordinance may be by title only if no council member or member of the public present at the reading requests that the ordinance be read in full, and at least one week before the reading:

(i)    A copy of the ordinance is provided for each councilor; 

(ii)    Three copies of the ordinance are available for public inspection in the office of the custodian of city records;

(iii)    Notice of their availability is given by written notice posted at the city hall and two other public places in the city; and,

(iv)    Notice of the proposed action is given to the local media for publication.

(v)    An ordinance read by title only which differs from its terms as it was filed and noticed prior to the reading shall have all the differing terms and changes read fully and distinctly in open council meeting before the council adopts the ordinance.

(2)    Upon the adoption of an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the council members shall be entered in the record of council proceedings.

(3)    After adoption of an ordinance and upon its being signed by the mayor, the custodian of city records shall endorse it with its date of adoption and the endorser’s name and title of office.


Section 32. Effective Date.

A nonemergency ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth day after its adoption or on a later day the ordinance prescribes. An ordinance adopted to meet an emergency may take effect as soon as adopted.


CHAPTER IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 33. Procedures for Public Improvements.

The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable state law.


Section 34. Special Assessments.

The procedure for fixing, levying, and collecting special assessments against real property for public improvements or other public services shall be governed by general ordinance.


CHAPTER X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 35. Debt.

The city’s indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A city officer or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is jointly and severally liable for the excess. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.


Section 36. Continuation of Ordinances.

Insofar as consistent with this charter, and until amended or repealed, all ordinances in force when the charter takes effect retain the effect they have at that time.


Section 37. Repeal.

All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect, with the exception of Chapter 16, “Water Intake Relocation”, and Chapter 17, “Wastewater Treatment Plant Facilities Plan”, which shall become Chapters 11 and 12 respectively, of this charter, are hereby repealed.


Section 38. Severability.

The terms of this charter are severable. If a part of the charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the charter, except as the logical relation between the two parts requires.


Section 39. Time of Effect.

This charter shall take effect on the first day of January, 1993. 


CHAPTER XI WATER INTAKE RELOCATION


Section 40. Authorization to Expend Proceeds from Sale of Bonds.

The City of Brookings has heretofore been authorized to engage in the enterprise and business of owning, operating and maintaining a municipal water works and water system and to sell and dispose of water for irrigation, domestic, municipal and other purposes and uses to its inhabitants and to people residing without the boundaries of said City. To that end the City Council is hereby authorized to expend the proceeds from the sale of the bonds hereby authorized for the purposes herein provided in this Charter amendment and to provide, buy, construct, equip and maintain the municipal water system of the City of Brookings, and any combination of such purposes.


Section 41. Issuance and Sale of Bonds.

For the purpose of providing funds with which to provide, construct, build, acquire, equip and operate a water works and water system within and without the boundaries of the City of Brookings, Oregon, for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of said City, and for profit, and to acquire rights of way, easements, personal property, real property, water rights, and other property within and without the boundaries of the City of Brookings for the purposes, necessities, uses and conveniences of said City and securing an adequate and sufficient supply of water, the municipal water works and water system owned, operated and maintained by said City to supply water to said City and its inhabitants and the people residing without the boundaries of said City, and to pay the legal and engineering expense in connection therewith, the Council of said City is hereby authorized and empowered to issue and sell bonds of said City in a sum not to exceed $1,300,000.00, notwithstanding any debt limitation or restriction contained in or prescribed by the Charter of the City of Brookings, Oregon, or any amendment thereof. The debt limitations or restrictions contained in or prescribed by the Charter of the City of Brookings, or any amendment thereof, limiting or restricting the total indebtedness which the City may incur, or any provision of the Charter regulating the issuance and sale of bonds, shall not apply to the bonds hereby authorized or the indebtedness created by the issuance of such bonds.


Section 42. Authorization to Effect Amendment; Establishment of “Water Bond Sinking Fund.”

The City of Brookings may purchase or acquire by the exercise of eminent domain, lease, hold or receive property, real and personal, within and beyond the limits of said City for the construction, equipment, operation and maintenance of a water works and water system to supply the City with water for municipal purposes and its inhabitants within said City and people without the boundaries of said City with water for domestic, irrigation and other beneficial purposes or uses; and for such purpose or purposes may take private property within and beyond the limits of said City of public use for the purpose of supplying said City and its inhabitants, and persons and corporations residing outside the limits of said City, with water; and may take and enter into all contracts necessary or convenient to that end. The right to furnish the inhabitants of said City with water shall be forever vested in the City of Brookings, and no franchise, right or privilege shall hereafter be granted to or contract made with any person or corporation by said City to furnish or supply the said City or its inhabitants with water, without the authorization of the legal voters of said City. The Council is hereby granted authority to carry into effect this amendment and Charter provision and to do any and all things necessary, proper and convenient to secure for said City an efficient and effectual water works, water system and water service, and provide for the appropriation, preservation and security of a water supply for said City, and for the fixing and collection of taxes and charges as compensation from users of water from the water system of said City, and to enact and provide all rules and regulations necessary, proper or convenient in the operation, maintenance, control and management of such water system, and the collection of such rates and charges, as hereinafter provided.

All revenues arising from the sale or use of water from said system shall be set apart; first, as a special fund to be known as the “Water Fund” from which to pay needful expenses in maintaining, operating, repairing, renewing and extending said water system and works as necessity therefor shall arise, and for the payment of the interest on the City of Brookings water bonds as the same shall accrue; and, second, of the residue of such revenue a sinking fund shall be created to be kept inviolate and to be applied in the payment and/or redemption of the water bonds of said City, and such fund shall be used for no other purpose, and shall be known as the “Water Bond Sinking Fund.”


Section 43. Bonds to be General Obligation Bonds of the City of Brookings.

Said bonds shall be payable as to both principal and interest from taxes levied upon the taxable property within the corporate limits of the City of Brookings or from rates and charges as herein provided. The Council shall prescribe, fix and determine the form, date or dates, denomination or denominations, date or dates of maturity, rate of interest, time and place of payment of principal and interest, and all other matters not herein provided for or respecting said bonds. Said bonds shall be general obligation bonds of the City of Brookings.


Section 44. Authorization to Levy Taxes.

The Council is hereby authorized and required at the time of making the annual tax levy for city purposes each year to levy, in addition to all other taxes upon taxable property of the City, such sum as shall be necessary to meet and pay the interest on said Brookings Water Bonds and the principal of said bonds as it matures, provided that the rates and charges herein established are at any time insufficient to pay such interest and principal amounts. The Council is further authorized to apply for and obtain Federal aid, loans or grants to assist in carrying out the provisions of this Charter amendment.


Section 45. Authorization to Adopt Plans and Specifications.

The Council of the City of Brookings is hereby authorized to adopt plans and specifications to provide, purchase, construct, reconstruct and extend such municipal water system and to enter into such contracts as shall be necessary and proper to carry on such work or make such purchase or to do such work, or any part thereof, with City forces, employees and equipment, to make purchases as herein authorized and to do any or all acts or things necessary or requisite to be done to that end, and to order the costs and expense thereof to be paid from said bond fund.


CHAPTER XII WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT FACILITIES PLAN


Section 46. Authorization to Issue and Sell Bonds.

For the purpose of providing funds with which to acquire, construct and maintain a sewage disposal plant for the City of Brookings, construct intercepting sewers, out-fall sewers, pumping stations, pressure lines and to purchase all equipment necessary therefor, all for the City of Brookings, and for the purposes, necessities, uses and conveniences of said City of Brookings and the inhabitants thereof, the Council of the City of Brookings is hereby authorized and empowered to issue and sell bonds of said City in an amount not to exceed $3,200,000.00 notwithstanding any debt limitation or restriction now contained or provided in or by the Charter of the City of Brookings or any amendments thereof. The debt limitations or restrictions contained in or provided by the Charter of the City of Brookings or amendments thereof, may incur, or any provision or amendment of said Charter regulating the issuance and sale of bonds, shall not apply to the bonds hereby authorized or the indebtedness created by the issuance of such bonds.


Section 47. Bonds to be Known as “City of Brookings Sewage Disposal Bonds, Series of 1988.”

Said bonds shall be payable as to both principal and interest from taxes levied upon the taxable property within the corporate limits of the City of Brookings and from rates and charges established from time to time by the City Council. The bonds to be issued hereunder shall be known as “City of Brookings Sewage Disposal Bonds, Series of 1988". Said bonds shall be negotiable in form. The Council shall prescribe, fix and determine the form, date or dates, denomination or denominations, date or dates of maturity, rate of interest, time and place of payment of principal and interest, and all other matters not herein provided for or respecting said bonds. Said bonds shall be general obligations of the City of Brookings and shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Recorder under the corporate seal of the City of Brookings and shall be sold by the Council from time to time in such amounts as the Council may, in its judgment, determine to be necessary to provide funds for the purposes for which said bonds are to be issued. The interest coupons shall bear facsimile signatures of both the Mayor and City Recorder.


Section 48. Establishment of “Brookings Sewage Disposal Construction Fund.”

The proceeds from the sale of said bonds shall be deposited by the City Recorder in a special fund to be known as the “Brookings Sewage Disposal Construction Fund” and shall be used for no purpose other than to construct, build, equip, own, acquire, operate and maintain within and without the corporate limits of the City of Brookings, in whole or in part, a sewage treatment disposal plant and the facilities thereof, to provide a sanitary means of disposing of the sewage of said City with all appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for the treatment and disposal of sewage for the use and benefit of the inhabitants thereof, and to acquire rights of way, easements, personal property and real property within and without the City for said purposes, necessities, uses and conveniences, and to construct out-fall and intercepting sewers, pumping stations, pressure lines and all equipment, and for legal and engineering expense in connection therewith.


Section 49. Authorization to Adopt Plans and Specifications.

The Council of the City of Brookings is hereby authorized to adopt plans and specifications for such sewage disposal plant, sewers, and pumping stations and to estimate the cost of the same and of such work and to enter into such contracts as shall be necessary and proper to carry on such work, or to do said work, or any part thereof, with City forces and employees and equipment; to do any and all acts or things necessary or requisite to be done to that end, and to order the cost and expense thereof to be paid from said construction funds. The Council is further authorized and empowered in behalf of the City of Brookings to apply for and obtain such Federal aid, grants, funds or assistance to aid in paying the cost of said improvements, or any part thereof.


Section 50. Authorization to Levy Taxes.

The Council is hereby authorized and required at the time of making the annual tax levy for city purposes each year to levy, in addition to all other taxes upon taxable property of the City, such sum as shall be necessary to meet and pay the interest on said City of Brookings Sewage Disposal Bonds, Series of 1988, and the principal of said bonds as it matures, provided that the rates and charges herein established are at any time insufficient to pay such interest and principal amounts. 


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    General Penalty

1.10    Fees and Charges

1.15    Citizen Citations


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption, amendment and repeal.

1.01.020    Repeal of certain ordinances.

1.01.030    Reservation of prosecutions.

1.01.040    Severability.


1.01.010 Adoption, amendment and repeal.

A. There is hereby adopted the Brookings Municipal Code which consists of the ordinances of the city that have ongoing effect and which have not expired according to their own terms.

B. This code may be cited as the Brookings Municipal Code.

C. This code may be amended by reference to code section without the necessity of referring to the underlying ordinance.

D. New ordinances may be added to the code, and if an ordinance is enacted with a numbering system that is inconsistent with the code numbering system, the city clerk is authorized to assign an appropriate code number and to codify the ordinance accordingly.

E. The repeal of any code section does not revive the original text of the code section, but rather, repeal of an existing section repeals the underlying ordinance section and all of its amendments. [Ord. 06-O-572 § 1.]


1.01.020 Repeal of certain ordinances.

The following general ordinances or sections of ordinances of the city are hereby repealed:

Ord. 51-O-004, Section 4(D);

Ord. 51-O-013, Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 19, 29, 30, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 48, 51, 55, 56, 62, 64, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 86, 92;

Ord. 52-O-012.A;

Ord. 52-O-025;

Ord. 52-O-031, Section 6;

Ord. 53-O-052;

Ord. 54-O-056, Section 9;

Ord. 55-O-070;

Ord. 57-O-105;

Ord. 57-O-106;

Ord. 58-O-112;

Ord. 58-O-115;

Ord. 59-O-134, Sections 4, 11;

Ord. 61-O-157, Sections 10(D), 12, 17, 41, 64;

Ord. 64-O-178;

Ord. 66-O-184 to the extent that it amends Ord. 51-O-013, Section 19;

Ord. 66-O-185;

Ord. 66-O-190, Sections 10, 28(C);

Ord. 79-O-309, Sections 14, 16;

Ord. 79-O-315;

Ord. 79-O-324;

Ord. 80-O-348;

Ord. 84-O-387, Sections 5, 12;

Ord. 86-O-406, Section 7(D);

Ord. 88-O-432, Sections 10, 28(C);

Ord. 89-O-439;

Ord. 89-O-446, Sections 1(1.010), 8 (definition of “condominium”), 128, 132;

Ord. 89-O-450, Sections 4, 5;

Ord. 90-O-115.A;

Ord. 90-O-190.A;

Ord. 90-O-387.A, Section 3;

Ord. 91-O-477, Section 15;

Ord. 97-O-115.B;

Ord. 00-O-535, Section 22(C)(5). [Ord. 06-O-572 § 1.]


1.01.030 Reservation of prosecutions.

The adoption of this code shall not affect any prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the adoption of the municipal code, nor shall the adoption of the municipal code be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and owing at the effective date of the code adoption, nor shall adoption affect the validity of any bond or cash deposited with the city pursuant to the terms of any ordinance, upon its codification; but rather, all rights and obligations pertaining under ordinances in effect prior to codification shall remain in full force and effect. [Ord. 06-O-572 § 1.]


1.01.040 Severability.

If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city declares that it would have enacted this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional. [Ord. 06-O-572 § 1.]


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.05.010    General penalty.


1.05.010 General penalty. 

A. Violations. Every offense is a violation which may be punished by a fine up to $720.00; provided, that where Oregon statutes impose a lesser penalty for the same offense, then the lesser penalty shall apply. Each day or part of a day for which a violation is committed or persists is a separate offense.

B. Administrative Enforcement. Where a chapter of this code provides that enforcement shall be through an administrative process, the provisions for administrative procedures shall apply rather than this section.

C. Equitable and Other Remedies Preserved. Nothing in this section prohibits the city seeking equitable relief or damages in addition to judicial or administrative enforcement of its ordinances. [Ord. 09-O-644 § 2; Ord. 07-O-592 § 2; Ord. 06-O-572 § 2.]


Chapter 1.10 FEES AND CHARGES

Sections:

1.10.010    Master fee resolution established.

1.10.020    Deposit of funds received.


1.10.010 Master fee resolution established.

Unless considerations of convenience, clarity, ease of reference, or similar factors dictate otherwise, all rates, fees, charges, deposits, refunds, reimbursements and penalties imposed or collected by the city, except where required by law to be otherwise set, shall be designated and set forth in the master fee resolution, as may be amended by the city council from time to time. Wherever practicable throughout this code, reference shall be made to the master fee resolution in lieu of any reference to specific rates, fees, charges, deposits, refunds, reimbursements and penalties. [Ord. 07-O-598 § 2.]


1.10.020 Deposit of funds received.

All funds collected from fees, charges, deposits, refunds, reimbursements and penalties established by the master fee resolution shall be received by the administrative services department and shall be deposited into the appropriate accounts within the general fund. [Ord. 07-O-598 § 3.]

 


Chapter 1.15 CITIZEN CITATIONS

Sections:

1.15.010    Purpose.

1.15.020    Citizen citations limited to traffic violations.


1.15.010 Purpose.

ORS 153.058(7) provides that a political subdivision may limit the commencement of proceedings for violations of its charter and ordinances to its enforcement officers. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the circumstances under which a citizen may cite another person, or persons, into Brookings municipal court. [Ord. 16-O-756 § 2.]


1.15.020 Citizen citations limited to traffic violations.

A. Citizen citations may only be cited into Brookings municipal court for traffic violations committed within the city of Brookings.

B. Only a police officer, building inspector, code enforcement officer or fire department employee shall have the authority to issue a citation for nontraffic violations of the Brookings Municipal Code.

C. Any citizen citation issued for a violation other than a traffic violation shall be automatically dismissed by the court. [Ord. 16-O-756 § 2.]


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters: 

2.01    Committee and Commission Membership

2.05    Council Rules

2.10    Elections

2.15    City Manager

2.20    City Attorney

2.25    Municipal Court

2.30    Police Department

2.35    Fire Department

2.40    Repealed

2.45    Repealed

2.50    Parks and Recreation Commission

2.55    Planning Commission

2.57    Tourism Promotion Advisory Committee

2.60    Urban Renewal Agency

2.63    Urban Renewal Advisory Commission

2.65    Repealed

2.67    Budget Committee

2.70    Repealed

2.75    Disposal of Unclaimed, Bailed and Stolen Property

2.80    Repealed

2.85    Sale of City Owned Real Property


Chapter 2.01 COMMITTEE AND COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP

Sections:

2.01.010    Membership restricted.


2.01.010 Membership restricted.

A. Appointees to the planning commission and the budget committee shall not simultaneously serve on any other city council-appointed committee or commission.

B. Upon appointment to a position covered under subsection (A) of this section, said appointee’s seat on any other city committee or commission shall be immediately vacated. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-O-679 § 2.] 


Chapter 2.05  COUNCIL RULES1

Sections: 

2.05.010    Regular council meeting dates.

2.05.020    Study sessions.

2.05.030    Special meetings.

2.05.040    Continuance of meetings.

2.05.050    Quorum.

2.05.060    Public notice required for meetings.

2.05.070    Written minutes.

2.05.080    Agenda.

2.05.090    Regular or special meetings to be public.

2.05.100    Executive sessions permitted on certain matters.

2.05.110    Presiding officer at council meetings – Calling of roll.

2.05.120    Order of business.

2.05.130    Consent calendar.

2.05.140    Council debate.

2.05.150    Addressing council.

2.05.160    Voting by council.

2.05.170    Conflicts of interest.

2.05.180    Council-administration relations.

2.05.190    Boards and commissions.

2.05.200    Appointments to boards, commissions, and committees.

2.05.210    Maintenance of order and decorum of council meetings.

2.05.220    Orientation of new council members.

2.05.230    Council member communications.

2.05.240    Evaluation of council appointive officers.

2.05.250    Employee attendance at meetings.


2.05.010 Regular council meeting dates.

The city council of the city of Brookings shall have as its regular meeting dates the second and fourth Mondays of each month of the calendar year; and further, said meetings shall be held within the council chambers of the Brookings City Hall, 898 Elk Drive, Brookings, Curry County, Oregon; excepting, however, whenever appropriate, the mayor may cancel one regular meeting per month. The council shall meet in regular session at least once a month. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 1.] 


2.05.020 Study sessions.

Upon legal notice duly given, the Brookings city council shall have the power to schedule study sessions of the city council of the city of Brookings pursuant to Section 13 of the City Charter, which study sessions may be called by the mayor, a majority of the members of the council or the city manager. Each study session shall be devoted exclusively to matters regarding which the interchange of information preliminary to taking action thereon is deemed to be essential. At a study session no formal vote shall be taken on any matter under discussion, nor shall any member enter into a commitment with another respecting a vote to be taken subsequently in a formal meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 2.] 


2.05.030 Special meetings.

Upon legal notice duly given, the city council shall have and retain all due powers to set other dates and times for special meetings of the city council of the city of Brookings pursuant to Section 13 of the Brookings Charter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 3.] 


2.05.040 Continuance of meetings.

Any meetings of the city council may be continued from day to day, or for more than one day, but no continuance shall extend beyond the next regular meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 4.] 


2.05.050 Quorum.

For the transaction of business by the city council, there shall be present a majority of the members of the council currently holding office. If a quorum is not present, the city recorder shall immediately inform the absent members, except those known to be unavoidably detained, that their presence is required to enable the council to proceed. If the absent member or members do not appear after the notice, the members present shall adjourn until a specific time or until the next regular meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 5.] 


2.05.060 Public notice required for meetings.

Public notice, via press release, email, and/or other such means as are appropriate for reasonable communication, shall be given for all city council meetings. Such notice shall provide the time, place, and the principal subjects anticipated to be covered at any meeting of the city council where a quorum is present excepting an executive session, which shall be noticed as required in Chapter 192 ORS. Interested persons and the news media which have stipulated in writing that they wish to be notified of every meeting must be so notified. Such persons, other than those representing the news media, shall be required to express an interest in remaining on the notification list every six months. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 00-O-535 § 6.] 


2.05.070 Written minutes.

The council shall provide for the taking of written minutes of all its meetings under the provisions of Chapter 192 ORS. A summary report of all actions taken by the city council at each of its meetings shall be prepared by the city recorder as soon after each meeting as is practicable and shall be distributed to such interested parties as may be determined by the council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 00-O-535 § 7.] 


2.05.080 Agenda.

The city manager shall prepare an agenda of the business to be presented at a regular council meeting. Council members shall be given copies of this no later than the time it is provided to the local media. Additions to the published agenda are not encouraged but may be permitted based on proven need. Nonagenda items brought before the council during a meeting shall normally be for informational purposes only. Unanimous approval of all council members present is a prerequisite for any nonagenda item to be added to the agenda and considered for action. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 00-O-535 § 8.] 


2.05.090 Regular or special meetings to be public.

All regular or special meetings and all study sessions of the city council shall be public meetings and open to the public and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 9.] 


2.05.100 Executive sessions permitted on certain matters.

The city council may conduct an executive session during a regular, special or emergency meeting, or study session as long as appropriate statutory limitations are met. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 10.] 


2.05.110 Presiding officer at council meetings – Calling of roll.

The mayor, or in his/her absence, the council president, shall take the chair of city council meetings at the hour appointed and shall immediately call the council to order. The roll shall then be called by the city recorder who shall enter in the minutes of the meeting the names of the councilors present. In the absence of the mayor and the council president, the city recorder shall call the council to order whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the members of the council present. Upon arrival of the mayor at the meeting, the council president, if then presiding, shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council. If a temporary presiding officer is presiding, he/she shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council to the mayor or council president upon the arrival of either.

The council has an obligation to be clear and simple in its procedures and the consideration of the questions coming before it. It should avoid invoking the finer points of parliamentary rules which may serve only to obscure the issues and arouse the suspicion of the audience and of the citizens of the city in general. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 11.] 


2.05.120 Order of business.

The order of business at regular council meetings shall be as follows except the city manager may delete items listed in subsections (D), (E), (F), (G)(1), (H), (I) and (J) of this section when there is no specific business under that item, or may revise the order of business as deemed appropriate and to accommodate public participation. The presiding officer may also revise the order of business.

A. Call to order;

B. Pledge of allegiance;

C. Roll call;

D. Ceremonies/appointments/announcements;

E. Public hearings/ordinances/resolutions/final orders;

F. Scheduled public appearances;

G. Oral requests, communications from the audience:

1. Committee reports;

2. Public comments;

H. Staff reports;

I. Consent calendar;

J. Nonaction, information-only items;

K. Remarks from mayor and councilors;

L. Adjournment. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 08-O-611 § 2; Ord. 00-O-535 § 12.] 


2.05.130 Consent calendar.

To make more efficient use of meeting time, the city manager shall place all items which are routine in nature and when no debate is expected on a consent calendar to be considered at the council’s regular meetings. Any item placed on the consent calendar shall be removed at the request of the mayor or a councilor prior to the time a vote is taken on the consent calendar items. All remaining items on the consent calendar shall be disposed of by a single motion to adopt the consent calendar, which shall not be debatable. Adoption of the consent calendar shall be by the affirmative vote of all councilors present at the time the vote is taken and shall have the same effect as a separate vote for each item. If there are dissenting votes, each item shall be voted on separately in the usual manner. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 13.] 


2.05.140 Council debate.

Debate by the city council shall be conducted as follows:

A. The mayor, or such other member of council as may be presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and the presiding officer shall not be deprived of any privileges of a councilor by reason of his/her acting as the presiding officer.

B. Every councilor desiring to speak shall address the chair and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine him/herself to the question under debate.

C. A councilor, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless it be to call him/her to order or as herein otherwise provided. If a member of the council, while speaking, be called to order, he/she shall cease speaking on the point until the question of order be determined and if in order, he/she shall be permitted to proceed.

D. The mayor or any councilor shall have the privilege of having an abstract of his/her statement on any subject under consideration by the council entered in the minutes. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 14.]


2.05.150 Addressing council. 

A. Administrative Staff and City Employees Addressing Council or Public. Members of the city’s administrative staff and other city employees desiring to address the council or members of the public shall first be recognized by the presiding officer and shall address such remarks to the presiding officer. The staff may respond to questions or comments by the council or members of the public with permission of the presiding officer, but shall always do so in a polite, tactful manner.

B. Public Members Addressing the Council.

1. Any public member desiring to address the council shall wait to be recognized by the presiding officer. After recognition, the person’s name and address shall be stated for the record and the remarks shall be limited to the question under discussion. All remarks and questions shall be addressed to the presiding officer and not to any individual councilor, staff member or other person. No person shall enter into any discussion without being recognized by the presiding officer.

2. Any public member addressing the council shall be limited to five minutes unless further time is granted by the presiding officer. No public member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every other public member choosing to speak thereon has spoken.

3. After a motion has been made or after a public hearing has been closed, no public member shall address the council without securing permission from the majority of the council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 15.] 


2.05.160 Voting by council.

Voting by the council on all matters shall be as follows:

A. The city recorder shall call the name of each councilor in attendance and the “aye” or “nay” of each shall be recorded in the minutes of the records of the council proceedings. Any member may change his/her vote prior to the next order of business.

B. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter of the city of Brookings, Oregon, a motion shall be deemed carried if a quorum is present and a majority of those voting vote “aye.”

C. Every member of the council, when present, has a responsibility to vote upon all matters before the council. Should a council member abstain from voting on a particular matter, he or she shall give a clear and concise reason for the abstention which shall be listed in the written minutes of the meeting.

D. Any member who voted with the majority may move for a reconsideration of an action at the same or the next following regular meeting. Once a matter has been reconsidered, no motion for further reconsideration thereof shall be made without unanimous consent of the council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 16.] 


2.05.170 Conflicts of interest.

Members of the council and all other persons who serve the city in any capacity (e.g., officer, employee, agent, or otherwise) shall perform their duties in accordance with Oregon’s ethics laws as provided in Chapter 244 ORS.

A. Each newly elected or appointed member of the council shall be given a copy of the latest edition of the Ethics Guide for Public Officials published by the Oregon Government Ethics Commission prior to the member’s participation in any decision-making process. It shall be the duty of the city manager to distribute the guide in a timely manner.

B. Elected officials of the city who have a potential or actual conflict as defined by ORS 244.020(1) and (7) as amended, replaced, or supplanted from time to time, relative to any matter or ordinance coming before the city council shall declare such conflict immediately upon introduction of the item to the city council by the presiding officer. Disclosure of such potential or actual conflict shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings. Nothing in this section authorizes a public official to vote if the official is otherwise prohibited from doing so. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 00-O-535 § 17.] 


2.05.180 Council-administration relations.

Members of the council shall have the authority to closely scrutinize, by questions and personal observations, all aspects of city government operations so as to obtain independent information to assist the members in the formulation of sound policies to be considered by the council. Members shall have the authority to discuss any aspect of city government with city officers or employees; however, members are not authorized to issue orders or directives to city officers and employees because the supervision of said officers and employees is the responsibility of the city manager under Chapter 2.15 BMC. In order to assist the manager in coordinating efforts of all city departments so as to achieve the greatest possible savings through the most efficient and sound means available, recommendations for improvement in city government operations should be made to and through the city manager. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 18.] 


2.05.190 Boards and commissions.

The council may establish boards and commissions and provide for their powers and duties, and the council may consolidate, merge, or abolish any of the said boards or commissions. The establishment, consolidation, merger, or abolishment of any boards or commissions shall be accomplished only by ordinance. Unless otherwise required by law or the City Charter, all board and commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. Initial appointments shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure. All members shall be subject to removal by majority vote of the city council. Appointments to fill vacancies for unexpired terms shall also be made by the mayor with the approval of the council. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each board and commission shall choose its own chair and vice-chair from its members and operate in accordance with the rules of procedures set forth in this chapter, unless inconsistent with the provisions of the ordinance establishing the board or commission. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 19.] 


2.05.200 Appointments to boards, commissions, and committees. 

A. All appointments to city boards, commissions and lay committees shall be made in accordance with the Oregon Revised Statutes, the City Charter and BMC 2.05.190. Appointees shall not be appointed to more than one board or commission at a time.

B. Upon the start of each calendar year, the city manager shall provide to all members of the city council a listing of all board, commission and committee terms due to expire in that year. The city recorder shall further give written notice to all members of the city council of the expiration of the term of office of all members of boards, commissions and lay committees appointed by the mayor or council at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of said term of office. All appointments shall be presented by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the councilors present and voting. In all appointments the mayor shall endeavor to submit to the council the names of persons nominated for appointment as far in advance as practicable to the date of the meeting wherein said appointment shall be considered. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 20.] 


2.05.210 Maintenance of order and decorum of council meetings.

It shall be the duty of the presiding officer to maintain order during council meetings. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks, or becoming boisterous or otherwise disrupting or impeding the orderly conduct of the meeting, shall be barred by the presiding officer from attending the remainder of the meeting. The police department shall carry out all legal orders and instructions of the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum in the council chambers. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 5; Ord. 00-O-535 § 21.] 


2.05.220 Orientation of new council members.

To ensure an orderly transition or continuance of legislative authority, all newly elected or appointed council members shall be formally advised of current council affairs and procedures.

A. Within seven days of election or upon appointment to the council of any new member, the city manager shall schedule one or more study sessions for the sole purpose of the orientation of the new member.

B. Within seven days of election or upon appointment to the council, new members shall be given:

1. The City Charter;

2. Oregon Ethics Guide for Public Officials;

3. Brookings comprehensive plan and land development code;

4. Selected ordinances and resolutions;

5. Current city budget and the most recent audit;

6. Roster of city officials and standing committees. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 00-O-535 § 22.] 


2.05.230 Council member communications.

Unless authorized by a majority vote of the city council to speak on their behalf, any written or oral communication by the mayor or any city council member which could be interpreted as being representative of a position of the city council in general, must contain a disclosure that the communication is solely that of the sender. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 23.] 


2.05.240 Evaluation of council appointive officers.

Council-appointed officers of the city shall have their job performance evaluated at regular intervals. The results of each evaluation shall be reviewed and discussed with the officer and shall be filed in the officer’s personnel record.

A. City Manager. The city manager shall be evaluated by the city council using council adopted criteria at least annually. Upon initial employment the manager may be evaluated after his/her third and sixth months of service.

B. Municipal Judge and City Attorney. An evaluation of these offices shall be performed by the council at least annually.

C. City Recorder. The recorder shall be evaluated by the city manager annually and the results of these evaluations shall be presented to the council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 00-O-535 § 24.] 


2.05.250 Employee attendance at meetings. 

A. City Manager. The city manager shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused by the mayor or the council. The manager may take part in all discussions concerning the welfare of the city. He/she shall have the authority to make recommendations to the council and when doing so shall present all reasonable alternatives for council consideration.

B. Officers and Employees. The city manager may direct any employee to attend any regular, special or executive meeting to confer with the council on matters relating to the city. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-668 § 2; Ord. 00-O-535 § 25.] 1

Prior legislation: Ords. 91-O-474, 92-O-474.A, 92-O-474.B, 94-O-474.D and 95-O-474.E 


Chapter 2.10 ELECTIONS

Sections: 

2.10.010    Nominations for elective offices.

2.10.020    Certification of nominated candidates.

2.10.030    Form of nominating petition.

2.10.040    Ballots.

2.10.050    City measures.

2.10.060    General provisions.

2.10.070    Council position numbers.


2.10.010 Nominations for elective offices.

Candidates for elective offices for the city of Brookings shall be nominated by petition. The name of any qualified candidate shall be printed on the election ballot when a petition shall have been filed with the recorder signed by not less than 20 legally qualified electors of the city and accompanied by an acceptance of the candidates. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 52-O-031 § 1.] 


2.10.020 Certification of nominated candidates.

Nominating petitions must be filed with the city recorder not less than five days before the last date on which the city recorder may certify to the county clerk the names of all candidates who have been nominated for municipal office. If a candidate does not accept the nomination as provided in this chapter his/her name shall not appear on the ballot. In a general or special election the city recorder shall certify the information required by the county clerk of Curry County in conformity with the time limits established by the laws of this state in order that necessary ballots can be prepared and printed. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 62-O-168; Ord. 59-O-140; Ord. 52-O-031 § 2.] 


2.10.030 Form of nominating petition.

The form of the nominating petition and the acceptance by the person nominated shall be in substantially the form prescribed by the general laws of the state of Oregon, except that in all elections held in the city of Brookings, the candidate’s name appearing upon the ballot shall be without party mark, designation, or reference to political parties. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 52-O-031 § 3.] 


2.10.040 Ballots.

The recorder shall, upon application, furnish a reasonable number of forms of nominating petition and of acceptance. The recorder shall cause ballots for each general and special election to be prepared, printed and authenticated; the ballots shall contain a complete list of the offices to be filled and the names of the candidates nominated therefor. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 52-O-031 § 4.] 


2.10.050 City measures.

When city measures are to be voted upon, the city recorder shall cause the official ballot to be prepared with ballot titles for the various measures. The city recorder shall use the ballot title prepared by the city attorney, and shall cause the ballot title to be printed upon the official ballot. In a general or special election the city recorder shall certify the official ballot for city measures to the county clerk in conformity with the time limits established by the laws of this state. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 52-O-031 § 5.] 


2.10.060 General provisions.

Any matter or thing required by the general laws of the state of Oregon respecting elections and not herein expressly provided for shall be as provided by the general laws of the state of Oregon. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 52-O-031 § 8. Formerly 2.10.070] 


2.10.070 Council position numbers.

For the purpose of facilitating the conduct of municipal elections for the office of councilor, the various positions on the council shall be and the same hereby are designated by number as follows:

A. Position No. 1.

B. Position No. 2.

C. Position No. 3.

D. Position No. 4.

At all municipal elections held hereafter, all candidates for election to the city council shall file as a candidate for a specified position on the council, as herein designated. The nominating petition for each candidate shall specify the position on the council for which the candidate is filing. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 59-O-123; Ord. 52-O-031 § 10. Formerly 2.10.080.] 


Chapter 2.15  CITY MANAGER

Sections: 

2.15.010    Purpose.

2.15.020    Creation of the office of city manager and procedures for appointment.

2.15.030    Duties, powers, responsibilities and authority of the city manager.

2.15.040    Legislative policy making prohibited.


2.15.010 Purpose.

Pursuant to Chapter III, Section 11 of the Charter of the city of Brookings, Oregon, the city council hereby deems it advisable and in the best interest of the city to create the office of city manager and to outline said officer’s powers, duties, responsibilities and the procedure for appointment and removal of said officer. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 2; Ord. 89-O-457 § 1.] 


2.15.020 Creation of the office of city manager and procedures for appointment. 

A. The office of city manager is hereby created. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council of the city of Brookings, shall serve for an indefinite term and may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the members of the city council presently holding office at the time of such vote.

B. The city manager shall receive such compensation as the mayor and city council shall fix from time to time by motion noted in the minutes of the council.

C. The city manager shall be required to carry a bond for the faithful performance of the duties of office in an amount to be determined by the city council. The expense of said bond shall be paid from the budget of the city manager’s office. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 2; Ord. 89-O-457 § 2.] 


2.15.030 Duties, powers, responsibilities and authority of the city manager. 

A. The city manager shall devote his/her entire time to the discharge of official duties, attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the council or the mayor, keep the council advised at all times of the affairs and needs of the city, and make reports annually, or more frequently if requested by the council, of all the affairs and departments of the city.

B. The city manager shall enforce all the ordinances of the city including the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by, or running to, the city.

C. The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the city and have control and general supervision over all city employees and all appointive city officers, except that the city manager shall not impinge on the city attorney’s ethical obligations to the city council, shall have no control over the judicial activities of the municipal judge and shall have no power of appointment or removal of the municipal judge, city recorder or city attorney as such appointment and removal power is within the hands of the mayor and council pursuant to the City Charter. The city manager shall supervise the departments to the end of attaining the utmost efficiency in each of them and therefore shall have the power to employ, dismiss or transfer an employee from one department to another.

D. The city manager shall act as purchasing agent of the city. All purchases shall be made in accordance with the city of Brookings contracting rules as adopted by city council resolution and administrative policies prescribed by the city manager.

E. The city manager shall supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by the city and shall have general supervision over all city real or personal property.

F. The city manager shall act as business agent of the city for the sale of real estate and other matters relating to franchises and leases.

G. The city manager shall supervise the expenditures of all departments, divisions or services of the city and analyze and supervise the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, boards and services of the city, and all employees thereof, and make recommendations to the mayor and city council with reference to which in his/her judgment will result, if adopted, in greater efficiency of the overall operation of the city of Brookings government.

H. When authorized by the city council, the city manager shall develop and organize improvement projects and programs, and aid and assist the mayor and city council in carrying the same through to a successful conclusion.

I. The city manager shall make and keep an inventory of all personal and real property owned by the city and advise the mayor and council of the need for purchase of new machinery, equipment or supplies, which in his/her judgment the same can be obtained under the terms and conditions which are most advantageous to the city.

J. The city manager shall make, or cause to be made, studies and surveys of the duties, responsibilities and work of the personnel employed by the city; shall inform and update the mayor and council in regards to his/her decisions on abolition, consolidation, transfer, removal of positions or personnel, or any other administrative decisions made by the city manager which in his/her judgment will increase administrative efficiency.

K. The city manager shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience, and professional courtesy in his/her contacts with the public, personnel employed by the city and all elected and appointed officials, to the end that the highest possible standards of public service shall be maintained.

L. The city manager shall perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by the mayor and council, not inconsistent with the laws of the state of Oregon and the Charter and ordinances of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 2; Ord. 08-O-601 § 2; Ord. 89-O-457 § 3.] 


2.15.040 Legislative policy making prohibited.

The city manager shall not exercise any legislative policy making or legislative functions, nor attempt to commit or to bind the mayor or council to any action, plan or program regarding legislative policy or legislative function, and such shall remain exclusively the province of the city council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 2; Ord. 89-O-457 § 4.] 


Chapter 2.20  CITY ATTORNEY

Sections: 

2.20.010    Establishment of office of city attorney.

2.20.020    Oregon State Bar member.

2.20.030    Jurisdiction of city attorney.

2.20.040    Powers and duties of city attorney.

2.20.050    Compensation of city attorney.


2.20.010 Establishment of office of city attorney.

There is hereby established the office of city attorney. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-004 § 1.] 


2.20.020 Oregon State Bar member.

The city attorney shall be an active member of the Oregon State Bar in good standing. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-004 § 2.] 


2.20.030 Jurisdiction of city attorney.

The city attorney shall have general control and supervision of all civil actions and legal proceedings in which the city of Brookings may be a party or may be interested and have full charge and control of all the legal business of all departments, commissions and bureaus of the city, or of any office thereof, which requires the services of an attorney or counsel in order to protect the interests of the city. No city officer, commission, bureau or the head of any department of the city shall be represented by any other counsel or attorney at law unless authorized or directed by official action of the council taken at one of its meetings and entered in the minutes. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-004 § 3.] 


2.20.040 Powers and duties of city attorney.

The powers and duties of the city attorney shall be as follows:

A. When required by the city council, the city attorney shall appear for the city in any court or tribunal in any cause in which the city is a party to or in which the city is directly interested.

B. The city attorney shall consult with and advise the city council on all questions of law submitted to him or her by the city council, and the city attorney shall consult with and advise other officers of the city on questions of law directly affecting the city and submitted to him/her by an officer of the city. The city attorney shall not be required to render opinions or give legal counsel to others than the city council and other officers of the city.

C. The city attorney, when requested by the council to do so, shall prepare contracts, bonds, leases and other legal forms and writings for the use of the city.

D. The city attorney, upon request of the city council, shall prepare ordinances and resolutions.

E. The city attorney, either in person or by deputy, shall attend all regular monthly meetings of the council unless excused by the city manager or the council and shall attend all other special meetings, work study sessions and events as may be directed by the city manager, mayor or the council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 91-O-004.A § 1; Ord. 51-O-004 § 4.] 


2.20.050 Compensation of city attorney.

For the performance of the duties of the office, the city attorney shall receive as compensation such remuneration as the city council may, from time to time, authorize. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-004 § 5.] 


Chapter 2.25  MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections: 

2.25.010    Creation of municipal court.

2.25.020    Creation of office of municipal judge.

2.25.030    Judicial officer of the city.

2.25.040    Territorial jurisdiction.

2.25.050    Crime and offense jurisdiction.

2.25.060    Authority of municipal court judge.

2.25.070    Creation of office of municipal judge pro tem.

2.25.080    Applicability of Oregon laws.

2.25.090    Municipal court rules.

2.25.100    Municipal court schedule.


2.25.010 Creation of municipal court.

There is hereby created a court for the city of Brookings to be known as “the municipal court for the city of Brookings.” [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-008 § 1.] 


2.25.020 Creation of office of municipal judge.

There is hereby created the office of municipal judge. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-008 § 2.] 


2.25.030 Judicial officer of the city.

The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city of Brookings and shall preside over the municipal court of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-008 § 3.] 


2.25.040 Territorial jurisdiction.

All of the incorporated area, now or hereafter, within the city of Brookings shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the municipal court and the municipal judge. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-008 § 4.] 


2.25.050 Crime and offense jurisdiction.

The municipal judge shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all crimes and offenses defined and made punishable by ordinance of the city of Brookings and of all actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or penalties defined or authorized by an ordinance of the city of Brookings. The municipal judge also has jurisdiction over traffic crimes as defined by ORS 801.545 committed within the boundaries of the city. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 6; Ord. 51-O-008 § 5.] 


2.25.060 Authority of municipal court judge.

In cases charged as misdemeanors, the municipal judge shall have authority to issue process for the arrest of any person accused of an offense against the ordinances of the city of Brookings, and to commit any such person to jail or admit him to bail pending trial. In all cases, the municipal judge shall have authority to issue subpoenas, to compel witnesses to appear and testify in court on the trial of any cause before him, to compel obedience to such subpoenas, to issue any process necessary to carry in effect the judgments of the court, and to punish witnesses for contempt of court. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 6; Ord. 51-O-008 § 6.] 


2.25.070 Creation of office of municipal judge pro tem.

The office of municipal judge pro tem is hereby created. The city may appoint one or more persons to serve as municipal judge pro tem. The municipal judge pro tem shall be appointed in the same manner as the municipal judge. The municipal judge pro tem shall serve as municipal judge pro tem when the municipal court judge is absent from the city, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to discharge the duties of municipal judge. When occupying the office of municipal judge, the municipal judge pro tem shall have all the powers and authority of the municipal judge. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 64-O-175; Ord. 51-O-008 § 7.] 


2.25.080 Applicability of Oregon laws.

When not governed by ordinance or by Charter of the city of Brookings, all proceedings in the municipal court for the city of Brookings for the violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the state of Oregon governing justices of the peace and justice courts. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-008 § 8.] 


2.25.090 Municipal court rules.

The municipal judge shall have authority to form and adopt such reasonable rules for the conduct of the business of the municipal court for the city of Brookings; provided, however, that he/she shall not form or adopt any rule which is in contravention with the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state of Oregon, the laws of the state of Oregon or any ordinance of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 51-O-008 § 10.] 


2.25.100 Municipal court schedule.

The municipal court shall be in session only for such length of time as may be necessary to complete the judicial business of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 97-O-525 § 2; Ord. 51-O-008 § 11.] 


Chapter 2.30  POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections: 

2.30.010    Creation of the police department.

2.30.020    Supervision of chief of police.

2.30.030    Powers and duties of the chief of police.

2.30.040    Powers and duties of police officers other than the chief of police.

2.30.050    Compensation.

2.30.060    Authority of the police department to perform criminal history records checks.


2.30.010 Creation of the police department.

There is hereby created the police department for the city of Brookings. The police department shall consist of a chief of police and such other police officers as may be appointed by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 90-O-467 § 1.] 


2.30.020 Supervision of chief of police.

The chief of police of the city of Brookings appointed pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager of the city of Brookings. Subject to confirmation by the city council, the city manager of the city of Brookings shall have authority to appoint the chief of police and also to remove the chief of police from office. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 90-O-467 § 2.] 


2.30.030 Powers and duties of the chief of police.

The powers and duties of the chief of police shall be:

A. The chief of police shall have authority to appoint the police officers that the city council shall, from time to time, deem necessary to authorize and shall further have authority to remove any such police officer from employment with the police department.

B. The chief of police shall supervise and direct the activities of other police officers of the city.

C. The chief of police shall, with the advice and consent of the city manager, purchase or lease such property and equipment as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

D. The chief of police shall make rules and regulations governing the activities of the police department and shall be responsible to maintain discipline within the police department.

E. The chief of police shall have authority to exercise all the powers and duties of a police officer within the geographic limits of the city of Brookings and/or the state of Oregon as the general law may provide.

F. The chief of police shall carry out all directives issued to him/her by the city manager.

G. The chief of police shall exercise vigilant control over the peace and quiet of the city of Brookings to the end that any person violating the ordinances of the city of Brookings or the laws of the state of Oregon shall be brought before the appropriate court.

H. The chief of police shall be responsible for the assignment of all details to officers of the police department.

I. The chief of police shall be responsible for the service and execution of all process issued by the judge of the municipal court for the city of Brookings.

J. The chief of police serves as the director of public safety. In performing the duties of director of public safety, he/she has oversight of the Brookings fire department. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 90-O-467 § 3.] 


2.30.040 Powers and duties of police officers other than the chief of police.

Police officers other than the chief of police shall have all powers of a police officer, within and without the geographic limits of the city of Brookings, as the general law may provide. They shall carry out all duties assigned to them by the chief of police, and shall follow all rules, policies and regulations of the city of Brookings police department. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 90-O-467 § 4.] 


2.30.050 Compensation.

The chief of police and police officers of the police department shall receive compensation as the city council shall from time to time authorize. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 90-O-467 § 5.] 


2.30.060 Authority of the police department to perform criminal history records checks.

Members of the police department, when properly trained and authorized to access law enforcement data systems (LEDS) information by the state of Oregon and the chief of police or his/her designee, shall have the authority, as expressed under OAR 257-010-0025(1)(a), as amended or replaced, “to access criminal history records when the information is to be used for the administration of criminal justice, Criminal Justice Agency employment, or the information is required in order to implement a federal or state statute, local ordinance, executive order, or administrative rule that expressly refers to criminal conduct and contains requirements or exclusions expressly based on such conduct, or other demonstrated and legitimate need.” All requests for criminal history records, whether made by the city for purposes defined by resolution, ordinance, policy, or for criminal justice purposes, shall be handled in compliance with state law. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-O-599 § 2.]


Chapter 2.35  FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections: 

2.35.010    Creation of the fire department.

2.35.020    Definition.

2.35.030    Configuration of the fire department.

2.35.040    Fire chief – Appointment.

2.35.050    Powers and duties of fire chief.

2.35.060    Officers – Appointment.

2.35.070    Rules and regulations.

2.35.080    Composition of department.

2.35.090    Arson investigations.

2.35.100    Authority to enter buildings and premises.

2.35.110    Notice to abate.

2.35.120    Records and inventory.

2.35.130    Suspension and discharge.

2.35.140    Purchasing.

2.35.150    Use of fire apparatus.

2.35.160    Handling of fire apparatus.

2.35.170    Mutual aid.

2.35.180    Assignment of equipment.

2.35.190    Issuance of badges.

2.35.200    False alarms prohibited.

2.35.210    Penalties.

2.35.220    Special police powers.

2.35.230    Duties of police officers.

2.35.240    Establishment of office of fire marshal.

2.35.250    Appointment and qualifications.

2.35.260    Powers and duties of fire marshal and deputy fire marshal.


2.35.010 Creation of the fire department.

There is hereby created a fire department to be hereinafter known as the Brookings fire department, the object of which shall be the prevention and suppression of fire and the protection of life and property within the limits of the city of Brookings, and within the limits of any area which the city of Brookings may contract to provide the services contemplated by this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 1.] 


2.35.020 Definition.

The term “department” as hereinafter used in this chapter shall mean the Brookings fire department. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 2.] 


2.35.030 Configuration of the fire department.

The department shall consist of a fire chief, and such other officers and members as the fire chief and director of public safety may deem necessary for the effective operation of the department. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 3.] 


2.35.040 Fire chief – Appointment.

The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite period of time. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 4.] 


2.35.050 Powers and duties of fire chief.

The fire chief shall be held accountable to the director of public safety and shall make written and verbal reports thereto at such times and in such manner as the director of public safety may require. The fire chief shall serve as the city fire marshal. All other department and company officers shall be accountable to the fire chief only. Other members of the department and any company shall be accountable to their superiors and the fire chief. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 5.] 


2.35.060 Officers – Appointment.

The assistant officers and all other department and company officers shall be appointed by the fire chief. Such officers shall be accountable only to the fire chief and shall be subject to removal by the fire chief or the director of public safety. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 6.] 


2.35.070 Rules and regulations.

The fire chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the department and shall be responsible to the director of public safety for the personnel, morals and general efficiency of the department. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 7.] 


2.35.080 Composition of department.

The fire chief shall, with the advice and consent of the director of public safety, determine the number and kind of companies of which the department is to be composed and shall determine the response of such companies to alarms. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 8.] 


2.35.090 Arson investigations.

The fire chief is hereby required to assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 10. Formerly 2.35.100.] 


2.35.100 Authority to enter buildings and premises.

The fire chief is hereby authorized to enter any and all buildings and premises during business hours for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 11. Formerly 2.35.110.] 


2.35.110 Notice to abate.

Any person so served with a notice to abate any fire hazard or hazards shall comply therewith and promptly notify the fire chief. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 12. Formerly 2.35.120.] 


2.35.120 Records and inventory.

The fire chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the department. He shall also maintain a current inventory of all city equipment along with current equipment sign-out records. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 13. Formerly 2.35.130.] 


2.35.130 Suspension and discharge.

Any member of the department may be suspended or discharged from the department by the fire chief or the director of public safety at any time he/she may deem such action necessary for the good of the department. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 17. Formerly 2.35.150.] 


2.35.140 Purchasing.

Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the fire chief and, after approval by the city council, shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by the council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 18. Formerly 2.35.160.] 


2.35.150 Use of fire apparatus.

No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless so authorized by the fire chief. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 21. Formerly 2.35.190.] 


2.35.160 Handling of fire apparatus.

No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless so authorized by the fire chief. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 22. Formerly 2.35.200.] 


2.35.170 Mutual aid.

The council is hereby authorized to enter into agreement or contract with nearby agencies to provide the members of such other communities, organizations or inhabitants with fire protection or to establish a mutual aid system. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 23. Formerly 2.35.210.] 


2.35.180 Assignment of equipment.

The officer in charge of the department shall have power to assign equipment for response to calls for outside aid in accordance with BMC 2.35.170 and in other cases only when the absence of such equipment will not jeopardize protection in the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 24. Formerly 2.35.220.] 


2.35.190 Issuance of badges.

Each member of the department shall be issued a badge or identification card designating his rank. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 25. Formerly 2.35.230.] 


2.35.200 False alarms prohibited.

No person shall turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 26. Formerly 2.35.240.] 


2.35.210 Penalties.

Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction pay a fine as defined under Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty, or be imprisoned for a term not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 27. Formerly 2.35.250.] 


2.35.220 Special police powers.

All regularly appointed members of the department are hereby given the necessary police powers for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and for the enforcement of traffic ordinances relating to fires and firefighting equipment. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 28. Formerly 2.35.260.] 


2.35.230 Duties of police officers.

It is hereby made the special duty of the chief of police and/or other peace officers who may be on duty and available for fire duty to respond to all fire alarms and assist the department in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining order and in enforcing observance of all sections of this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 3; Ord. 79-O-309 § 29. Formerly 2.35.270.] 


2.35.240 Establishment of office of fire marshal.

There is established within the city of Brookings the office of fire marshal. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A).]


2.35.250 Appointment and qualifications.

The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager who may also appoint deputy fire marshals. The fire marshal and deputy fire marshal shall, within six months of appointment, obtain and maintain all certifications as required by OAR 837-039-0120, as amended or replaced, for the level of inspection conducted by the appointee. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A).]


2.35.260 Powers and duties of fire marshal and deputy fire marshal.

The fire marshal or his deputy shall enforce the provisions of all chapters of the Brookings Municipal Code pertaining to the protection of the city of Brookings from fire, and all provisions of the State of Oregon Fire Code and standards referenced therein. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 2.40 FIRE MARSHAL

(Repealed by Ord. 18-O-772)


Chapter 2.45  LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD

(Repealed by Ord. 12-O-701)


Chapter 2.50  PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Sections: 

2.50.010    Creation of parks and recreation commission.

2.50.020    Terms of office.

2.50.030    Organization of parks and recreation commission.

2.50.040    Powers and duties.

2.50.050    Removal/vacancies.


2.50.010 Creation of parks and recreation commission.

There is hereby created a parks and recreation commission for the city of Brookings, Oregon, consisting of five members, as hereinafter provided. The five members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. These members shall not be officials or employees of the city. Four of the five members shall be residents of Brookings, and one member may be a resident within the Brookings urban growth area. The city council may appoint one of its own members to act as liaison between the commission and the council. Membership shall be restricted pursuant to Chapter 2.01 BMC. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-695 § 2; Ord. 11-O-685 § 2; Ord. 11-O-681 § 2; Ord. 93-O-482.A § 2; Ord. 91-O-482 § 1.] 


2.50.020 Terms of office.

The term of office for the appointed members of the commission shall be two years. Elected officers within the commission shall not hold the same office for more than two consecutive years. Elected officers shall include, but not be limited to, chair and vice chair. Officer elections shall take place at the March meeting. Term of elected office shall be one year, commencing immediately upon election. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-O-685 § 2; Ord. 11-O-681 § 2; Ord. 93-O-482.A § 3; Ord. 91-O-482 § 2.] 


2.50.030 Organization of parks and recreation commission.

At its March meeting the commission shall organize by electing a chair and vice chair of the commission. The commission shall hold regular meetings, every two months, on a day and hour to be fixed by the commission. A majority of appointed commission members shall constitute a quorum. Special meetings may be held upon a call of the chair or vice chair of the commission with consent of a majority of the members of the commission. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-O-685 § 2; Ord. 91-O-482 § 3.] 


2.50.040 Powers and duties.

The parks and recreation commission shall have the following powers and duties, in addition to such others as may be prescribed by the council. Upon authorization of the city council, the parks and recreation commission shall:

A. Solicit gifts or bequests for park and recreational purposes, subject to the approval of the council.

B. Make and recommend in writing to the council plans for the future growth, development, beautification and establishment of parks and recreational facilities in the city consistent with the future growth and development of the city of Brookings.

C. Make a detailed and exhaustive study of the future requirements of the city for park and recreational facilities, establish and recommend in writing to the planning commission and the city council a definite long-range plan for the orderly growth and development of park and recreational facilities within the city.

D. Meet and cooperate with representatives of other governmental bodies for joint and integrated plans between various municipal bodies for the most efficient and economical use of park and recreational facilities of the different governmental units.

E. Recommend to the city council such acts necessary and proper for the protection, operation or improvement of city parks and recreational facilities and all necessary rules and regulations, schedules and concessions that aid in governing the use of those parks and facilities.

F. Keep the city council informed on the activities of the commission by submitting a copy of their minutes to the city council following approval of the minutes by the commission.

G. Form such subcommittees as it deems necessary to assist in the performance of its duties and responsibilities, in developing working relationships with other units of government and community based organizations, and in providing site or program-specific advice to city management.

H. Review proposals for new park facilities and recreation programs and make recommendations regarding same to the city council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-O-685 § 2; Ord. 93-O-482.A, §§ 4, 5; Ord. 91-O-482 § 4.] 


2.50.050 Removal/vacancies. 

A member may be removed by majority vote of the city council. A member who is absent from two consecutive meetings without the permission of the commission chair, or chair when absent without permission from the vice chair, is rebuttably presumed to be in nonperformance of duty, and the city council shall declare the position vacant unless finding otherwise. All vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, for the unexpired term. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-O-685 § 2; Ord. 93-O-482.A § 6; Ord. 91-O-482 § 5.] 


Chapter 2.55  PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections: 

2.55.010    Creation of city planning commission.

2.55.020    Definition.

2.55.030    Qualifications of members.

2.55.040    Terms of office.

2.55.050    Removal/vacancies.

2.55.060    Election of chairperson and vice-chairperson.

2.55.070    Staffing, training, expenses and compensation.

2.55.080    Quorum, rules, meetings.

2.55.090    Conflict of interest and disclosure.

2.55.100    General duties and responsibilities of the commission.

2.55.110    Particular duties of the commission.

2.55.120    Submittal of all maps, plats and replats of land within the city limits to be submitted to the commission.

2.55.130    Renaming of streets or roads.

2.55.140    Ordinances and petitions pertaining to land use to be submitted to planning commission.

2.55.150    Repealed.


2.55.010 Creation of city planning commission.

There is hereby created a city planning commission for the city of Brookings which shall henceforth be known as the Brookings city planning commission. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 1.] 


2.55.020 Definition.

The term “commission” as used in this chapter shall mean and be the Brookings city planning commission. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 2.] 


2.55.030 Qualifications of members. 

A. The commission shall consist of seven voting members to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. At least five of the voting members shall be electors of the city of Brookings; two may be electors who reside within the city of Brookings adopted urban growth boundary. Members shall not be officials or employees of the city.

B. No more than two of the voting members may engage principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation that engages principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two of the members shall be engaged in the same kind of business trade or profession.

C. Membership shall be restricted pursuant to Chapter 2.01 BMC. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 7; Ord. 11-O-680 § 2; Ord. 91-O-483 § 3.] 


2.55.040 Terms of office.

The term of office shall be four years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the mayor with the approval of the council for the unexpired portion of the term. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 4.] 


2.55.050 Removal/vacancies.

A member may be removed by the city council, after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from two consecutive meetings without the permission of the commission chairperson is rebuttably presumed to be in nonperformance of duty, and the city council shall declare the position vacant unless finding otherwise following the hearing. All vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the approval of the council, for the unexpired term. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 5.] 


2.55.060 Election of chairperson and vice-chairperson.

At its last meeting of each calendar year, the commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve a one-year term. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be eligible for re-election and shall be elected from among the voting members of the commission. The newly elected officers will take their seat at the first meeting of the next calendar year. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-O-483.A § 2; Ord. 91-O-483 § 6.] 


2.55.070 Staffing, training, expenses and compensation. 

A. The city manager shall provide the commission with a secretary who shall keep an accurate record of planning commission proceedings.

B. The city shall provide the commission with such other staff and consultation service as is deemed necessary by the commission and city council.

C. The expenses of the commission and those incurred by staff and consultants to the commission shall be met by such funds as are budgeted by the city council for such purposes.

D. Members of the commission shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses.

E. Training sessions for the continuing education of commission members shall be provided at least annually.

F. Prior to the first regularly-scheduled meeting of the planning commission following the new members’ appointment, said members shall be entitled to an orientation meeting with the city’s planning staff.

G. New members of the commission shall receive, upon appointment, at a minimum:

1. The comprehensive plan;

2. The land development code;

3. Ordinance No. 91-O-483;

4. Resolution No. 91-R-501;

5. Urban growth boundary management agreement;

6. Such other documents as may be useful in understanding the role of planning commission members as determined by staff and the city attorney. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 7; Ord. 91-O-483 § 7.] 


2.55.080 Quorum, rules, meetings. 

A. Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. Voting on all matters shall be consistent with the process adopted by the city council under BMC 2.05.160, with the exception that the staff member recording the votes may call for a voice vote unless a polled vote is required by state law.

B. The commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and procedure consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon and with the Charter and ordinances of the city of Brookings.

C. The commission shall meet at least once a month, unless there is no business to conduct, at such time and place as may be fixed. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public.

D. Meetings other than at regularly scheduled times may be announced at a prior meeting and thereby be made a part of the meeting records. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or by three members, by notice served upon each member of the commission at least 24 hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. Notice of a special meeting shall be provided in accordance with State Public Meeting Law (Chapter 192 ORS). [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 7; Ord. 91-O-483 § 8.] 


2.55.090 Conflict of interest and disclosure.

Members of the commission shall not participate in any commission discussion, proceeding, or action in which the member has an actual conflict of interest as defined by ORS 244.020, as amended from time to time. Members of the commission may choose whether or not to participate if he or she has a potential conflict of interest as defined by ORS 244.020, as amended from time to time. Any actual or potential conflict of interest must be disclosed at the meeting prior to any discussion, action, or opening of a hearing. The disclosure shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-698 § 7; Ord. 91-O-483 § 9.] 


2.55.100 General duties and responsibilities of the commission. 

A. It shall be the duty of the commission and they shall have the responsibility to prepare, adopt and maintain a comprehensive general plan for the future growth and development of the city of Brookings. The commission shall base its decisions relating to land use, public facilities, transportation, housing and related matters on the Brookings comprehensive general plan as now or hereafter constituted. The commission shall conduct an overall review of the Brookings comprehensive general plan that may be proposed from time to time by the public, the commission, or the city council. Said amendments shall be based upon further studies or changed community priorities or conditions. The commission shall formulate and recommend to the city council various programs, policies and ordinances intended to implement the Brookings comprehensive general plan.

B. The commission may review and submit recommendations to the city council regarding the city boundary changes or any public program for the acquisition and development of public facilities and transportation.

C. The commission’s duties and responsibilities are further defined in the city’s land development code.

D. At the request of the city council, the planning commission shall perform such other duties relating to some aspect of community planning and development.

E. The commission shall submit a written annual report to the city council by the first day of January of each year, to be presented orally at the January council meeting.

F. The commission shall forward copies of the minutes of its proceedings to the city council on a monthly basis.

G. The commission shall perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter; and in general to study and to propose such measures as may be advisable for the promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare of the city of Brookings, and the urban growth area and the area of mutual interest.

H. The commission shall also have all the powers which are now, or may hereafter be given to it, under the general laws of the state of Oregon or the Charter or ordinances of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 10.] 


2.55.110 Particular duties of the commission.

It shall be the particular duty of the commission and they shall have the power, except as otherwise provided by law, to recommend and make suggestions to the city council and to all other public authorities concerning:

A. The laying out, widening, extending, location of streets, parking, sidewalks, and the relief of traffic congestion;

B. Housing and sanitary conditions;

C. The establishment of zones and districts;

D. Limitations on the use, height, area, and bulk of buildings and structures;

E. Plans for the regulation of the future growth, development, and beautification in respect to its public and private buildings, works, streets, grounds, and vacant lots;

F. Plans consistent with the projected growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of all public utilities, harbor, shipping, and transportation;

G. Plans for the promotion, development, and regulation of the industrial and economic needs of the community in respect to private and public enterprises. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 11.] 


2.55.120 Submittal of all maps, plats and replats of land within the city limits to be submitted to the commission.

All maps, plats and replats of land laid out in building lots and streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, and located within the city limits of the city of Brookings shall be submitted to the commission for its approval and all plans for plats for vacating or laying out, widening, extending, and locating streets, or plans for public buildings may be submitted to the commission. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 12.] 


2.55.130 Renaming of streets or roads. 

A. It shall be the duty of the commission to recommend to the city council the renaming of any existing street, highway or road if, in the judgment of said commission, such renaming is in the public interest.

B. Within the urban growth area and area of mutual interest outside the city limits of the city of Brookings the commission shall have the authority to recommend to the county planning commission the renaming of streets, highways or roads. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 13.] 


2.55.140 Ordinances and petitions pertaining to land use to be submitted to planning commission.

Copies of all proposed ordinances or petitions for the establishment or alteration of the boundaries of any zone or district contemplated or referred to by this chapter, and copies of all ordinances or petitions relating to the city’s land development code and the city’s comprehensive plan, shall be first submitted by staff to the commission for recommendation, and staff shall immediately so notify the city council, and said commission shall make the recommendation thereon in writing to the city council; provided, however, the commission shall first hold a public hearing on said ordinances or petitions. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 91-O-483 § 14.] 


2.55.150 Receiving of gifts, bequests, or devises of property.

Repealed by Ord. 18-O-772. [Ord. 91-O-483 § 15.] 


Chapter 2.57 TOURISM PROMOTION ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.57.010    Name.

2.57.020    Mission and goals.

2.57.030    Powers and duties.

2.57.040    Organization.


2.57.010 Name.

The Brookings city council hereby creates the tourism promotion advisory committee. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-O-732 § 2.]


2.57.020 Mission and goals.

A. The primary role of the tourism promotion advisory committee is to advise the city council on the use of transient occupancy tax (TOT) revenues allotted for tourism promotion pursuant to Chapter 3.10 BMC.

B. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorizing the city to conduct a tourism promotion campaign.

C. It is the goal of the city council to expend tourism promotion funds in a coordinated and efficient manner with funding to be provided for a few selected projects and events each year. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-O-732 § 2.]


2.57.030 Powers and duties.

A. Duties and Responsibilities.

1. The tourism promotion advisory committee is an advisory body to the city council. It has no authority to spend or approve the expenditure of city funds. Its recommendations are made to the city council through its minutes.

2. Committee members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.

3. Committee membership is honorary and without compensation.

4. All committee meetings shall be open to the public and held in a place that is handicapped accessible.

5. Committee minutes, as prepared by staff and approved by the committee, shall be submitted to the city council for acceptance. The minutes shall be approved, with or without amendments, additions or corrections, by affirmative action of the committee at its next meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-O-732 § 2.] 


2.57.040 Organization.

A. Membership.

1. The committee shall consist of seven voting members to be appointed by the mayor with approval of the city council.

2. Insofar as possible, city residents shall have precedence over other applicants.

a. All members of the committee shall be residents of Curry County. At least four of the seven members shall be residents of the city of Brookings. Noncity residents must have an economic interest, such as property ownership, business ownership, or employment, within the city. These members shall not be officials or employees of the city.

b. No member of any other city council-appointed board, committee or commission shall simultaneously serve on the tourism promotion advisory committee.

3. Meeting minutes shall be recorded by the city manager, or his/her designee.

B. Terms of Appointment/Removal/Vacancies.

1. Terms shall be for three years.

2. Vacancies created by a mid-term resignation or termination shall be filled by appointment as provided under subsection (A)(1) of this section.

3. Members may be removed by a majority vote of the city council for any reason and at any time during the member’s term of appointment. Failure of a member to attend at least 50 percent of regularly scheduled meetings during a 12-month period shall result in automatic termination, unless the absences have been excused by the committee’s chair.

C. Election of Officers.

1. At the last meeting of each calendar year, a chair and vice-chair shall be elected from the voting members of the committee to serve a one-year term.

2. Newly elected officers shall take their seats at the first meeting of the next calendar year.

3. No member shall serve more than two consecutive years in any one office.

D. Quorum/Rules/Meetings.

1. A majority of appointed committee members shall constitute a quorum.

2. The committee shall meet at least once each quarter, at a time and place as may be fixed by consensus of the voting members, and at other times as deemed necessary by the city manager when action is required on referrals from the agency. All meetings shall be open to the public and noticed in accordance with State Public Meeting Law (ORS Chapter 192).

3. Voting by the committee on all matters shall be consistent with the process adopted by the city council under BMC 2.05.160, with the exception that the staff member recording the votes may call for a voice vote unless a polled vote is required by state law.

4. Recommendations made by the committee shall be submitted to the city council in the manner prescribed by city administrative regulation.

E. Staffing.

1. The city manager or his/her designee shall provide staff support to the committee in the same manner as staff provides support to other committees and commissions to include:

a. Preparation of reports containing recommendations for projects to achieve the goal of promoting tourism.

b. Review and make recommendations for funding special events.

c. Transmitting recommendations from the committee to the city council.

2. All projects, programs and contracts funded through allocation of TOT funds shall be administered by the city manager or his/her designee. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-O-732 § 2.]


Chapter 2.60 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

2.60.010    Definitions.

2.60.020    Declaration of need.

2.60.030    Agency’s rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted and vested.

2.60.040    Name of agency.

2.60.050    Members’ terms of office.

2.60.060    Urban renewal plan.


2.60.010 Definitions.

There are hereby declared to be blighted areas existent in the city of Brookings. There is further declared to be a need for an urban renewal agency to function in the city of Brookings, which urban renewal agency shall be deemed to have all powers provided by ORS Chapter 457. For purposes of this declaration, blighted areas are deemed to be areas which by reason of deterioration, faulty planning, inadequate or improper facilities, deleterious land use or the existence of unsafe structures, or any combination of these factors, are detrimental to the safety, health, or welfare of the city of Brookings. The term “blighted areas” is more particularly defined in ORS 457.010 and those definitions are incorporated herein by reference. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-O-547 § 1.]


2.60.020 Declaration of need.

The city council declares and recognizes that there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function within the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-O-547 § 2.]


2.60.030 Agency’s rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted and vested.

The city council further declares, pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon shall be exercised by and vested in the city council of the city of Brookings; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the urban renewal agency shall be and shall be considered, the act of the urban renewal agency only and not of the city council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-O-547 § 3.]


2.60.040 Name of agency.

The corporate name of the agency provided by this chapter shall be, and said agency shall be known as, the urban renewal agency of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-O-547 § 4.]


2.60.050 Members’ terms of office.

The term of office of each member of the urban renewal agency shall be concurrent with each member’s individual term of office as a member of the city council. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-O-547 § 5.]


2.60.060 Urban renewal plan.

A. Findings.

1. That the area described in the Brookings urban renewal plan is blighted.

2. That rehabilitation and redevelopment is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare of the city of Brookings.

3. That the Brookings urban renewal plan conforms to the city’s comprehensive plan as a whole, and provides an outline for accomplishing the projects that the Brookings urban renewal plan proposes.

4. That provisions have been made to house displaced persons within their financial means and in accordance with ORS 281.045 through 281.105 and, except in the relocation of elderly or handicapped individuals, without displacing on priority lists persons already waiting for existing federally subsidized housing.

5. That no real property has been identified for acquisition at this time, and therefore, that no findings of necessity have been made at this time.

6. That the adoption and carrying out of the urban renewal plan is economically sound and feasible.

7. That the city shall assume and complete any activities prescribed it by the urban renewal plan.

8. That the Brookings city council hereby incorporates by reference the Brookings urban renewal plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit “A,” as support for its above-mentioned findings.

9. That the Brookings city council further relies on the report on the Brookings urban renewal plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit “B,” which is incorporated by reference, the report of the planning commission, the public hearing and the entire record before the city council in this matter.

B. Conclusions.

1. The Brookings city council hereby adopts and approves the Brookings urban renewal plan, pursuant to the provision of ORS Chapter 457, and directs the city recorder to publish notice of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section in accordance with the requirements of ORS 457.115.

2. The Brookings city council directs the city recorder to record a copy of the ordinance codified in this section approving the Brookings urban renewal plan with the recording officer of Curry County, Oregon, pursuant to ORS 457.125, and directs the city recorder to send a copy of the ordinance codified in this section to the urban renewal agency for the city of Brookings, Oregon. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-O-551 §§ 1, 2.]


Chapter 2.63 URBAN RENEWAL ADVISORY COMMISSION

Sections:

2.63.010    Name.

2.63.020    Powers and duties.

2.63.030    Organization.


2.63.010 Name.

The Brookings city council hereby creates the urban renewal advisory commission for the urban renewal agency. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-653 § 2; Ord. 08-O-607 § 2.]


2.63.020 Powers and duties.

A. General Duties and Responsibilities.

1. The urban renewal advisory commission is an advisory body to the city council acting as the urban renewal agency. It has no authority to spend or approve the expenditure of urban renewal agency funds. Its recommendations are made to the urban renewal agency through its minutes.

2. Commission members shall serve at the pleasure of the urban renewal agency.

3. Commission membership is honorary and without compensation.

4. All commission meetings shall be open to the public and held in a place that is handicapped accessible.

5. Any matters pertaining to the urban renewal plan shall only be acted upon by the urban renewal agency following review and recommendation by the commission.

6. This commission may be assigned other duties related to urban renewal by the urban renewal agency.

B. Specific Duties and Responsibilities.

1. The primary role of the urban renewal advisory commission is to advise the urban renewal agency on the implementation of the urban renewal plan and to make recommendations to the urban renewal agency on projects referred to it by the agency, including, but not limited to, the following:

a. The timing, final design and funding for projects and activities listed in the urban renewal plan.

b. The annual or periodic review of work plans related to implementation of the urban renewal plan.

c. Minor or major amendments to the urban renewal plan.

d. Sponsoring public events and other activities to gather input and communicate with the community regarding the plan, as requested by the agency.

2. Commission minutes, as prepared by staff and approved by the commission, shall be submitted to the urban renewal agency for acceptance. The minutes shall be approved, with or without amendments, additions or corrections, by affirmative action of the commission at its next meeting. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-673 § 2; Ord. 10-O-653 § 2; Ord. 08-O-607 § 3.]


2.63.030 Organization.

A. Membership.

1. The commission shall consist of seven voting members to be appointed by the chair with approval of the urban renewal agency, and non-voting members to consist of the city manager acting in the capacity of the agency’s executive director, an agency liaison, and other staff members as deemed necessary or appropriate by the agency’s executive director to support the activities of the commission.

2. Insofar as possible, residents of the urban renewal district area shall have precedence over other applicants.

a. All members of the commission shall be residents of Curry County. At least four of the seven members shall be residents of the city of Brookings. Noncity residents must have an economic interest, such as property ownership, business ownership, or employment, within the urban renewal area. These members shall not be officials or employees of the city.

b. No member of any other city council-appointed board, commission or committee shall simultaneously serve on the urban renewal advisory commission.

3. The executive director shall designate a staff member whose responsibility it shall be to record the minutes of the meetings.

B. Terms of Appointment/Removal/Vacancies.

1. Terms shall be initially staggered so that three members serve a term of three years, two members serve a term of two years and two members serve a term of one year. Thereafter, all terms shall be for three years.

2. No member shall be eligible to serve for more than two full terms on the commission.

3. Vacancies created by a mid-term resignation or termination shall be filled by appointment of the urban renewal agency.

4. Members may be removed by a consensus of the urban renewal agency for any reason and at any time during the member’s term of appointment. Failure of a member to attend less than 50 percent of regularly scheduled meetings shall result in automatic termination, unless the absences have been excused by the commission’s chair.

C. Election of Officers.

1. At the last meeting of each calendar year, a chair and vice-chair shall be elected from the voting members of the commission for a one-year term.

2. The newly elected officers shall take their seats at the first meeting of the next calendar year.

3. No member shall serve more than two consecutive years in any one office.

D. Quorum/Rules/Meetings.

1. Four voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.

2. The commission shall meet at least once each quarter, at a time and place as may be fixed by consensus of the voting members, and at other times as deemed necessary by the executive director when action is required on referrals from the agency. All meetings shall be open to the public and noticed in accordance with State Public Meeting Law (ORS Chapter 192).

3. Voting by the commission on all matters shall be consistent with the process adopted by the city council under BMC 2.05.160, with the exception that the staff member designated by the executive director to take the minutes shall call the names of each member and record the votes.

4. Recommendations made by the commission shall be submitted to the agency in the manner prescribed by city administrative regulation. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-O-673 § 2; Ord. 10-O-653 § 2; Ord. 08-O-607 § 4.]


Chapter 2.65 TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE

(Repealed by Ord. 18-O-772)


Chapter 2.67  BUDGET COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.67.010    Purpose.

2.67.020    Definitions.

2.67.030    Organization of the budget committee.

2.67.040    Qualifications and terms of appointed members.

2.67.050    Term of appointed members.

2.67.060    No compensation.

2.67.070    Election of presiding officer.

2.67.080    Power and duties of the budget committee.

2.67.090    Duties and responsibilities of the budget officer.

2.67.100    Meetings and notice.

2.67.110    Removal/vacancies of citizen members.


2.67.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the budget committee is to review the budget message and budget document as prepared by the budget officer. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.020 Definitions.

The term “committee” as used in this chapter shall mean the city of Brookings budget committee. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.030 Organization of the budget committee.

ORS 294.414 requires that each local government establish a budget committee. The committee is made up of the city council and an equal number of appointed citizen members. The director of finance and human resources shall serve as the committee’s budget officer. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.040 Qualifications and terms of appointed members.

Appointments to the committee are made by the mayor with consent of the city council after an application is filed with the city recorder. Appointed members:

A. Must reside inside the city limits;

B. May not be officers or employees of the city; and

C. Must be qualified voters of the city. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.050 Term of appointed members.

Appointed members serve staggered three-year terms, such that approximately one-third of the terms of appointed members end each year. Members may apply for reappointment. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.060 No compensation.

Appointed members shall not receive compensation for serving in this capacity as proscribed under ORS 297.414(3). [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.070 Election of presiding officer.

At its first budget meeting of the calendar year, the committee shall elect a presiding officer for a one-year term. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.080 Power and duties of the budget committee.

The committee shall be responsible for reviewing the budget document. The committee may request and receive any information it requires for the revision and preparation of the budget document and may compel the attendance of any such officer or employee at its meeting as provided under ORS 294.428. Once satisfied with the budget document, the committee will approve the document and forward it to the city council for public hearing and adoption. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.090 Duties and responsibilities of the budget officer.

The budget officer shall be responsible for preparing and submitting the annual budget estimates and other such estimates as the city council may request and for presenting the budget document and budget message to the committee. The budget officer shall prepare budget estimates, the budget message and budget document under the direction of the city manager. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.100 Meetings and notice.

The committee shall hold one or more meetings to review and approve the budget document as provided under ORS 294.426. The budget committee may also meet at other times at its discretion. Budget committee meetings shall be open to the public and noticed as required under Oregon budget law. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


2.67.110 Removal/vacancies of citizen members.

Citizen members serve at the pleasure of city council and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. A member who is absent from two consecutive meetings without the permission of the presiding officer is presumed to be in nonperformance of duty, and the city council may declare the position vacant. All committee vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the approval of the council, for the unexpired term. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-699 § 2.]


Chapter 2.70 EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERS

(Repealed by Ord. 18-O-772)


Chapter 2.75  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED, BAILED AND STOLEN PROPERTY

Sections: 

2.75.010    Unclaimed property – Definition.

2.75.020    Notice and sale of unclaimed property.

2.75.030    Repealed.

2.75.040    Delivery of stolen property to owner.

2.75.050    Repealed.

2.75.060    Disposal of unclaimed stolen property.

2.75.070    Title of purchase at sale.

2.75.080    Crediting and appropriating proceeds of sale paid into city treasury – Rights of owner.

2.75.090    Rights and authority converted by order of delivery.


2.75.010 Unclaimed property – Definition.

“Unclaimed property” means personal property that was seized by a removing authority as evidence, abandoned property, found property or stolen property, and that has remained in the physical possession of that removing authority for a period of more than 60 days following conclusion of all criminal actions related to the seizure of the evidence, abandoned property, found property or stolen property, or conclusion of the investigation if no criminal action is filed. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 80-O-343 § 1.] 


2.75.020 Notice and sale of unclaimed property.

A. Notice. Before property may be sold pursuant to this section, a minimum of 30 days’ notice of sale shall be given to any person that the city of Brookings has reason to believe has an ownership or security interest in any of the unclaimed property described in the notice. The notice shall be sent by regular mail to the last known address of the person. In addition, the city of Brookings shall post a notice in three public places and publish it at least once within a newspaper of general circulation in Curry County. The notice shall include a description of the unclaimed property, the address and telephone number of city hall. The first publication of the notice shall be at least 30 days prior to the date of sale.

B. Affidavit by Custodian When No Response to Notice. If the owner or person entitled to the property to be sold pursuant to this section shall not take it away and pay the charges thereon after 30 days’ notice is given, the agency of the city of Brookings having possession thereof shall deliver to the Brookings police department an affidavit setting forth a description of the property remaining unclaimed, the time of its reception, the publication of the notice, and whether the owner of the property is known or unknown.

C. Inventory and Order to Sell. Upon the delivery to the Brookings police department of the affidavit as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the property described therein may be sold at public auction or public sale by the department.

D. Sale. The Brookings police department, after receiving the affidavit provided for in subsection (B) of this section, shall sell the property at public auction or public sale.

E. Delivery of Proceeds. Upon completing the sale provided for in subsection (D) of this section and after deducting its fees, the Brookings police department shall deliver the net proceeds of the sale, together with a statement containing a description of the property sold, the gross amount of the sale, and the costs, charges and expenses, to the city finance director.

F. Disposal If Not Sold. If, upon completing the sale provided for in subsection (D) of this section, property remains unclaimed and unsold, the Brookings police department may dispose of such property by any method it deems suitable based upon the nature and condition of the property.

G. Procedure by City Finance Director. The city finance director shall make an entry of the amount received by him or her and the time when received.

H. Payment to Person Proving Ownership. If the owner of the property sold, or his legal representative, furnishes satisfactory evidence to the city finance director of his or her ownership of the property deposited in the city treasury pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, he or she shall be entitled to receive from the treasurer the amount deposited with him. Any such claim must be made within one year of the date of sale. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A).] 


2.75.030 Fees allowed to municipal court judge and Brookings police department.

Repealed by Ord. 18-O-772. [Ord. 80-O-343 § 3.] 


2.75.040 Delivery of stolen property to owner. 

If property that is the subject of a theft has not been delivered to the owner, the court before which a trial is had for the stealing thereof, may, on like proof and condition, order its delivery to the owner or his agent. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 80-O-343 § 4.]


2.75.050 Rights and authority converted by order of delivery.

Repealed by Ord. 18-O-772. [Ord. 80-O-343 § 5.]


2.75.060 Disposal of unclaimed stolen property.

If stolen property is not claimed by the owner within 60 days from the conviction of the person charged with the theft, the officer having it in custody shall, if it is money, pay it into the city treasury. If it is other property, it shall be sold as otherwise provided in this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 80-O-343 § 6.]


2.75.070 Title of purchase at sale.

The sale of property pursuant to this chapter conveys a good title to the purchaser as against any person. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 80-O-343 § 7.]


2.75.080 Crediting and appropriating proceeds of sale paid into city treasury – Rights of owner.

Money paid into the city treasury pursuant to BMC 2.75.060 shall be credited and appropriated as a fine imposed upon a person convicted of a theft; but, the owner of the property, at any time within one year of the conviction, upon making satisfactory proof of ownership before the municipal court, may, by the order of such court, have the proceeds repaid to him from the city treasury. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 80-O-343 § 8.]


2.75.090 Rights and authority converted by order of delivery.

The order provided for in BMC 2.75.080 entitles the owner or his or her agent to demand and receive the possession of the property from the officer having it in custody and authorizes such officer to deliver it accordingly, but it does not affect the rights of third persons. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 2.80 REAL PROPERTY COMPENSATION

(Repealed by Ord. 08-O-603)


Chapter 2.85 SALE OF CITY OWNED REAL PROPERTY

Sections:

2.85.010    Purpose.

2.85.020    Decision to sell real property.

2.85.030    Procedure to sell real property.

2.85.040    Proposals for purchase of property.

2.85.050    Opening of proposals.

2.85.060    Negotiations.

2.85.070    Public hearing.

2.85.080    Rejection of all proposals.

2.85.090    Continued marketing of real property interest after rejection of all proposals.

2.85.100    Application of this chapter.


2.85.010 Purpose.

This chapter is created to provide a procedure by which the city sells real property owned by the city which has been determined to no longer have public need. This chapter may be known as “Procedures to Sell City Owned Real Property.” It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall supplement the requirements of Oregon law in the sale of city owned real property. In the event that any provision of this chapter shall conflict with state law, state law shall control. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.020 Decision to sell real property.

In the event that the city council should decide that a parcel or parcels of real property owned by the city are no longer needed for a public use, the council may order that the property be sold pursuant to the procedures of this chapter. The decision of the council to order the property sold shall be made at a regular or special meeting of the city council, and shall be based upon evidence and recommendations gathered by city staff. Unless otherwise required by the council, no public hearing shall be required for the council to make a determination that the real property is not needed for public use or to decide to sell the real property, subject to the public hearing procedures required by Oregon law and this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.030 Procedure to sell real property.

If the city council decides to sell real property pursuant to this chapter, the city manager, or the city manager’s designee, shall prepare a request for bids to buy the subject real property. A notice shall be published of the proposed disposition of city real property interest. Such notice shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in Curry County, and in any other publication which the city administrator deems advisable, considering any unique circumstance surrounding the subject real property. The notice shall be published not less than once a week, for three successive weeks. The published notification shall include the following:

A. A general description of the city real property interest subject to disposition, including a legal description;

B. The minimum asking price. The minimum asking price shall be determined after considering an appraisal of the real property or other information which the city manager deems appropriate, including a consideration of the costs of sale of the property;

C. The name and address of the person to contact to obtain any additional information concerning the city real property interest;

D. A request for proposals, including the address to which the proposal must be delivered and the date and time the proposal is due, which shall not be less than 30 days from the date of the first notice;

E. A requirement that a security deposit in the amount and form required by this chapter be submitted with the proposal;

F. A reservation of the right of the city to accept or reject any proposal; and

G. Any other information the city manager deems desirable to include in the notice.

In addition to the above notice requirements, the city manager shall also cause notices to be sent, containing the same information as required above, to the owners of real property directly adjoining the city owned real property proposed to be sold. Such notices shall be sent by regular mail to the person, persons or entity listed in the records of Curry County, Oregon, purporting to be the owner in fee title to the real property directly adjoining the city owned property to be sold. Failure of any person or entity with an ownership interest in said adjoining real property to receive the notice of the proposed sale of the subject city owned real property shall not invalidate or impede any subsequent sale of the city owned real property. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.040 Proposals for purchase of property.

A. All proposals submitted in response to the published notice described in BMC 2.85.030 shall be accompanied by a deposit, in the form of:

1. A certified check; or

2. Sufficient bond furnished by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, in favor of the city of Brookings in a sum not less than 10 percent of the total amount of the value of the proposal.

B. Deposits will be refunded to all unsuccessful proposers after:

1. The closing of the sale to a successful proposer; or

2. Rejection of all proposals.

C. Each proposal shall clearly set forth the amount offered for the purchase of the city owned real property, and shall include the following additional matters:

1. Any conditions upon the proposer’s offer to acquire the city’s real property interest; and

2. Any other information the proposer believes is relevant to its proposal.

D. If the city manager finds any proposal to be ambiguous, the city manager may request that the proposer submit further information in order to clarify the proposer’s proposal. If the city manager does not request any such clarification, the ambiguous proposal may be rejected. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.050 Opening of proposals.

After the date and time for submitting proposals have passed, the city manager shall open all proposals that have been timely delivered and that have the required deposit. All responsive proposals shall be evaluated by the city manager, or his designee, in order to determine the proposal most advantageous to the city. The city manager may make recommendations to the city council concerning the transfer of the city’s interest in the subject real property. The city council, as provided in this chapter, after public notice and hearing may determine if the proposal is most advantageous to the city. The determination of the most advantageous proposal by the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall not be subject to review by any court. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.060 Negotiations.

The city manager shall notify the apparent successful proposer and may negotiate to determine if the transfer can be consummated, subject to the final approval of the city council. If such negotiations are unsuccessful, the city manager shall notify the next highest ranking acceptable proposer and may similarly attempt to negotiate the disposition of the city real property interest. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.070 Public hearing.

The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed disposition of the city real property interest prior to the sale. Notice of the proposed sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

A. The notice shall be published at least once during the week prior to the public hearing required in this section. The notice shall comply with the provisions of ORS 221.725 and shall state the time and place of the public hearing, a description of the property or interest to be sold, the proposed uses for the property and the reasons why the city council considers it necessary or convenient to sell the property. Proof of publication of the notice may be made as provided by ORS 193.070.

B. Not earlier than five days after publication of the notice, the public hearing concerning the sale shall be held at the time and place stated in the notice. Nothing herein prevents the city council from holding the hearing at any regular or special meeting of the city council as part of its regular agenda.

C. The nature of the proposed sale and the general terms thereof, including an appraisal or other evidence of the market value of the property, shall be fully disclosed by the city council at the public hearing. Any resident of the city shall be given an opportunity to present written or oral testimony at the hearing.

D. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city council from adopting an alternative procedure for the sale of city real property, after public notice and hearing, as provided by ORS 221.727. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.080 Rejection of all proposals.

The city council, in its sole discretion, may reject any or all proposals. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.090 Continued marketing of real property interest after rejection of all proposals.

If all proposals are rejected, the city may market and sell the real property interest in any manner the city council deems appropriate, subject to the public hearing provisions of BMC 2.85.070, including by and through a real estate licensee; provided, that:

A. Any resulting agreement of sale must be approved by the city council as required by state law.

B. If no agreement of sale is executed within 18 months of the publication of the first public notice of sale described in BMC 2.85.030, no agreement of sale may be accepted without again first publishing a public notice of sale and complying with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


2.85.100 Application of this chapter.

This chapter shall apply to sales and leases of city owned real property, only, after the effective date of this chapter. [Ord. 18-O-772 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-O-700 § 2.]


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    Reserve Fund

3.10    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.15    Public Improvement Special Assessments

3.20    Tax on Sale of Marijuana

3.25    Motor Vehicle Fuel Sales Tax


Chapter 3.05  RESERVE FUND

Sections: 

3.05.010    Reserve fund established.

3.05.020    Minimum criteria for separate funds.

3.05.030    Fund balances.


3.05.010 Reserve fund established.

There is hereby established within the city of Brookings a separate fund for the purposes of accumulating reserves for future expenditures. Said fund shall be known as the reserve fund. Such funds shall be used to hold the various types of reserve and accumulation funds which the city of Brookings, as a municipal corporation, is allowed, permitted or mandated to so maintain under any order, resolution, ordinance, statute, intergovernmental agreement, or budgetary practice using generally accepted accounting principles and procedures. The reserve fund may be the depository for any of such reserves or accumulations, whether presently existing or to be enacted or required in the future, including, but not limited to, financial reserve funds, special reserve funds, working capital and capital improvement funds, project financing funds, debt service funds, intergovernmental service funds, and miscellaneous budgetary fund balances not otherwise specifically designated. [Ord. 82-O-358 § 1.] 


3.05.020 Minimum criteria for separate funds.

Wherever applicable or required by resolution, ordinance or state statute, each separate fund within the reserve fund shall have at least the following minimum criteria set forth, as follows: 

A. The appropriation or appropriations to be charged in order to provide the initial money for financing said separate fund; 

B. The object or purpose of said separate fund; 

C. The method for controlling expenditures from and the encumbering of such separate fund; and 

D. The sources, if any, from which said special fund shall be replenished. [Ord. 82-O-358 § 2.] 


3.05.030 Fund balances.

Subject to any contrary provisions contained within the city’s Charter, resolutions, ordinances, or in any state law relating to municipal corporations, when the necessity for maintaining any separate fund has ceased and a balance remains in said fund within the reserve fund, the city council shall so declare by ordinance or other appropriate order and upon such declaration such fund balance shall forthwith be transferred to the general fund of the city unless other provisions have been made in the creation of said fund. [Ord. 82-O-358 § 3.] 


Chapter 3.10  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections: 

3.10.010    Definitions.

3.10.020    Tax imposed.

3.10.030    Collection of tax by operator – Rules for collection.

3.10.040    Operator’s duties.

3.10.050    Exemption.

3.10.060    Registration of operator – Form and content – Execution – Certification of authority.

3.10.070    Due date – Returns and payments.

3.10.080    Penalties and interest.

3.10.090    Deficiency determination – Evasion, operator delay.

3.10.100    Redeterminations.

3.10.110    Security for collection of tax.

3.10.120    Lien.

3.10.130    Refunds.

3.10.140    Administration.

3.10.150    Use of transient room tax.

3.10.160    Appeals to the city council.

3.10.170    Violations.

3.10.180    Misdemeanor.


3.10.010 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definition given in this section governs the construction of this chapter. 

A. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, motel, inn, condominium, tourist home or house, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, and also means space in mobile home or trailer parks (including recreational vehicle, tent trailer and tent camping parks), or similar structures or space or portions thereof so occupied, provided such occupancy is for less than a 30-day period.

B. “City council” means the city council of the city of Brookings, Oregon. 

C. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, or space in a mobile home or trailer park, (including recreational vehicle, tent trailer and tent camping park), or portion thereof.

D. “Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both. 

E. “Person” means any individual, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 

F. “Cash accounting” means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid. 

G. “Accrual accounting” means the operator enters the rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid. 

H. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction, but shall not include charges to a condominium unit owner which are solely for cleaning or maintenance of such unit or personal use or occupancy by such owner, so long as the charges are made in connection therewith for space occupancy. 

I. “Rent package plan” means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the same charge made for rent when consideration is not a part of the package plan. The amount applicable for rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be that amount allocated to space rent, taking into consideration a reasonable value of other items in the rent package and taking into consideration charge for rent when the space is rented separately and not included in a package plan. 

J. “Tax” means the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collections. 

K. “Tax administrator” means the financial administrator of the city of Brookings. 

L. “Transient” means any individual who exercised occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than 30 consecutive days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient. [Ord. 93-O-342.B § 2; Ord. 80-O-342 § 1.] 


3.10.020 Tax imposed.

For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, on or after August 1, 1980, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. For recreational vehicle, tent trailer and tent camping with self-pay slots, the tax shall be increased and assessed to the closest $0.25 interval. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time when the rent is collected if the operator keeps his records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the operator keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and space occupancy in mobile home parks or trailer parks. [Ord. 93-O-342.B § 3; Ord. 80-O-342 § 2.] 


3.10.030 Collection of tax by operator – Rules for collection. 

A. Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city. 

B. In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectibles. 

C. The tax administrator shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement. 

D. For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted. 

E. In instances where credit is extended to the transient for charges for the rental of the unit through the use of a credit card or other similar transaction whereby the amount paid to the operator is discounted by contract between the operator and the issuer of the credit card, the amount of such discount shall be excluded from the definition of “rent” and no tax shall be imposed on the amount so discounted. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 3.] 


3.10.040 Operator’s duties.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records, and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided by this chapter. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 4.] 


3.10.050 Exemption.

No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon: 

A. Any occupant for more than 30 successive calendar days with respect to any rent imposed for the period commencing after the first 30 days of such successive occupancy; 

B. Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $2.00 per day;

C. Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents such facilities incidental to his own use thereof; 

D. Any occupant whose rent is paid for hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged people, or to a public institution owned and operated by a unit of the government. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 5.] 


3.10.060 Registration of operator – Form and content – Execution – Certification of authority.

Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by him. Operators engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register not later than 30 calendar days after passage of the ordinance. Operators starting business after the ordinance is adopted must register within 15 days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration sets forth the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate collection of the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The tax administrator shall, within 10 days after registration issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 

A. The name of the operator; 

B. The address of the hotel; 

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued; 

D. “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Lodging Tax Ordinance of the City of Brookings by registration with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the lodging tax imposed by said city and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city of Brookings. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” [Ord. 80-O-342 § 6.] 


3.10.070 Due date – Returns and payments. 

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator on a monthly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding month, and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. The tax administrator has authority to classify and/or district the operators for determination of applicable tax periods, and shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator’s returns. 

B. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each month of collection, a return for the preceding month’s tax collections shall be filed with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax. 

C. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The tax administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of such amounts, and the amount of the rents exempt, if any. 

D. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at his office, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies. 

E. For good cause, the tax administrator may extend for not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the Brookings city council. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 7.] 


3.10.080 Penalties and interest. 

A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay 10 percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax. 

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed. 

C. Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section. 

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 

F. Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time stated shall pay the penalties herein stated; provided, however, the operator may petition the Brookings city council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the Brookings city council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 8.] 


3.10.090 Deficiency determination – Evasion, operator delay. 

A. Deficiency Determination. If the tax administrator determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in BMC 3.10.080.

1. In making a determination the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in BMC 3.10.080.

2. The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, it shall be served by mailing such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.

3. Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 

4. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 20 days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided. 

B. Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report or remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years of the discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 20 days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption or refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided. 

C. Operator Delay. If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the tax administrator after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within 20 days from the date of service of notice by the tax administrator. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 9.] 


3.10.100 Redeterminations. 

A. Any person against whom a determination is made under BMC 3.10.090 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in BMC 3.10.090. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in BMC 3.10.090, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time. 

B. If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him 20 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 

C. The tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing. 

D. The order or decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination or redemption and refund becomes final 20 days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the Brookings city council within the 20 days after the service of such notice. 

E. No petition for determination or redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 10.] 


3.10.110 Security for collection of tax. 

A. The tax administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure the compliance with this chapter, may require the operator subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average monthly liability for the period of which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the tax administrator deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is less. The amount of security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to limitations herein provided. The operator has a right to appeal to the Brookings city council any decision of the tax administrator made pursuant to this section. The operator’s right to appeal is pursuant to BMC 3.10.160. 

B. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring any action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 11.] 


3.10.120 Lien.

The tax imposed by this chapter together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the county clerk of Curry County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this chapter shall be and, until paid, remain a lien from the date of its recording with the department of records, Curry County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the hotel of an operation within Brookings and may be foreclosed on and sold as may be necessary to discharge said lien, if the lien has been recorded with the department of records in Curry County, Oregon. Notice of the lien may be issued by the tax administrator or his deputy whenever the operator is in default in the payment of said tax; interest and penalty shall be recorded with the department of records of Curry County, Oregon, and a copy sent to the delinquent operator. The personal property subject to such lien seized by any deputy or employee of the tax administrator may be sold by the department seizing same at public auction after 10 days notice which means one publication in a newspaper published in the city of Brookings, Oregon. Any lien for taxes shown on the records of the proper county official shall, upon payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest thereon, be released by the tax administrator when the full amount determined to be due has been paid to the city, and the operator or person making such payment shall have a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of taxes, penalties, and interest thereon have been paid and that the lien is hereby released and the record of lien is satisfied. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 12.] 


3.10.130 Refunds. 

A. Refunds by the City to the Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded; provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the tax administrator. If the claim is approved by the tax administrator, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to such operator, his administrators, executors or assignees. 

B. Refunds by City to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by an operator, and deposited by the operator with the tax administrator, and it later is determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded by the tax administrator to the transient; provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. 

C. Refunds by Operator to Tenant. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupies the hotel for a period exceeding 30 days without interruption, the operator shall refund to such tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for such collection and refund to the tax administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to the refund or credit to the tenant, he shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 13.] 


3.10.140 Administration. 

A. Disposition and Use of Transient Room Tax Funds. All proceeds derived by the city of Brookings from the transient room tax funds shall be deposited and kept in the general fund of the city of Brookings, except that 75 percent of the transient room tax collected from the Oregon State Park System shall be dedicated for maintenance of Azalea City Park. 

B. Records Required from Operators, Etc. – Form. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being. 

C. Examination of Records – Investigations. The tax administrator, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 

D. Confidential Character of Information Obtained – Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the tax administrator or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate or pay a transient occupancy tax, or other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

1. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another city of Brookings official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder, or collecting city business license fees.

2. The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, or information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the tax administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby. 

3. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued. 

4. The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. [Ord. 93-O-342.B § 4; Ord. 80-O-342 § 14.] 


3.10.150 Use of transient room tax. 

A. The city shall use 25 percent of the transient room tax collections each year to promote tourism. 

B. The city finds and declares that expenditure of a portion of the transient room tax collections for tourism promotion will serve a public purpose. The city will derive economic benefits through attraction of visitors to the area. It is in the public interest to promote quality, integrity and reliability in all tourism and tourism related services and in information offered to visitors. Travel and recreation industries are important to the area as a whole, and tourist facilities and attractions serve the recreational and cultural needs of all visitors and residents. Further, the travel and recreation industries have become increasingly important to the economic growth of the area and will become more important in the future because of increased leisure time and declining employment opportunities in other traditional Oregon industries. There is a need to encourage communication and cooperation between the public and private sectors to promote the orderly growth and implementation of tourism-related objectives. It is important that visitors to the area be informed of the scenic and historic attractions, entertainment and recreation opportunities, restaurant facilities, lodging facilities and other matters of special interest. The area on the whole will benefit by attraction of tourists. [Ord. 07-O-581 § 2; Ord. 93-O-342.A § 2; Ord. 80-O-342 § 15.] 


3.10.160 Appeals to the city council.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the tax administrator within 20 days of the serving or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the tax administrator. The council shall give the appellant not less than 20 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing of said appealed matter. Action by the council on appeals shall be decided by a majority of the members of the council present at the meeting where such appeal is considered. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 17.] 


3.10.170 Violations.

It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other date required by the tax administrator or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter. [Ord. 80-O-342 § 19.] 


3.10.180 Misdemeanor.

Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 16-O-757 § 2; Ord. 80-O-342 § 20.] 


Chapter 3.15 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

3.15.010    Definitions.

3.15.020    Initiating an improvement.

3.15.030    Action on report for improvement.

3.15.040    Resolution of intent to create improvement district.

3.15.050    Manner of completing improvement.

3.15.060    Public hearing.

3.15.070    Completion of improvement.

3.15.080    Apportionment of costs.

3.15.090    Assessment procedure.

3.15.100    Notice of assessment.

3.15.110    Installment payments.

3.15.120    Liens records and foreclosure proceedings.

3.15.130    Errors in assessment calculations.

3.15.140    Deficit assessment.

3.15.150    Rebates.

3.15.160    Transfers.

3.15.170    Abandonment of proceedings.

3.15.180    Curative provisions.

3.15.190    Reassessment.


3.15.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Improvement” means the acquisition, alteration, change in the grade of, construction, establishment, installation, laying out, opening, reconstructing, repair or widening of any street, alley, avenue, sewer, drain, water main, sidewalk, curb, gutter, off-street motor vehicle parking facility, or the performance of any other public work for which an assessment may be made on the property benefitted. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 1.] 


3.15.020 Initiating an improvement.

Whenever the city council considers it necessary to make an improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment against property according to the benefits conferred, or when the owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the improvement, by written petition request the city council to make an improvement, the city council shall, by motion, direct the city manager or his designee to prepare a written report for presentation to the city council. Unless the city council otherwise directs, the report shall contain the following:

A. A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost. 

B. A general statement of specifications and estimates of the work to be completed. 

C. An estimate of costs of the improvement, including legal, administrative, advertising and engineering costs.

D. An estimate of the cost of the improvement to the property benefitted. 

E. A recommendation of the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the property benefitted. 

F. The description and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefitted by the improvement, with the name or names of the owners thereof as shown on the latest assessment roll from the offices of the Curry County assessor.

G. A statement of any unpaid city liens against the property to be assessed.

H. A description of all property or property interests which must be acquired to make the improvement and estimates of the costs to obtain such property or property interests.

A copy of the completed report shall be filed in the offices of the city recorder and available for public inspection. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 2.] 


3.15.030 Action on report for improvement.

Upon the presentation of the report to the city council, the council may approve the report, modify it in any manner or require the presentation of additional information about the improvement, or determine to abandon the improvement project. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 3.] 


3.15.040 Resolution of intent to create improvement district.

Upon the approval of the report for an improvement, or upon the approval of a modified report by the city council, the city council shall declare by resolution its intention to make the improvement, provide the manner and method for carrying out the improvement and give notice of its intention to make the improvement as follows: 

A. The notice shall be published at least once each calendar week for two calendar weeks prior to the date of the hearing before the city council; and a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the address of each record owner of property subject to a proposed assessment, at the address of the property owner shown by the latest assessment roll in the offices of the Curry County assessor.

B. The notice to be published and mailed shall contain the following information: 

1. In general terms, the kind of improvement proposed to be made.

2. A statement that the report for the improvement is on file in the office of the city recorder and available for public inspection.

3. The boundaries of the proposed assessment district, or a general description of the property to be benefitted by the improvement. 

4. An estimate of the total cost of the improvement.

5. An estimate of the cost of the improvement to be assessed against the property to be benefitted. 

6. Notice of a specific date, time and place where the city council will hold a public hearing, at which public hearing objections and remonstrances to the improvement will be heard. The date and time of the public hearing shall not be earlier than 10 days after the date of the first publication or mailing of notice, whichever is later.

7. A statement to all interested persons that written objections or remonstrances to the report and proposed assessment must be submitted to the city recorder on or before the date and time specified in the notice for the public hearing. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 4.] 


3.15.050 Manner of completing improvement.

The city council may provide in its resolution of intent to create an improvement district that the construction work for the improvement may be done in whole or in part by the city, by a contract, by any other governmental agency, or by any combination of methods acceptable to the city council. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 5.] 


3.15.060 Public hearing. 

The city council shall, at the time specified in the notice, hear all objections and remonstrances made by persons affected by the improvement. The city council may continue the public meeting for a period not to exceed 60 days after the date set in the notice. In the event of the city’s receipt of written objections or remonstrances by persons owning 51 percent of the front footage of property subject to the assessment when the proposal is to levy or collect such assessment against only the property abutting upon such public improvement, or by remonstrance of persons owning 51 percent of the area within the boundaries of the proposed improvement district in all other instances, the city council shall by motion abandon the establishment of the proposed improvement district and shall not re-initiate its establishment for six months thereafter.

In the event the council determines to proceed with the improvement, the council shall determine, by resolution, the extent of the proposed improvement district, the nature of the project and an estimate of the time within which it shall be completed. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 6.] 


3.15.070 Completion of improvement.

A. If all or part of the improvement is to be constructed by a contractor, the council shall direct the city manager to prepare the city’s advertisement for bids for construction in a manner specified by the council.

B. No solicitation for bids on the improvement project shall be made until the council has determined by resolution that the improvement shall be made as provided in BMC 3.15.060.

C. A contract for the improvement, or any part of it, shall be awarded in accordance with the city’s previously adopted procedures for public contracting. 

D. The city may reject any or all bids when they are considered unreasonable or unsatisfactory.

E. If no bids are received, or if the bids received are rejected, the council may call for other bids or change the manner in which the improvement is to be constructed. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 7.] 


3.15.080 Apportionment of costs. 

A. After the adoption by the city council of the resolution determining the improvement, or some part of it, shall be made, the city manager shall determine, as nearly as possible, the cost of the improvement and shall report the cost to the city council. The city council shall, by ordinance, assess the various lots, parcels of land, or portions specifically benefitted by the improvement with its share of the cost of the improvement, or in an amount the council determines is appropriate. The council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement, may:

1. Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of the improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

2. Use any just and reasonable method of apportioning the sum to be assessed among the properties benefitted; and

3. Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the costs of the improvement when, in the opinion of the council, the circumstances or nature of the work involved warrant only a partial payment of the costs of the improvement by the property benefitted. The portion to be paid by the city shall represent a reasonable relation between the benefits derived by the properties specially assessed and the benefits derived by the city as a whole.

B. Nothing in the provisions of this chapter precludes the city council from using other available means of financing improvements, including, but not limited to, federal or state grants, sewer, water or other utility charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance. If other means of financing improvements are used, the council may levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of the improvement. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 8.] 


3.15.090 Assessment procedure. 

A. When the estimated cost of an authorized local improvement has been ascertained on a basis acceptable to the city council, or after the work has been completed and the actual cost has been determined, the city council shall direct the preparation of a proposed assessment to the property specially benefitted within the local improvement district, which proposed assessment shall be filed in the offices of the city recorder of the city of Brookings. The proposed assessment may be in the form of a proposed resolution.

B. Upon receipt of the proposed assessment, the council shall, after any modifications, adopt a resolution directing notice of the proposed assessment to be mailed or delivered to the owners of property proposed to be assessed, at the addresses shown on the latest assessment roll in the offices of the Curry County assessor. The notice shall contain the following information:

1. The name of the owner, or reputed owner, the description of the property assessed, the total estimated or actual project cost assessed against the described property;

2. The date, time and place where written objections to the proposed assessment will be considered including a statement that the written objections must be received on or before the time scheduled for the public hearing at which the city council will hear any objections; and

3. A statement that the proposed assessment, as it may be modified by the council, will be levied by the council after the public hearing and will thereafter be charged against the property and will be immediately payable in full, or in installments, if applicable.

C. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed assessment to consider written objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments. The public hearing shall be held not sooner than 10 days after the date of mailing of the notice specified in subsection (B) of this section. The council shall determine by ordinance the amount of assessment to be charged against each lot in the improvement district according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing from the improvement, and shall thereby levy the assessments. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 9.] 


3.15.100 Notice of assessment.

A. Within 30 days after the adoption of the assessment ordinance, the city recorder shall mail a notice of the assessment to the owner or owners of the assessed property as shown on the latest assessment roll in the offices of the Curry County assessor. The city recorder shall cause to be published a notice of the assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of Brookings. The first publication shall be made not later than 10 days after the date the assessment ordinance becomes effective. 

B. The notice of assessment shall recite the date the assessment ordinance became effective and state that if the owner of the property fails to make written application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days from the date of the first publication of the notice, or if the owner fails to pay the assessment in full within 30 days from the date the assessment ordinance became effective, interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure.

C. The notice shall contain a description of the property assessed, the name of the owner or owners of the property and the amount of each assessment. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 10.] 


3.15.110 Installment payments.

A. The owner of property assessed for an improvement in the sum of $100.00 or more may make written application to the city manager to pay the assessment in installments. The application shall be made within 10 days from the date of first publication of the notice of assessment, unless such time is extended by the assessment ordinance. The application for installment payments shall be approved if:

1. The amount remaining unpaid on the assessment with any unpaid balance of any previous assessments against the same property for improvements does not exceed double the assessed valuation of the property, as shown by the last county tax roll; and 

2. The installment payment period does not exceed 10 years or the period established by the assessment ordinance.

B. If the assessed valuation of the property, as shown by the last county tax roll, is insufficient to permit installment payments, the council, by motion, may authorize payments in any manner it determines to be fair and reasonable. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 11.] 


3.15.120 Liens records and foreclosure proceedings.

A. After the adoption of the assessment ordinance, the city recorder shall enter in the lien docket a statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof, a description of the improvement, the names of the owner or owners, and the date the assessment ordinance became effective. The amount entered in the lien docket shall become a lien and charge upon the particular lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof assessed for the improvement as of the date the assessment ordinance became effective.

B. Interest at a rate not to exceed two percentage points more than the net effective rate of interest paid by the city on improvement bonds sold in connection with financing the improvements project out of which the assessment arose, or if no improvement bonds are sold, then interest at a rate the council may set in the assessment ordinance, or if no rate is set in the ordinance, then at a rate of nine percent per annum shall be charged on the balance of the assessment that is unpaid after 30 days from the date the assessment ordinance became effective.

C. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the city may use any method authorized by law to enforce collections of delinquent assessment liens. The assessment liens shall be considered delinquent if not paid or placed on an installment basis within 30 days after the entry on the lien docket. The city may become a bidder for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale.

D. If the owner of property neglects or refuses to pay an installment within one year of the date due, the council may adopt a resolution declaring the whole sum, both principal and interest owing on the assessment, due and payable at once. The council may then proceed to collect the assessment or any part of it. The provisions of ORS 223.205 to 223.295 are hereby adopted and made a part hereof by this reference. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 12.] 


3.15.130 Errors in assessment calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments may be reported to the city recorder, who shall determine whether there has or has not been an error in fact. If the city recorder finds that there has been an error in fact, he/she shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error, and, upon enactment of such amendment, the city recorder shall make the necessary correct in the lien docket and send the corrected notice of assessment by registered or certified mail to the then-current owner of record of the real property at the address shown on the latest assessment roll in the offices of the Curry County assessor. If the city recorder finds there has been no error in fact, he/she shall reject the claim. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 13.] 


3.15.140 Deficit assessment.

A. If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to pay the costs of the improvement, the council, by motion, may declare the deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The council shall set a time for hearing objections to the deficit assessment and direct the publication of one notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and mail a copy of the notice to the address of each record owner of property subject to the proposed deficit assessment, at the address of the property owner shown by the latest assessment roll in the offices of the Curry County assessor. The hearing on the proposed deficit assessment shall be held no earlier than seven days after the date of mailing, or publication, whichever is later. 

B. After the hearing, the city council, by ordinance, shall make a just and equitable deficit assessment which shall be entered in the lien docket as provided by this chapter. Notices of the deficit assessment shall be published and mailed and the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with the procedure established for making the initial assessment. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 14.] 


3.15.150 Rebates.

If, upon completion of the improvement, the assessment previously levied on the property is more than sufficient to pay the costs of the improvement, the council shall ascertain and declare the excess by ordinance and, when so declared, the excess amount shall be entered on the lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. If the assessment has been paid, the person who paid, or his legal representative, is entitled to repayment of the rebate credit, or the portion which exceeds the amount unpaid on the original assessment. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 15.] 


3.15.160 Transfers. 

When a deficit or surplus exists after completion of collection of all liens and payment of all liabilities involving an individual assessment roll, the council shall authorize the payment of any deficit from the general fund and shall authorize the transfer of any surplus to the general fund. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 16.] 


3.15.170 Abandonment of proceedings. 

The city council may abandon and rescind proceedings for an improvement at any time before the completion of the improvement. If liens have been assessed on any property under this procedure, they shall be cancelled, and payments made on the assessment shall be refunded to the persons paying them, their assigns, or legal representatives. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 17.] 


3.15.180 Curative provisions. 

A. No improvement assessment is rendered invalid because of the failure of a report to contain all the information required by BMC 3.15.020, or because of an omission or deficit in the improvement resolution, the assessment ordinance, the lien docket, or notices published and mailed, nor by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to, the owner of any property as required by this chapter, or by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdiction, or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining. The council may remedy and correct all assessments determined by it to be unfair or unjust by suitable action or proceedings.

B. No improvement or improvement district which has been commenced or formed under the provisions of a prior ordinance shall be rendered invalid by the repeal of such prior ordinance and the enactment of this chapter. Such prior improvements and improvement districts are hereby validated and any further actions or proceedings thereon which are necessary for the completion of the improvement or the formation of the improvement district shall be made under the provisions of this chapter which are appropriate in recognition of the stage of completion of the earlier improvement. The provisions of this chapter shall be applied and interpreted so as to relate to existing improvement projects promulgated under Ordinance No. 60-O-146, repealed hereby. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 18.] 


3.15.190 Reassessment.

When an assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment for an improvement which has been made by the city is set aside, annulled or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by a court of competent jurisdiction, or when the council doubts the validity of the assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment, or any part thereof, the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law and the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 92-O-486 § 19.] 


Chapter 3.20 TAX ON SALE OF MARIJUANA

Sections:

3.20.010    Purpose.

3.20.020    Definitions.

3.20.030    Levy of tax.

3.20.040    Deductions.

3.20.050    Seller responsible for payment of tax.

3.20.060    Penalties and interest.

3.20.070    Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

3.20.080    Appeal.

3.20.090    Refunds.

3.20.100    Actions to collect.

3.20.110    Violations.

3.20.120    General penalty.

3.20.130    Confidentiality.

3.20.140    Audit of books, records or persons.

3.20.150    Forms and regulations.


3.20.010 Purpose.

For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana items in the city of Brookings is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana items as authorized by state law. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.020 Definitions.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A. “Director” means the finance and human resource services director for the city of Brookings or his/her designee.

B. “Gross taxable sales” means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from the sale of marijuana items that are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

C. “Marijuana item” has the meaning given that term in Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614, Section 1.

D. “Marijuana retailer” means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.

E. “Person” means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

F. “Purchase or sale” means the retail acquisition or furnishing for consideration of any marijuana item by any person within the city and does not include the acquisition or furnishing of marijuana by a grower or processor to a seller.

G. “Retail sale price” means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.

H. “Retail sale” means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor and a seller.

I. “Seller” means the same as “marijuana retailer.” 

J. “Tax” means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter.

K. “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the director for taxes collected, or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.030 Levy of tax.

There is hereby levied and shall be paid a three percent tax on the retail sale price of any marijuana item by every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana items as defined herein. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.040 Deductions.

The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana items:

A. Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser;

B. Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana items and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.050 Seller responsible for payment of tax.

The seller is responsible for reporting and paying all taxes due as follows:

A. Every seller shall file a return on forms provided by the city.

B. The due date for filing a return with the city is the fifteenth day of each month for the preceding month. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the director.

C. Returns and the full amount of tax collected shall be remitted to the director by the due date and shall specify the total sales subject to this chapter, the amount of tax collected under this chapter, and other relevant information as specified on the form.

D. A payment is delinquent on the last day of the month in which the payment is due.

E. Payments received by the director for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.

F. Nondesignated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted.

G. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the director, in his/her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the director may order such a change.

H. The director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period.

I. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

J. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

K. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years, in an accounting format established by the director, records of all sales made by the dispensary, to include books, accounts, invoices and other such records as may be required by the director. Seller shall make all such records available to the director for inspection at all reasonable times. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.060 Penalties and interest.

A. Original Delinquency. Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay, in addition to the amount of the tax, a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the delinquent tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. On or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the delinquent tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the delinquent tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

D. Interest. Any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay, in addition to any penalties imposed, interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of tax owed, exclusive of penalties and without proration for portions of a month, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid.

F. Petition for Waiver. Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay the penalties as provided herein; however, the seller may petition the Brookings city council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the Brookings city council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.070 Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report of the tax required by this chapter, the director shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. The director shall, upon determining the estimate of tax due from the seller, assess said tax against the seller to include any interest and penalties provided for under this chapter. When such determination is made, the director shall give notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally, or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the seller so assessed at the last known address. Such seller may make an appeal of such determination as provided in BMC 3.20.080. If no appeal is filed, the director’s determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.080 Appeal.

A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may make written request for an informal hearing with the city manager in the following manner:

1. Written notice shall be provided to the city manager any time within 15 days of the date upon which the director provided written notice of determination to the aggrieved person.

2. The city manager shall, upon receipt of the written request for hearing, schedule an informal hearing to be held at City Hall within 15 days of receipt of the request, at which hearing the person aggrieved shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to support his/her position.

3. The city manager shall take evidence from the director as to the reasonableness, fairness, and validity of the determination, and shall render his decision within 24 hours after closing the hearing and shall notify the complainant of his decision.

B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the city recorder in the following manner:

1. The aggrieved shall provide written notice to the city recorder within 20 days of the serving or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the city manager.

2. The city council shall give the appellant not less than 20 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing of said appeal.

3. Action by the city council on appeals shall be final, and shall be decided by a majority of the members of the city council present at the meeting where such appeal is considered. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.090 Refunds.

Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded based upon the following provisions:

A. A written claim, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, must be filed with the director within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms furnished by the director.

B. The director shall have 20 calendar days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the claim’s validity. Notice of the director’s determination shall be provided to claimant in writing. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form.

C. In the event a claim is determined by the director to be valid, a seller may, in a manner prescribed by the director, collect the amount of such claim as a refund or as credit against taxes collected. The seller shall notify the director of claimant’s choice no later than 15 days following the date the director mailed the determination. In the event the claimant has not notified the director of claimant’s choice within the 15-day period and the seller is still in business, a credit will be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the seller is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the claim form.

D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant has established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the director has acknowledged the validity of such claim. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.100 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city.

Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city of Brookings for the recovery of such amount. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city may, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. In the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fee, so long as the fee does not to exceed the limits as set by state statute and the city complies with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.110 Violations.

It is unlawful for any seller or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other pertinent information required by the director, or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due as required by this chapter. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.120 General penalty.

Violations will be fined as provided under Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.130 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

A. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana items are sold or provided; or

B. The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

C. Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the director or an appeal from the director for amount due the city under this chapter; or

D. The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

E. The disclosure of records related to the failure of a seller to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The city council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.140 Audit of books, records or persons.

The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax returns, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the director or an authorized agent of the director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the director may immediately seek a subpoena from the Brookings municipal court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


3.20.150 Forms and regulations.

The director is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for:

A. A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all marijuana retailers; and

B. The records which marijuana retailers are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 16-O-753 § 5; Ord. 14-O-739 § 2.]


Chapter 3.25 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL SALES TAX

Sections:

3.25.010    Purpose.

3.25.020    Definitions.

3.25.030    Tax imposed.

3.25.040    Amount and payment.

3.25.050    Permit requirements.

3.25.060    Permit applications and issuance.

3.25.070    Failure to secure permit.

3.25.080    Revocation of permit.

3.25.090    Cancellation of permit.

3.25.100    Remedies cumulative.

3.25.110    Payment of tax and delinquency.

3.25.120    Monthly statement of dealer.

3.25.130    Failure to file monthly statements.

3.25.140    Billing purchasers.

3.25.150    Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

3.25.160    Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

3.25.170    Exemption of export fuel.

3.25.180    Sales to armed forces exempted.

3.25.190    Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

3.25.200    Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.

3.25.210    Refunds.

3.25.220    Examinations and investigations.

3.25.230    Limitation on credit or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

3.25.240    Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

3.25.250    Records to be kept by dealers.

3.25.260    Records to be kept three years.

3.25.270    Use of tax revenues.

3.25.280    Street system replacement fee.

3.25.290    Effective date and expiration of fuel tax.


3.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the motor vehicle fuel tax is to raise revenues necessary for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation and use of the public streets system in the city. The city’s annual revenue target from the fuel tax is $300,000 adjusted annually by the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the preceding May to May, 12-month period. [Ord. 18-O-771 § 2; Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “City” means the city of Brookings, Oregon.

B. “Dealer” means any person who:

1. Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in the city, but “dealer” does not include any person who imports into the city motor vehicle fuel in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer hereunder and who assumes liability for the payment of the applicable motor vehicle fuel tax to the city; or

2. Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the city for use, distribution or sale in the city; or

3. Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred.

C. “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

D. “Highway” means every way, thoroughfare, and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel.

E. “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.

F. “Motor vehicle fuel” means and includes diesel and gasoline and any other flammable or combustible gas or liquid, by whatever name such as diesel and gasoline, gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles, except gas or liquid, the chief use of which, as determined by the tax administrator, is for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways.

G. “Person” means and includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other business entity.

H. “Service station” means and includes any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.

I. “Tax administrator” means the city manager, the city manager’s designee, or any person or entity with whom the city manager contracts to perform those duties.

J. “Weight receipt” means a receipt issued by the Oregon Department of Transportation, stating the combined weight of each self-propelled or motor-driven vehicle. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.030 Tax imposed.

A motor vehicle fuel tax is hereby imposed on every dealer. The tax imposed shall be paid to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection and administration of the motor vehicle fuel tax, including all powers specified in ORS 319.010 to 319.430. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.040 Amount and payment.

In addition to any fees or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every dealer engaging in his own name, or in the name of others, or in the name of his representatives or agents with the city, in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel, shall:

A. Not later than the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month, render a statement to the tax administrator or duly authorized agent of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by him/her in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser thereof upon which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable motor vehicle fuel tax during the preceding calendar month.

B. Pay a motor vehicle fuel tax computed on the basis of $0.04 per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this chapter. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.050 Permit requirements.

No dealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he/she has secured a dealer’s permit as required herein. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.060 Permit applications and issuance.

A. Every person, before becoming a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in the city, must file an application with the tax administrator for a permit authorizing such person to engage in business as a dealer.

B. Applications for the permit must be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator.

C. The applications must be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate containing:

1. The business name under which the dealer is transacting business.

2. The address of the applicant’s principal place of business and location of distributing stations in the city.

3. The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the several persons constituting the firm or partnership and, if a corporation, the corporate name under which it is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent.

D. If an application for a motor vehicle dealer’s permit is complete and has been accepted for filing, the tax administrator shall issue to the dealer a permit in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe to transact business in the city. The permit is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued.

E. The tax administrator shall keep and file all applications with an alphabetical index thereof, together with a record of all permitted dealers. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.070 Failure to secure permit.

A. If any dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing the certificate and securing the permit required by this chapter, the motor vehicle fuel tax shall immediately be due and payable on account of all motor vehicle fuel so sold, distributed or used.

B. The tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine, from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable, the amount of tax due, and shall assess the tax in the amount found due, together with a penalty of 100 percent of the tax, and shall make a certificate of such assessment and penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect such tax or penalty or both, the certificate shall be prima facie evidence that the dealer therein named is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated.

C. Any tax or penalty so assessed may be collected in the manner prescribed in BMC 3.25.110 with reference to delinquency in payment of the tax or by action at law.

D. In the event any suit or action is instituted to enforce this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to other sums provided by law. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.080 Revocation of permit.

The tax administrator may revoke the permit of any dealer who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. The tax administrator shall mail by certified mail addressed to such dealer at his last known address appearing on the files of the tax administrator, a notice of intention to revoke the permit. The notice shall give the reason for the revocation. The revocation shall become effective without further notice if within 10 days from the mailing of the notice the dealer has not made good its default or delinquency. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.090 Cancellation of permit.

A. The tax administrator may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a permit issued to that dealer. The tax administrator shall, upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, set a date not later than 30 days after receipt of the written request, after which the permit shall no longer be effective.

B. The tax administrator may, after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the permit of dealer upon finding that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.100 Remedies cumulative.

Except as otherwise provided in BMC 3.25.110 and 3.25.130, the remedies provided in BMC 3.25.070, 3.25.080 and 3.25.090 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this code. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.110 Payment of tax and delinquency.

A. The motor vehicle fuel tax imposed by BMC 3.25.030 and 3.25.040 shall be paid to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month.

B. Except as provided in subsections (C) and (E) of this section, if payment of the motor vehicle fuel tax is not paid as required by subsection (A) of this section, a penalty of one percent of such motor vehicle fuel tax shall be assessed and be immediately due and payable.

C. Except as provided in subsection (E) of this section, if the payment of the tax and penalty, if any, is not made on or before the first day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, a further penalty of 10 percent of the tax shall be assessed. This penalty shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (B) of this section and shall be immediately due and payable.

D. Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply if a penalty has been assessed and paid pursuant to BMC 3.25.070. The tax administrator may for good cause shown waive any penalties assessed under this section.

E. If any person fails to pay the motor vehicle fuel tax or any penalty provided for by this section, the tax and/or penalty shall be collected from that person for the use of the city. The tax administrator shall commence and prosecute to final determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to collect the same.

F. In the event any suit or action is instituted to collect the motor vehicle fuel tax or any penalty provided for by this section, if the city is the prevailing party, then the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.120 Monthly statement of dealer.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall provide to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, on the forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, a statement of the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by the dealer during the preceding calendar month. The statement shall be signed by the dealer or the dealer’s agent. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.130 Failure to file monthly statements.

If a dealer fails to file any statement required by BMC 3.25.120, the tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines to be reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by such dealer for the period unreported, and such determination shall in any proceeding be prima facie evidence of the amount of such fuel sold, distributed or used. The tax administrator shall immediately assess the dealer for the motor vehicle fuel tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of 10 percent of the tax. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this chapter. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.140 Billing purchasers.

Dealers in motor vehicle fuel shall render bills to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe the different products sold or shipped thereunder and shall be serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls acceptable to the tax administrator are maintained. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.150 Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

No person shall receive and accept motor vehicle fuel from any dealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the motor vehicle fuel for sale, unless the motor vehicle fuel is accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which motor vehicle fuel was delivered, purchased or sold, and the name of the dealer. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.160 Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling, transporting or delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering upon the public highways of the city with such conveyance, have and possess during the entire time of hauling or transporting of such motor vehicle fuel, an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement showing the number of gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor, and the true name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same. The person hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall at the request of any officer authorized by law to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for inspection the invoice, bill of sale or other statement. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.170 Exemption of export fuel.

A. The motor vehicle fuel tax imposed by BMC 3.25.030 and 3.25.040 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel that is:

1. Exported from the city by a dealer; or

2. Sold by a dealer for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required to report such exports and sales to the city in such detail as may be required.

B. In support of any claimed exemption from motor vehicle fuel taxes claimed under this section other than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in his/her own equipment, every dealer must execute and file with the tax administrator an export certificate in such form as shall be prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, containing a statement, made by some person having actual knowledge of the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported from the city, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as the tax administrator may require. The tax administrator may demand of any dealer such additional data as is deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of such certificate. The tax administrator may, in a case where the tax administrator believes no useful purpose would be served by fling of an export certificate, waive the filing of the certificate.

C. Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle shall not be considered as exported from the city.

D. No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the city tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion thereof or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be exported, or diverted or cause to be delivered the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof, to be used, distributed or sold in the city and fail to notify the tax administrator and the dealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally purchased of his/her act.

E. No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold from export, or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city for sale or use so as to avoid any of the fees imposed herein.

F. In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser, the dealer shall retain in his/her files for at least three years an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as is prescribed by the tax administrator. This certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.180 Sales to armed forces exempted.

The license tax imposed by BMC 3.25.030 and 3.25.040 shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the armed forces of the United States for use in ships, aircraft or for export from the city; but every dealer shall be required to report such sales to the tax administrator in such detail as may be required. A certificate by an authorized officer of such armed forces shall be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.190 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of such vehicle, motor vehicle fuel for his/her own use only and for the purpose of operating such motor vehicle without securing a permit or paying the tax provided in BMC 3.25.030 and 3.25.040, or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein, but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is removed from the fuel tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the vehicle, the person importing fuel into the city shall be subject to all the provisions herein applying to dealers. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.200 Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.

A. A dealer selling or delivering motor vehicle fuel to dealers is not required to pay a motor vehicle tax thereon.

B. The dealer in rendering monthly statements to the city as required by BMC 3.25.040 and 3.25.120 shall show separately the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold or delivered to dealers. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.210 Refunds.

A. Refunds of tax on motor vehicle fuel will be made pursuant to ORS 319.280 to 319.320. Claim forms for refunds may be obtained from the office of the tax administrator. Claims for refunds must be filed with the tax administrator within 15 months from the date of purchase or invoice.

B. In addition, a holder of a weight receipt that certifies to the city that the motor vehicle fuel upon which the tax was imposed will be used only for fueling vehicles subject to the state of Oregon’s weight-mile tax, may apply for a refund of 80 percent of the tax imposed by BMC 3.25.030 and 3.25.040 on motor vehicle fuel purchases. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.220 Examinations and investigations.

The tax administrator, or duly authorized agent, may make any examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product or products within the city, and such other investigations as it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examination or investigations disclose that any reports of dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the tax administrator pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of gallonage of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the tax administrator may make such changes in subsequent reports and payment of such dealers or other persons, or may make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examination or investigations. The dealer shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of the examination or investigations if the action disclosed that the dealer paid 95 percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of 18 percent per year from the date the original tax payment was due. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.230 Limitation on credit or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a dealer must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city.

B. Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this chapter shall be served on dealers within three years from the date upon which such additional taxes become due, and shall be subject to penalty as provided in BMC 3.25.110. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.240 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

The tax administrator, or duly authorized agent, may at any time during normal business hours examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.250 Records to be kept by dealers.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the tax administrator of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel. The records shall include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the tax administrator or authorized officers or agents of the tax administrator. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.260 Records to be kept three years.

Every dealer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the city by such dealer, together with stock records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the tax administrator. In the event such records are not kept within the state of Oregon, the dealer shall reimburse the tax administrator for all travel, lading, and related expenses incurred by the tax administrator in examining such records. The amount of such expenses shall be an additional tax imposed by BMC 3.25.030. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.270 Use of tax revenues.

A. For the purposes of this section, “net revenue” shall mean the revenue from the tax imposed by BMC 3.25.030 and 3.25.040 remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized herein.

B. The net revenue shall be used only for the maintenance, repair and rehabilitation of public highways, roads and streets within the city. Such work may include sidewalk, bicycle, storm drain and utility relocation associated with a street improvement project.

C. Tax revenues shall be accounted for in the fuel tax fund in the city’s annual budget where revenues and expenditures shall be shown.

D. The city manager shall prepare an annual report to the city council on the expenditure of fuel tax revenues. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.280 Street system replacement fee.

As of July 1, 2015, the current street system replacement fee is repealed. No street system replacement fee shall be imposed while this fuel tax is in effect. [Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


3.25.290 Effective date and expiration of fuel tax.

The motor vehicle fuel sales tax will become effective July 1, 2015, and will expire at 11:59 p.m. on June 30, 2023. [Ord. 18-O-771 § 2; Ord. 15-O-742 § 2.]


Title 4 FRANCHISES

Chapters:

4.05    Communications Infrastructure


Chapter 4.05 COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE

Sections:

4.05.010    Short title and intent.

4.05.020    Definitions.

4.05.030    Registration of communications providers.

4.05.040    Construction standards.

4.05.050    Location of communications facilities.

4.05.060    Communications franchise.

4.05.070    General franchise terms.

4.05.080    General provisions.


4.05.010 Short title and intent.

A. Short Title. This chapter may be referred to as the “communications infrastructure chapter.”

B. Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights-of-Way.

1. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the city Charter and state law.

2. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory management of each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

3. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

4. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

5. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any communications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency.

C. Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.

1. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all other federal, state, local, and city charges as may be levied, imposed, or due from a communications provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of communications services.

2. The city has determined that any fee or tax provided for by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees or taxes are not imposed on property or property owners.

3. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter are subject to applicable federal and state laws. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Act, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

“Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq., as amended.

“Cable service” is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

“City” means the city of Brookings, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

“City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Brookings, Oregon.

“City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.

“Communications facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located or to be located under, on, or above the surface of the ground and used or to be used for the purpose of providing communications services.

“Communications provider” means any provider of communications services and includes, but is not limited to, every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages communications facilities within the city.

“Communications service” means any service provided for the purpose of transmission of information including, but not limited to, voice, video, or data, without regard to the transmission protocol employed, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself, and includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information transport, but does not include:

1. Open video system service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. Part 76;

2. Private communications system services provided without using the public rights-of-way;

3. Over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; and

4. Direct-to-home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act.

Communications System. See “Communications facilities” above.

“Construction” means any activity in the public rights-of-way resulting in physical change thereto, including excavation or placement of structures, but excluding routine maintenance or repair of existing facilities.

“Control” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

“Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

“Director” means the director of public works and development services, or his/her designee.

“Emergency” has the meaning provided for in ORS 401.025.

“Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee communications providers, services and providers on a national level.

“Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

“Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

“OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing and regulation of certain communications providers as set forth in Oregon law, or its lawful successor.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

“Private communications network” means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. “Private communications network” includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

“Public rights-of-way or right-of-way” includes, but is not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, within the city, but does not include parks, parkland or other city property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas for communications facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below.

“State” means the state of Oregon.

“Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. Section 151 et seq.

“Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated, or devoted for public utility purposes. “Utility easement” does not include any easement dedicated solely for city facilities or where the proposed use by the communications provider is inconsistent with the terms and conditions of any easement granted to the city. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.030 Registration of communications providers.

A. Purpose. The purpose of registration is:

1. To assure that all communications providers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

2. To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the communications providers who offer to provide communications services within the city, or that own or operate communications facilities within the city.

3. To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

B. Registration Required.

1. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, all communications providers having communications facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all communications providers that offer or provide communications services to any customer within the city, shall register within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter. Any communications provider that desires to have communications facilities within the corporate limits of the city or to provide communications services to any customer within the city after the effective date of this chapter shall register prior to such installation or provision of service.

2. After registering with the city pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section, the registrant shall, by December 31st of each year, file with the city a new registration form if it intends to provide communications services at any time in the following calendar year. Registrants that file an initial registration pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section on or after September 30th shall not be required to file an annual registration until December 31st of the following year.

3. The appropriate application and license from: (a) the Oregon Public Utility Commission (PUC); or (b) the Federal Communications Commission qualify as necessary registration information. To the extent not included in the application and license materials submitted pursuant to this subsection, applicants also shall provide the following information:

a. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the name, address, and telephone number of the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information.

b. The name, address, and telephone number for the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee to be contacted in case of an emergency.

c. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed communications facilities within the city, a description of the communications facilities that the registrant intends to construct, and a description of the communications services that the registrant intends to offer or provide to persons, firms, businesses, or institutions within the city.

d. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the communications services provided, or to be provided, by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to the city’s business license requirements. A copy of the business license or the license number must be provided.

C. Registration Application Fee. Each application for registration as a communications provider shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council.

D. Exceptions to Registration. The following communications providers are excepted from registration:

1. Communications providers with a valid franchise agreement granted by the city pursuant to this chapter.

2. Communications facilities that are owned and operated exclusively for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state.

3. A private communications network; provided, that such network does not occupy any public rights-of-way of the city. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.040 Construction standards.

A. General. No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of communications facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in this section and BMC 4.05.050, and with all applicable codes, rules, and regulations.

B. Construction Codes. Communications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code.

C. Construction Permits. Except in the event of an emergency, no person shall construct or install any communications facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in subsection (G) of this section. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of communications facilities within a public right-of-way:

1. Unless the communications provider that owns or will own the communications facilities has first filed a registration statement with the city as required by BMC 4.05.030; and

2. Unless the communications provider that owns or will own the communications facilities has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to BMC 4.05.060.

In the event of an emergency, a franchisee or its contractor may perform work on its communications facilities without first obtaining a permit from the city; provided, that, to the extent reasonably feasible, it attempts to notify the city prior to commencing the emergency work and in any event applies for a permit from the city and pays the permit fee as soon as reasonably practicable, but not more than 48 hours after commencing the emergency work. As used in this subsection (C), “emergency” means a circumstance in which immediate repair to damaged or malfunctioning communications facilities is necessary to restore lost service or prevent immediate harm to persons or property.

D. Permit Application. Applications for permits to construct communications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

1. That the communications facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

2. That the communications facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

3. The location and route of all communications facilities to be installed above ground or on existing utility poles.

4. The location and route of all new communications facilities on or in the public rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Applicant’s existing communications facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing communications facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

5. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

E. Applicant’s Verification. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the verification of a registered professional engineer, or other qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant, that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.

F. Construction Schedule. All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the director.

G. Construction Permit Fee. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. Such fees shall be designed to defray the costs of city administration of the requirements of this chapter.

H. Issuance of Permit. If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement, the director shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

I. Notice of Construction. Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the director not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or construction in the public rights-of-way.

J. Compliance with Permit. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The director and his/her representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

K. Noncomplying Work. Subject to the notice requirements in BMC 4.05.050(D), all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee. The city is authorized to stop work in order to assure compliance with the provision of this chapter.

L. Completion of Construction. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved by the director.

M. As-Built Drawings. If requested by the city for a necessary public purpose, as determined by the city, the permittee shall furnish the city with up to two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all communications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. These plans shall be submitted to the director within 60 days after completion of construction, in a format acceptable to the city.

N. Restoration of Public Rights-of-Way.

1. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way, it shall, at its own expense, promptly restore the affected areas to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, or as otherwise required in the permit issued by the city.

2. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section (N), the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule may be subject to approval by the director.

3. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to good order and condition, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after such notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, or as otherwise required in the permit issued by the city, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

4. A permittee or other person acting on its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting the rights-of-way.

O. Performance and Completion Bond. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the city equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing the communications facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city shall be provided before construction is commenced.

1. The surety shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

2. The surety shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

a. Timely completion of construction;

b. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

c. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

d. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction; and

e. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material, or services provided in connection with the work. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.050 Location of communications facilities.

A. Location of Facilities. All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms of the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities, the franchise, and all applicable city codes, rules and regulations. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or communications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee occupying the same public right-of-way must also locate its communications facilities underground at its own expense.

B. Interference with the Public Rights-of-Way. No grantee may locate or maintain its communications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations.

C. Relocation or Removal of Facilities.

1. A grantee shall, at no cost to the city, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any communications facilities within the public rights-of-way, including relocation of aerial communications facilities underground, when requested to do so in writing by the city.

2. Nothing in this subsection (C) shall be deemed to preclude grantee from requesting reimbursement or compensation from a third party, pursuant to applicable laws, regulations, tariffs or agreements; provided, that grantee shall timely comply with the requirements of this subsection (C), regardless of whether or not it has requested or received such reimbursement or compensation.

3. The city shall provide written notice of the time by which grantee must remove, relocate, change, alter or underground its communications facilities. If grantee fails to remove, relocate, alter or underground any communications facility as requested by the city and by the date established by the city, grantee shall pay all costs incurred by the city due to such failure, including but not limited to costs related to project delays, and the city may cause the communications facility to be removed, relocated, altered or undergrounded at grantee’s sole expense using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the city, grantee shall reimburse the city for the costs the city incurred within 30 days.

D. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, communications provider, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized communications system, facility, or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such communications facilities and/or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A communications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

1. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s communications franchise, unless the city has provided written authorization for abandonment in place.

2. Upon abandonment of a communications facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A communications facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A communications facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the communications facility is being replaced. The city shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the communications provider before concluding that a communications facility is abandoned. A communications facility may be abandoned in place and not removed if authorized in writing by the city and there is no apparent risk to the public safety, health, or welfare.

3. If the communications system or facility was constructed or installed without the appropriate prior authority at the time of installation.

4. If the communications system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s communications franchise or other legally sufficient permit.

E. Coordination of Construction Activities. All grantees are required to make a good faith effort to cooperate with the city.

1. By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their known proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

2. If requested by the city, each grantee shall meet with the city annually or as determined by the city to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way. At that time, city will provide available information on plans for local, state, and/or federal construction projects.

3. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the director, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.060 Communications franchise.

A. Communications Franchise.

1. A communications franchise shall be required of any communications provider who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city.

2. Any person whose communications facilities occupy the public right-of-way without a valid franchise agreement from the city must comply with the provisions of this chapter, including payment of the franchise fee pursuant to subsection (H) of this section.

B. Franchise Application.

1. Any person that desires a communications franchise shall file an application with the director that includes the following information:

a. The identity of the applicant.

b. A description of the communications services that are to be offered or provided by the applicant over its communications facilities.

c. Engineering plans, specifications, and a network map in a form customarily used by the applicant of the communications facilities located or to be located within the public rights-of-way in the city, including the location and route requested for applicant’s proposed communications facilities.

d. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

e. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the communications facilities and to offer or provide the communications services proposed.

f. An accurate map showing the location of any existing communications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

g. For an applicant for a cable service franchise, all information required in 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41, to the extent applicable, in addition to the other information required in this subsection (B).

h. Any reasonable additional information the city deems applicable.

2. Any communications provider that occupies the public rights-of-way of the city without a franchise as of the effective date of this chapter shall file an application pursuant to this subsection (B) within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter. Any communications provider that desires to occupy the public rights-of-way of the city after the effective date of this chapter shall register prior to installation of any communications facilities in the public rights-of-way.

C. Application and Review Fee.

1. Subject to applicable law, applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

2. An application and review fee to be determined by resolution of the city council shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise.

D. Determination by the City. The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The application shall be evaluated based upon the continuing capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities and the applicant’s legal, technical and financial ability to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies.

E. Rights Granted. No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term, and upon the conditions stated in the franchise agreement. The right granted by the franchise is limited to the right to use the public rights-of-way for the provision of communications services as defined herein. Nothing in the franchise shall be construed to prevent the city from grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any public rights-of-way, constructing, laying down, repairing, relocating or removing city facilities or establishing any other public work, utility or improvement of any kind, including repairs, replacement or removal of any city facilities. If any of grantee’s communications facilities interfere with the construction, repair, replacement, alteration or removal of any public rights-of-way, public work, city utility, city improvement or city facility, except those providing communications services in competition with a grantee, grantee’s facilities shall be removed or relocated as provided in BMC 4.05.050(C) and (D), in a manner acceptable to the city and consistent with industry standard engineering and safety codes.

F. Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a communications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.

G. Franchise Territory. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a communications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas, and may include the entire city.

H. Franchise Fees.

1. A communications franchise granted hereunder shall require the grantee to pay the franchise fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council.

2. Every communications provider that uses the public rights-of-way in the city to provide communications services without a franchise, whether or not the communications provider owns the communications facilities used to provide its communications services and whether or not the communications provider is required to obtain a franchise pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, shall pay a right-of-way use fee in the amount of the franchise fee determined by resolution of the city council. The duty to provide information set forth in BMC 4.05.070(C) shall apply to information of communications providers subject to the right-of-way use fee in this subsection (H)(2) sufficient to demonstrate compliance with this subsection.

3. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city, the fee shall be paid within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues and a calculation of the amount payable. The communications provider shall pay interest at the rate of nine percent per year for any payment made after the due date.

4. The franchise fee required by this subsection (H) shall be subject to all applicable limitations imposed by federal or state law.

I. Amendment of Grant. Conditions for amending a franchise are as follows:

1. A new application and grant shall be required of any communications provider that desires to extend or locate its communications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

2. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its communications facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

3. A new application and grant shall be required of any communications provider that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

J. Renewal Applications. A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

1. The information required pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

2. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee.

K. Renewal Determinations. Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under subsection (J) of this section, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. The application shall be evaluated based upon the continuing capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities, the applicant’s compliance with the provisions of its franchise and this chapter during the franchise term, and the applicant’s legal, technical and financial ability to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies. For a cable service franchise, the application shall also be evaluated based upon whether the applicant’s proposed franchise is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests and other criteria consistent with the Cable Act, and the renewal process shall be subject to Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Section 546).

L. Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the franchise, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city.

M. Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise. Ownership or control of a majority interest in a communications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

1. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the franchise.

2. No transfer shall be approved unless the city determines the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical and financial ability to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies.

3. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a communications franchise.

4. Any transfer or assignment of a communications franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this subsection (M) or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise.

N. Revocation or Termination of Franchise. A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked for the following reasons:

1. Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit.

2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

3. Failure to comply with subsection (M) of this section with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a communications system or franchise.

4. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

5. Abandonment of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, unless the city has authorized abandonment in place pursuant to BMC 4.05.050(D)(2).

6. Failure to relocate or remove communications facilities as required in this chapter.

7. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city under this chapter.

8. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

9. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.

10. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.

O. Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding 30 days, to furnish evidence that:

1. Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;

2. Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or

3. It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.

P. Public Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in this subsection, the city manager may refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The city council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.

Q. Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions. If the city council finds that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, including but not limited to assessment of penalties pursuant to BMC 4.05.080(E), considering the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors. Whether:

1. The misconduct was egregious.

2. Substantial harm resulted.

3. The violation was intentional.

4. There is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

5. There is a history of overall compliance.

6. The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.

R. Other City Costs. All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all reasonable direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement consistent with applicable state and federal laws. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.070 General franchise terms.

A. Facilities. Upon request, each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all communications facilities within the public rights-of-way.

B. Damage to Grantee’s Facilities. Unless directly and proximately caused by negligent, careless, wrongful, willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, and consistent with Oregon law, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any communications facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom.

C. Duty to Provide Information.

1. Except in emergencies, within 60 days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with the following:

a. Information sufficient to demonstrate that grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the franchise fee payments required by BMC 4.05.060(H) and any franchise agreement.

b. All books, records, maps, and other documents maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals.

2. Such information, books, records, maps, and other documents shall be furnished at a mutually agreed upon location within the city unless the city agrees in writing to a location outside the city.

3. If the city’s audit or review of the books, records and other documents or information of the grantee demonstrates that grantee has underpaid the franchise fee by three percent or more in any one year, grantee shall reimburse the city for the cost of the audit or review, in addition to any interest owed pursuant to BMC 4.05.060(H) or as specified in a franchise. Any underpayment, including any interest or audit cost reimbursement, shall be paid within 30 days of the city’s notice to grantee of such underpayment.

D. Compensation for City Property. If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of communications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city.

E. Cable Service. For communication providers providing cable service, the franchise shall include adequate capacity and support for public, educational or governmental channels, capacity on an institutional network, and other cable-related community needs and interests required by the city, subject to applicable provisions of the Cable Act and related rules of the Federal Communications Commission.

F. Leased Capacity. A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided, that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee.

G. Grantee Insurance. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional insureds:

1. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

a. Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

b. Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and

c. Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

3. Workers’ compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

4. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

5. The liability insurance policies required by this subsection (G) shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the communications franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its communications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement, or other endorsement agreed to in writing by the city:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the director of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

6. Each grantee shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage in the terms and amounts required in this subsection (G). If the insurance is canceled or materially altered, the grantee shall obtain a replacement policy that complies with the terms of this subsection (G) and provide the city with a replacement certificate of insurance.

7. As an alternative to the insurance requirements contained herein, a grantee may provide evidence of self-insurance subject to review and acceptance by the city.

H. General Indemnification. Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its communications facilities, and in providing or offering communications services over the communications facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.

I. Performance Surety. Before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required by BMC 4.05.040(O) for construction of facilities. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


4.05.080 General provisions.

A. Governing Law. Any franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city.

B. Written Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder except by a writing duly executed by the franchisee and the city.

C. Nonexclusive Grant. No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of communications services or any other purposes.

D. Severability and Preemption. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this chapter, then the provision shall be read to be preempted only to the extent required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city.

E. Penalties. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs.

F. Other Remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter.

G. Captions. The captions to sections and subsections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter.

H. Compliance with Laws. Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of any franchise granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a communications system.

I. Consent. Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this chapter or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld.

J. Application to Existing Ordinances and Agreements. To the extent that this chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing ordinance and franchise agreements, this chapter shall apply to all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right-of-way for communications services.

K. Confidentiality. The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law; provided, that documents are clearly marked as confidential by the grantee at the time of disclosure to the city. The city shall not be required to incur any costs to protect the confidentiality of such document, other than the city’s routine internal procedures for complying with the Oregon Public Records Law. [Ord. 15-O-745 § 3.]


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Licenses

5.10    Taxicabs

5.15    Transportation Network Companies

5.20    Transient Businesses

 


Chapter 5.05  BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.05.010    Purpose and scope.

5.05.020    Definitions.

5.05.030    Employee not deemed in business – Purposes.

5.05.040    Agents of nonresident proprietors.

5.05.050    Representations – Advertisements.

5.05.060    Ability to conduct business – License required – Exemptions.

5.05.070    Annual fees.

5.05.080    Daily fees.

5.05.090    Noncompliance unlawful.

5.05.100    Regular and temporary license terms.

5.05.110    License period.

5.05.120    Fiscal year application.

5.05.130    City recorder to keep record.

5.05.140    Required application statements – Renewal.

5.05.150    License certificate – Appeal to city council.

5.05.160    Council to prescribe form of certificate.

5.05.170    Investigation of business.

5.05.180    Nontransferable – Exception.

5.05.190    License not vested right.

5.05.200    Fees are additional revenue.

5.05.210    Combination of certain businesses.

5.05.220    Certificate to be displayed.

5.05.230    Concurrent cause of suit.

5.05.240    Penalty.


5.05.010 Purpose and scope.

The business license fees imposed by the terms of this chapter are for revenue purposes only. Neither the acceptance of the prescribed fee nor the issuance of the applicable license shall be construed to constitute a regulation of any business activity or a permit to engage in activity otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance, or a waiver of any regulatory licensing requirement imposed by any other ordinance of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 1.] 


5.05.020 Definitions. 

As used in this chapter:

A. “Person” shall be deemed to mean and include any person, firm, copartnership, association, joint venture, syndicate, society, or domestic or foreign corporation. 

B. “Business” shall mean and include any trade, profession, occupation or pursuit of every kind conducted in the city of Brookings for gain including, but not limited to, those businesses hereinafter identified, except the following:

1. Any business recognized as charitable by the Internal Revenue Service under the provisions of IRC Section 501.

2. Any business filed as a nonprofit corporation under the provisions of Chapter 65 ORS. 

C. “Proprietor” and “employer” shall be deemed to mean and include any person, as herein defined, who is engaged in any “business” as herein defined. 

D. The use of any pronoun shall be construed as meaning and including the singular or plural thereof, and the masculine, feminine, and neuter gender, as the case may be. 

E. Transient Business. See Chapter 5.20 BMC. 

F. “Garage sale” shall be deemed to mean any public sale of new or used goods within the city limits by an individual or group of individuals from private property when the individual or group of individuals is not in the business of selling goods or is not licensed as a secondhand dealer, and when the property from which the sale is to be conducted is not within a zone permitting commercial business or if within a zone permitting commercial business is in residential use, or otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 2; Ord. 96-O-518 § 2.] 


5.05.030 Employee not deemed in business – Purposes.

No person who is an employee, and whose income is based solely on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or annual wage or salary shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed a person engaged in business in the city of Brookings. It is declared that the purpose of this chapter is that all license fees levied hereby and hereunder shall be borne by the employer for the privilege of doing business in the city of Brookings; and for providing revenue for municipal purposes generally; and to pay the necessary expenses for carrying out the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 3.] 


5.05.040 Agents of nonresident proprietors.

The agent or agents of a nonresident proprietor engaged in any business for which a license is required by this chapter shall be liable for the payment of the license fee therefor and shall be subject to the penalties for failure to pay the same or to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent and with like effect as though such agent or agents were themselves the proprietors of such business. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 4.] 


5.05.050 Representations – Advertisements.

Any person representing himself or exhibiting any sign or advertisement to the effect that he is engaged in any of the businesses upon which a license fee is levied by this chapter shall be deemed to be engaged in such business and shall be liable for the payment of the license fee levied hereby or hereunder, and shall be subject to the penalties for failure to pay the same or comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 5.] 


5.05.060 Ability to conduct business – License required – Exemptions. 

A. No person shall engage in, prosecute, or carry on any business within the corporate boundaries of the city of Brookings unless and until they have first obtained a license therefor and shall have paid to the city the fee required. 

B. The issuance of a business license under the provisions of this chapter does not constitute authorization by the city to the licensee to conduct business in any manner in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city or any rule, regulation, order or law of the state or federal government. 

C. The issuance of a license for a transient business does not constitute authorization for the conduct of that business on any public street or right-of-way of the city of Brookings, or other public property, unless specific authority is granted to the transient business licensee by the governing body of public entity which owns the public property. The city manager shall have authority to grant approval for the conduct of transient business on public property and rights-of-way of the city of Brookings. 

D. A business is exempt from the requirements of a business license if exempted by the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, by the Constitution and laws of the state or federal government or if exempted by the city manager under the following circumstances:

1. Special Events. An exemption to the business license requirements of this chapter may be granted by the city manager of the city of Brookings to a business which is conducted in the city for a single annual special event only, if the business is not otherwise conducted within the city at any other time. The city manager shall provide notice in advance of the designation of any special event qualifying for this exemption. 

E. Garage sales may be conducted without obtaining a business license. However, no household may conduct more than three garage sales in a one-year period, and no sale may last longer than three days. 

F. Sellers and purchasers of seasonally gleaned forest products such as mushrooms, wild berries, huckleberries, fern and fir boughs, cascara bark, etc., must hold a current city business license. A business license will only be issued to purchasers who transact business in conjunction with an existing commercial facility. Purchases shall be allowed either inside or outside the existing commercial structure; however, no temporary structures may be constructed to house this purchasing activity. A temporary business license will satisfy the business license requirement if the provisions of BMC 5.05.080(B) are met. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 6.] 


5.05.070 Annual fees. 

The annual fee for a business license for established businesses shall be determined by the total number of employees reported on State Unemployment Report Form No. 132 by each business. New businesses licensees who have not yet filed a State Unemployment Report Form No. 132 will estimate the number of employees for the first license year.

Business License Fee Schedule 

	Total Employees Reported on Form No. 132 in  April of Each Year	Business License Fee for Each Fiscal Year

	 0 – 10	$60.00

	11 – 25	$100.00

	26 – 50	$150.00

	51 – 75	$300.00

	 76 – 100	$600.00

	101 – 200	$1,000.00

	200 +	$1,500.00 

For businesses located outside the city of Brookings, doing business within the city of Brookings, the fee is $75.00.

Business license fees are due prior to July 31st of each year. For each month that the business license fee is late, a $10.00 penalty fee will be added. No business license will be issued without the proper license fee (and penalties, if any) being paid in full. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 7.] 


5.05.080 Daily fees.

A. Unless exempted by BMC 5.05.060, or unless a license has been issued under BMC 5.05.070, the following listed business shall pay a daily license fee to the recorder in the amounts specified for the respective business:

1. Carnival and circus: $35.00 per day.

B. Temporary 90-Day Business License Fees. Persons doing business within the city of Brookings who are seeking a temporary business license under the guidelines of this chapter shall first file an application with the city recorder and pay a fee of one-fourth of the annual business license fee for their type and size of business, or $25.00, whichever is greater. Persons holding a temporary business license and who do business within the city beyond the 90-day license period shall be required to pay the full annual regular business license fee. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 8.] 


5.05.090 Noncompliance unlawful.

It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or transact any business as specified in this chapter without first paying to the city of Brookings the license fees herein imposed. Persons operating without a current business license shall be liable to pay a business license fee for their unlicensed work period, plus a $10.00 late fee for each unlicensed month of the work period. If full payment is not made within 60 days of notice of payment due, the corrective action and possible penalties identified in BMC 5.05.230 and 5.05.240 may be pursued. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 9.] 


5.05.100 Regular and temporary license terms.

Annual business licenses are issued for a fiscal year running from July 1st of that year, to June 30th of the following year. Temporary licenses, if issued, run for a continuous 90-day period starting the day of the temporary license issuance. There shall be no extension or renewal of a temporary business license during the fiscal year of issuance. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 10.] 


5.05.110 License period.

If an application is made before December 31st of the fiscal year, no license, except a temporary license or those on a daily basis, may be issued for less than a full fiscal year. Except for a temporary license, if an application is made on or after January 1st of the fiscal year to cover the period from January 1st to June 30th, a license fee of one-half of the regular yearly business license fee (shown in BMC 5.05.070 in the business license fee schedule) shall be collected for such period or fraction thereof. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 11.] 


5.05.120 Fiscal year application.

On or before July 1st of each fiscal year, persons doing business in the city of Brookings shall apply in writing to the city recorder, upon forms furnished by the city, for a license to engage in business during the fiscal year. When applying for a license, the applicant shall pay the annual license fee prescribed by BMC 5.05.070. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 12.] 


5.05.130 City recorder to keep record.

The city recorder shall file and keep record of every application for a license made under the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 13.] 


5.05.140 Required application statements – Renewal. 

A. Before being issued a license, the applicant shall fill out a license application form provided by the city pursuant to BMC 5.05.120. The form shall require a statement in writing, signed by the applicant, describing: 

1. The type of business;

2. Its name and location; 

3. The telephone number of the business;

4. The fire preventative measures to be taken and/or installed about the business premises location in the city of Brookings;

5. The number and location of sanitary facilities for business invitees, customers and other persons using the business premises which facilities shall be located on the site of the business being conducted in the city of Brookings, except that transient businesses shall be exempt from this requirement;

6. Other information reasonably needed to issue a license certificate. 

B. Applicants who fail to pay the license fee in full or who hold a license certificate that is revoked, expired, or ceased for any reason are required to make a new and initial application. 

C. So long as a business has been continually operated without interruption through June 30th of the licensing year, upon premises for which an original license certificate was issued, persons operating said business may renew a license certificate issued to them before June 30th. If a license certificate is so renewed, the certificate holder need not make a new license application; however, new applications are necessary if there has been any break in the business or its operation upon the premises during the preceding year or if there have been any changes of circumstances necessitating a correction or amendment to the information above-required as it may vary at the time of renewal from that so stated in the prior application. 

D. Businesses as outlined in subsection (C) of this section must pay their renewal by July 31st of each year. Failure to make full and proper payment will result in a $10.00 per month late fee. If full and proper payment, including late fees, is not made by September 30th of the year, the city shall refer the matter of nonpayment to the city attorney for enforcement of remedies under this chapter. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 14.]


5.05.150 License certificate – Appeal to city council.

Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, the city recorder may request the assistance of the chief of police for investigation of the application with regard to the requirements of this chapter or with regard to the health, safety and welfare of the customers, business invitees, and citizens of the city of Brookings who may be on or about the business premises. Within 30 days after the receipt of the completed application and required fee, if the application is in order and the issuance of the license is called for under the terms of this chapter, the application shall be accepted and the city recorder shall issue a city of Brookings business license. The license certificate is evidence of the applicant’s privilege to conduct business in the city of Brookings in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and the certificate shall bear the printed signature of the mayor and be counter-signed by the city recorder. 

If an application is incomplete or when the city recorder determines that an applicant does not meet the requirements of this chapter for the issuance of a business license in the city of Brookings, the city recorder shall give notice of rejection of the license application to the applicant in writing mailed to the address shown on the application. An incomplete application may be supplemented by additional required information and submitted to the city recorder within 10 days of the date of mailing of the notice of application rejection, and such additional information shall be considered as part of the original application. Upon receipt of additional information to supplement an incomplete application, the application shall then be further reviewed by the city recorder and accepted or rejected by the city recorder as provided above within 30 days of receipt of the submittal of additional information.

If an application is rejected by the city recorder, the applicant may appeal the decision of the city recorder to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city recorder not later than 10 days after the date of mailing of the application rejected by the city recorder. The written request for appeal shall recite the facts or circumstances upon which the appeal is based.

At its next applicable council meeting, the city council shall hear the appeal of the applicant to the city recorder’s rejection of the business license application. Upon hearing the appeal by the city council, the council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city recorder, and the city council shall enter an order upon the minutes of the meeting in accordance with its decision. If the decision of the city recorder is reversed, the recorder shall issue a license certificate to the applicant within five working days after the date the order is entered on the minutes. In the event the city council affirms the decision of the city recorder, the minute order shall stand as the final decision of the city on the applicant’s request for a business license in accordance of the terms with the application received. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 15.] 


5.05.160 Council to prescribe form of certificate.

The form and wording of the license certificate to be issued by the city recorder shall be prescribed by the city council; and it shall specify the name of the licensee, the type of business licensed, the location of said business, and the amount of license fee paid. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 16.] 


5.05.170 Investigation of business.

The chief of police and his subordinate police officers are hereby directed and empowered to investigate and examine all places of business in the city of Brookings at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether or not such business is being conducted in accordance with the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 17.] 


5.05.180 Nontransferable – Exception.

No transfer or assignment of any license issued hereunder shall be valid or permitted; except that whenever any person shall sell or transfer the whole of a business for which such license has been issued, the vendee thereof shall, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, be allowed to engage in said business under the vendor’s license for the balance of the fiscal year for which the vendor’s license was issued. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 18.] 


5.05.190 License not vested right.

Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed as vesting in the license any contract right, or creating any contract obligation on the part of the city as to the amount of the license fee, or as to the character of the license issued hereunder; but on the contrary, it shall be construed as reserving to the city the right to increase or decrease at any time any license fee prescribed herein and to change the character of the license and term thereof. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 19.] 


5.05.200 Fees are additional revenue.

The license fees fixed by and collected, or to be collected, under this chapter shall be in addition to the general ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied pursuant to law, and also in addition to any and all license fees prescribed by other ordinances pertaining to or regulating specific businesses, occupations, amusements, utilities, trades, and other pursuits for gain. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 20.] 


5.05.210 Combination of certain businesses.

The conduct of a business or businesses at two or more separate and distinct locations within the city of Brookings, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed to be a separate business or businesses; and each business shall be subject to the license tax herein provided for. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 21.] 


5.05.220 Certificate to be displayed.

Every person who has obtained a license as required by this chapter for the privilege of doing business in the city of Brookings shall display the license certificate issued to him in a conspicuous place in or upon the premises where said business is conducted, except in the case of contractors, subcontractors, cleaning and dyeing solicitors, wholesale delivery trucks, peddlers, and solicitors. In the case of contractors and subcontractors, said license certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at their principal places of business in the city of Brookings; and in the case of cleaning and dyeing solicitors, wholesale delivery trucks, peddlers, and solicitors, said license certificate shall be carried on the person of the licensee or conspicuously displayed in or upon any vehicle used in the conducting of such business. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 22.] 


5.05.230 Concurrent cause of suit.

In addition to the penalty provided in BMC 5.05.240, and as separate and concurrent causes of action or suit, the city of Brookings may, in any court of competent jurisdiction, sue any person who has or is engaged in business in the city of Brookings without having complied with this chapter, for the amount of license fee payable hereunder; and also the city may in the same or a separate suit seek an injunction prohibiting such person from engaging in such business in the city of Brookings in violation of this chapter; and in any such action or suit the city shall, if it prevails, recover in addition to its costs and disbursements a reasonable attorney’s fee to be set by the court. [Ord. 96-O-518 § 23.] 


5.05.240 Penalty.

Any person or persons, association of persons, firm, corporation, or any agent or representative thereof who shall engage in or carry on a business within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings, without having first applied for a license, paid the fee therefor, and obtained a license certificate in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty, and no license shall be issued to any person convicted hereunder until the full amount of any fine imposed hereunder shall have been first paid. Each business day during which any business activity continues to be conducted in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. [Ord. 16-O-757 § 3; Ord. 96-O-518 § 24.] 


Chapter 5.10  TAXICABS

Sections: 

5.10.010    Permit to operate required.

5.10.020    Taxicab defined.

5.10.030    Application procedures.

5.10.040    Annual license fee.

5.10.050    Operator requirements.

5.10.060    Suspension and revocation of permits.

5.10.070    Insurance required.

5.10.080    License and equipment requirements.

5.10.090    Taxicab maintenance requirements.

5.10.100    Passenger requirements.

5.10.110    Revocation of license.

5.10.120    Penalty for violation.


5.10.010 Permit to operate required.

It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab within the city of Brookings without first having secured a permit therefor. Such operation of a taxicab service for hire by any person, firm, or corporation is hereby prohibited unless the owner and/or operator thereof first pays an annual license fee and, based upon the approval of his application, receives from the city of Brookings a permit to so operate said taxicab within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 84-O-387 § 1.] 


5.10.020 Taxicab defined.

“Taxicab,” as used herein, shall mean and include any vehicle used to carry or transport passengers or their property for hire, whether or not operating on a fixed route, and otherwise within the exemptions of Chapter 767 ORS. [Ord. 84-O-387 § 2.] 


5.10.030 Application procedures.

All owners and operators of taxicabs shall duly file with the city an application for the operation thereof within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings; and further, the form and requirements thereof shall be as prescribed from time to time by the city manager subject only to the review and further amendment thereof by the common council of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 84-O-387 § 3.] 


5.10.040 Annual license fee. 

A. No permit for the use and operation of a taxicab shall be issued until said application has been approved by the city manager and the payment by applicant of the annual license fee pursuant to the master fee schedule. All taxicab permits issued under this chapter shall begin on the first day of the fiscal year and expire on the last day of said year and no license fee herein required shall be prorated over said fiscal year, but shall be paid in full amount as if the same had been issued on the first day of the fiscal year.

B. The annual license fee, payable in advance, shall be for each such taxicab operated and shall be in addition to any other fee required by any other ordinance of the city of Brookings, including but not limited to the business license fee. The permit granted hereunder shall be displayed in a prominent place in the taxicab while it is in use. [Ord. 16-O-768 § 2; Ord. 93-O-387.C § 2; Ord. 84-O-387 § 4.] 


5.10.050 Operator requirements. 

A. No person shall operate a taxicab for hire within the city of Brookings without having first obtained a taxicab driver’s permit. 

B. Application for such permit may be made by the payment of a fee to the city of Brookings pursuant to the master fee schedule and shall set forth the name, address, date of birth and Oregon or California driver’s license number of the applicant. The applicant shall provide a two-and-one-half-inch by three-and-one-half-inch photograph to be attached to the taxicab driver’s permit. A permit may be issued by the city of Brookings if the applicant satisfactorily passes the police background investigation. The chief of police, or his designee, shall investigate each applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit. The following shall be cause for the chief of police to deny a permit:

1. The applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit has been convicted within the previous 36 months of any major traffic offense, as defined by Oregon law, possession of an open container of alcohol or possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance (not including the delivery of medically prescribed drugs);

2. The applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit has been convicted of a felony within the previous 36 months;

3. The applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit has accumulated more than three convictions for moving traffic offenses within the previous 12 months;

4. The applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit does not hold a valid Oregon or California driver’s license; or

5. The applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit is not 21 years of age.

C. A taxicab driver’s permit shall be renewed every two years of employment with the following conditions:

1. Any break in continuous employment will require a new permit;

2. Any significant change in appearance from permit identification photograph to taxicab driver’s actual current appearance will require a photograph change on the permit. A new photograph must be brought to City Hall for new identification preparation. There will be a charge for this service pursuant to the master fee schedule.

D. Taxicab drivers shall annually provide the chief of police with a copy of their DMV driving record. Drivers with an acceptable driving record will have their identification permit stamped and be allowed its continued use. 

E. The city manager may revoke the permit of a taxicab driver who is convicted of possession of an open container of alcohol, possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance (not including the delivery of medically prescribed drugs), or a major traffic offense, all as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes. 

F. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a taxicab, while on duty, to drink any intoxicating liquor or use any controlled substance, to shout or to call to prospective passengers, or to disobey any traffic rules or regulations established by Oregon Revised Statutes or a city of Brookings ordinance.

G. The taxicab driver’s permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the taxicab at all times when in service. A taxicab driver’s permit is not transferable. [Ord. 16-O-768 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 16-O-764 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 97-O-387.D § 2; Ord. 93-O-387.C § 3; Ord. 90-O-387.B § 1; Ord. 90-O-387.A § 1; Ord. 84-O-387 § 6.] 


5.10.060 Suspension and revocation of permits. 

A. The city manager may suspend or revoke any taxicab driver’s permit for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such suspension may extend for a period not to exceed one year. 

B. No taxicab driver’s permit shall be revoked unless the owner has first received notice and an opportunity to present evidence in his/her behalf to the city manager. Any owner may appeal a suspension or revocation to the city council, whose decision shall be final and binding. [Ord. 97-O-387.D, § 3; Ord. 84-O-387 § 7.] 


5.10.070 Insurance required.

No taxicab shall be operated upon the streets of the city of Brookings unless it is covered by a bond or public liability and property damage insurance policy in the amounts required under the statutes of the state of Oregon. [Ord. 97-O-387.D § 4; Ord. 84-O-387 § 8.] 


5.10.080 License and equipment requirements. 

A. No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly issued and displayed; and further, no owner or operator thereof shall drive or permit such to be driven unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear and side vision mirrors, and windshield wipers in good condition. Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on its side, in letters readable from a distance of 30 feet, the name of the licensee operating it. If more than one cab is operated by a licensee under a permit granted hereunder, each such cab shall be designated by a different number and such number also shall appear on each side of such cab. 

B. No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with a rate or fare schedule showing the amount to be charged on each trip, which amount shall be in figures visible to the passenger. Upon paying his fare each passenger shall be given a receipt showing the amount so paid and the name of the company or person operating the cab, together with the number of the cab if such company or person operates more than one taxicab in the city. [Ord. 97-O-387.D § 4; Ord. 90-O-387.A § 2; Ord. 84-O-387 § 9.] 


5.10.090 Taxicab maintenance requirements. 

A. The chief of police, or his designee, may at any time after displaying proper identification, enter any taxicab used for transporting passengers by permit from the city, to ascertain whether any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, or to ascertain whether there are any violations of safety requirements of the state of Oregon or the city. 

B. Any taxicab found to be in violation of any safety requirements of the state of Oregon or the city shall be ordered out of service, and before being placed again in service any mechanical or safety related defects shall be corrected and such correction verified by the chief of police or his designee. 

C. The interior and exterior of every taxicab shall be kept as thoroughly clean as reasonably possible at all times. [Ord. 97-O-387.D § 5; Ord. 84-O-387 § 10.] 


5.10.100 Passenger requirements.

It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger. The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the cab. It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fee at the termination of a trip. [Ord. 97-O-387.D § 6; Ord. 84-O-387 § 11.] 


5.10.110 Revocation of license.

Any and all permits and licenses for the operation of taxicabs, as the same may be granted hereunder, may be revoked and forfeited, without recovery of the license fee or any part thereof, by the city manager upon the failure of the licensee to provide adequate and reasonable taxicab services to the public or for any violation by said permittee of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter. No permit issued under this chapter shall vest any right in the licensee to continued use or operation of taxicabs within the city of Brookings, whether upon renewal or revocation thereof or otherwise. [Ord. 97-O-387.D § 6; Ord. 84-O-387 § 13.] 


5.10.120 Penalty for violation.

Any person, firm or corporation operating a taxicab or taxi service for hire within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings who has not complied with the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 16-O-757 § 4; Ord. 97-O-387.D § 7; Ord. 84-O-387 § 14.] 


Chapter 5.15 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES

Sections:

5.15.010    Definitions.

5.15.020    Permit to operate required.

5.15.030    Permit application procedures.

5.15.040    Annual license fee.

5.15.050    Operator requirements.

5.15.060    Suspension and revocation of permits.

5.15.070    Insurance required.

5.15.080    License and equipment requirements.

5.15.090    Passenger requirements.

5.15.100    Revocation of license.

5.15.110    Penalty for violation.


5.15.010 Definitions.

A. “Transportation network company (TNC)” means any entity or organization, whether a corporation, partnership, sole proprietor, that connects passengers with affiliated TNC drivers and TNC vehicles through an Internet based digital or software platform/application operated by the transportation network company.

B. “Transportation network company (TNC) driver” means any individual operating a private for-hire vehicle who connects with passengers through an Internet based digital or software platform/application operated by an affiliated transportation network company.

C. “Transportation network company (TNC) services” means any private for-hire transportation offered or provided to passengers for compensation by a TNC driver and TNC vehicle on behalf of or by an affiliated transportation network company.

D. “Transportation network company (TNC) vehicle” means any vehicle driven by a transportation network company driver to offer and/or provide transportation network company services. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.020 Permit to operate required.

It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a transportation network company service within the city of Brookings without first having secured a permit therefor. Such operation of a TNC by any person, firm, or corporation is hereby prohibited unless the owner and/or operator thereof first pays an annual license fee and, based upon the approval of his application, receives from the city of Brookings a permit to so operate said TNC within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.030 Permit application procedures.

All owners and operators of TNCs shall duly file with the city an application for the operation thereof within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings; and further, the form and requirements thereof shall be as prescribed from time to time by the city manager subject only to the review and further amendment thereof by the common council of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.040 Annual license fee.

A. No permit for the use and operation of a TNC shall be issued until said application has been approved by the city manager and the payment by applicant of the annual license fee pursuant to the master fee schedule. Said annual license fee may be adjusted, from time to time, upon motion of the city council; however, all TNC permits issued under this chapter shall begin on the first day of the fiscal year and expire on the last day of said year and no license fee herein required shall be prorated over said fiscal year, but shall be paid in full amount as if the same had been issued on the first day of the fiscal year.

B. The annual license fee, payable in advance, shall be in addition to any other fee required by any other ordinance of the city of Brookings, including but not limited to the business license fee. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.050 Operator requirements.

A. No person shall provide the service of a TNC driver within the city of Brookings without having first obtained a TNC driver’s permit.

B. Application for such permit may be made by the payment of a fee to the city of Brookings pursuant to the master fee schedule and shall set forth the name, address, date of birth and Oregon driver’s license number of the applicant. The applicant shall provide a two-and-one-half-inch by three-and-one-half-inch photograph to be attached to the TNC driver’s permit. A permit may be issued by the city of Brookings if the applicant satisfactorily passes the police background investigation. The chief of police, or his designee, shall investigate each applicant for a TNC driver’s permit. The following shall be cause for the chief of police to deny a permit:

1. The applicant for a TNC driver’s permit has been convicted within the previous 36 months of any major traffic offense, as defined by Oregon law, possession of an open container of alcohol or possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance (not including the delivery of medically prescribed drugs);

2. The applicant for a TNC driver’s permit has been convicted of a felony within the previous 36 months;

3. The applicant for a TNC driver’s permit has accumulated more than three convictions for moving traffic offenses within the previous 12 months;

4. The applicant for a TNC driver’s permit does not hold a valid Oregon driver’s license; or

5. The applicant for a TNC driver’s permit is not 21 years of age.

C. A TNC driver’s permit shall be renewed every two years of registration as a TNC driver with the following conditions:

1. Any break in continuous employment will require a new permit;

2. Any significant change in appearance from permit identification photograph to TNC driver’s actual current appearance will require a photograph change on the permit. A new photograph must be brought to City Hall for new identification preparation. There will be a charge for this service pursuant to the master fee schedule.

D. TNC drivers shall annually provide the chief of police with a copy of the DMV driving record. Drivers with an acceptable driving record will have their identification permit stamped and be allowed its continued use.

E. The city manager may revoke the permit of a TNC driver who is convicted of possession of an open container of alcohol, possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance (not including the delivery of medically prescribed drugs), or a major traffic offense, all as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes.

F. It shall be unlawful for any TNC driver, while on duty, to drink any intoxicating liquor or use any controlled substance, or to disobey any traffic rules or regulations established by Oregon Revised Statutes or a city of Brookings ordinance.

G. The TNC driver’s permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the TNC vehicle at all times when in service. A TNC driver’s permit is not transferable. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.060 Suspension and revocation of permits.

A. The city manager may suspend or revoke any TNC driver’s permit for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such suspension may extend for a period not to exceed one year.

B. No TNC driver’s permit shall be revoked unless the owner has first received notice and an opportunity to present evidence in his/her behalf to the city manager. Any owner may appeal a suspension or revocation to the city council, whose decision shall be final and binding. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.070 Insurance required.

No TNC shall be operated upon the streets of the city of Brookings unless it is covered by property damage insurance policy in the amounts required under the statutes of the state of Oregon. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.080 License and equipment requirements.

A. No TNC vehicle shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly issued and displayed; and further, no owner or operator thereof shall drive or permit such to be driven unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear and side vision mirrors, and windshield wipers in good condition.

B. Any TNC vehicle found to be in violation of any safety requirements of the state of Oregon or the city shall be ordered out of service, and before being placed again in service any mechanical or safety related defects shall be corrected and such correction verified by the chief of police or his designee.

C. The interior and exterior of every TNC vehicle shall be kept as thoroughly clean as reasonably possible at all times. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.090 Passenger requirements.

It shall be the duty of any TNC driver to accept any passenger who seeks to use the service, providing such person conducts himself in an orderly manner. The driver shall take the passenger to the requested destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the vehicle. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.100 Revocation of license.

Any and all permits and licenses for the operation of TNC vehicles, as the same may be granted hereunder, may be revoked and forfeited, without recovery of the license fee or any part thereof, by the city manager for any violation by said permittee of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter. No permit issued under this chapter shall vest any right in the licensee to continued use or operation of TNC vehicles within the city of Brookings, whether upon renewal or revocation thereof or otherwise. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


5.15.110 Penalty for violation.

Any person, firm or corporation operating a TNC service within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings who has not complied with the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 16-O-767 § 2.]


Chapter 5.20 TRANSIENT BUSINESSES

Sections:

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    Authority.

5.20.030    Licensing and agreements.

5.20.040    Operator requirements.

5.20.050    Suspension and revocation of license.

5.20.060    Insurance required.

5.20.070    Penalty for violation.


5.20.010 Definitions.

A. “Mobile food vending unit (vending unit)” shall be held to mean a business as defined in BMC 5.05.020(B) that operates from various locations in the city and has no fixed permanent location from which the business is conducted. Mobile food vendors shall only operate on public property from sunrise until sunset. Mobile food vendors shall not be open for service at any one location in the city, on public property, for more than four hours on any single day.

B. “Operator” shall mean a proprietor, manager or employee that operates a commercial establishment. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


5.20.020 Authority.

Businesses conducted under this chapter fall under the authority of BMC 5.05.060, Ability to conduct business – License required – Exemptions. This authority does not extend to city parking lots, parks or other public properties, nor does it extend to public property under the control of other public agencies, such as the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), Brookings Harbor School District, Chetco Community Public Library or other such agencies as may apply. It should be noted that Chetco Avenue, also known as Highway 101, and its adjacent sidewalks fall under ODOT authority. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


5.20.030 Licensing and agreements.

Mobile food vending unit (vending unit) operators are required to obtain a business license from the city of Brookings administrative services department and pay such fees as applicable upon initial issuance, and annually thereafter.

Vending unit operators must execute a mobile food vending unit wastewater disposal agreement prior to issuance of a business license.

Vending units shall comply with all state regulations such as but not limited to the Oregon Health Authority (Mobile Food Unit Operation Guide) and operators shall provide proof of a valid food handlers certificate from the appropriate county health department. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


5.20.040 Operator requirements.

A. When operating a vending unit adjacent to a sidewalk, a minimum unobstructed pedestrian passage area of 36 inches must be maintained at all times.

B. No electrical cords, ropes or other devices that may constitute a trip and fall hazard shall extend across any sidewalk or pedestrian way.

C. The city issues permits for the conduct of festivals and parades from time to time. Such permits shall supersede this authorization to conduct business on the public right-of-way within the area subject to the event permit and within 200 feet of the area subject to the event permit unless separate approval has been granted by the event operator.

D. Business shall not be conducted in any area of the city which is predominantly residential.

E. Business shall not be conducted within 150 feet of any restaurant.

F. All areas around the vending unit shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition, free of debris and litter generated by the subject business’s activities or patrons. The vending unit operator must provide a litter receptacle for use by its patrons at the site where business is being conducted and remove all trash upon departing the site.

G. There shall be no sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any time on public property.

H. At all times during the conduct of business, the vending unit must be legally parked, shall not be parked on the sidewalk or obstruct a pedestrian way or a driveway.

I. One sandwich board type sign may be placed on the right-of-way adjacent to the vending unit, subject to the 36-inch clearance indicated above. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


5.20.050 Suspension and revocation of license.

Any and all permits and licenses for the operation of a vending unit, as granted hereunder, may be revoked and forfeited, without recovery of the license fee or any part thereof, by the city manager for any violation by said permittee of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter. No permit issued under this chapter shall vest any right in the licensee to continued use or operation of a vending unit within the city of Brookings, whether upon renewal or revocation thereof or otherwise. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


5.20.060 Insurance required.

The operator of the vending unit shall provide the city of Brookings with the following certificates of insurance:

A. Automobile liability.

B. Comprehensive general liability with limits of not less than $500,000 and listing the city of Brookings as an additional insured. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


5.20.070 Penalty for violation.

Failure to comply with any of the above listed conditions when operating on rights-of-way controlled by the city of Brookings will result in the revocation of the licensee’s business license and/or a fine, as defined under Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 17-O-769 § 3.]


Title 6 ANIMALS (Reserved)

 


Title 7 (Reserved)

 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Fire Hazards

8.10    Repealed

8.15    Nuisances

8.20    Unlawful Disposal of Solid Waste and Littering

 


Chapter 8.05 FIRE HAZARDS

Sections: 

8.05.010    Definitions.

8.05.020    Right to enter premises.

8.05.030    Duties and responsibilities of responsible party.

8.05.040    Accumulations on roofs.

8.05.050    Prohibited materials.

8.05.060    Prohibited burns.

8.05.070    Permitted burns.

8.05.080    Permit standards.

8.05.090    Permit fees.

8.05.100    Abatement of fire hazards.

8.05.110    Abatement costs – Lien.

8.05.120    Penalties and violations.


8.05.010 Definitions.

“Class A burn” means the burning of wood products containing paint, glue, preservatives or other chemical treatment, paper, grass, hazardous materials, plastics, asphalt, paint, tires, oil, cardboard, rubber and other refuse and rubbish in an incinerator, burn barrel, or by open burning.

“Class B burn” means the open burning of wood, yard trimmings or leaves in a pile consisting of less than five yards.

“Class C burn” means the open burning of wood, tree trimmings, yard trimmings, and leaves in a pile consisting of more than five yards. Any burn conducted in association with land clearing or commercial tree removal shall be defined as a Class C burn.

“Class D burn” means a campfire conducted on private property or in a designated area of a public park where firewood cut in lengths, not to exceed 18 inches, is used. Such burns are limited to cooking or entertainment use and shall not include the burning of refuse. 

“Class E burn” means a large open burn, for purposes of entertainment, such as a bonfire. Such burns are limited to community events or celebrations and must be approved and permitted by the fire chief.

“Responsible party” or “person responsible” means owner, occupant or other person entitled to possession. [Ord. 13-O-717 § 2; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2.]


8.05.020 Right to enter premises.

For the purposes of performing their duties, the fire chief or his designee shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 59-O-134 § 3. Formerly 8.05.010.]


8.05.030 Duties and responsibilities of responsible party.

A. Any shavings, paper, hay, straw, litter or other combustible waste material fragments shall be securely deposited or removed so as to be safe from fire. All receptacles for waste, rags, paper and other substances liable to spontaneous combustion must be made of incombustible material.

B. Fire Hydrant Maintenance.

1. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants.

2. Clear Space Around Hydrants. A three-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved. 

C. It shall be unlawful to permit grass or other vegetation to grow in a manner that is determined to be a fire hazard by the fire chief.

D. Prior to removal of vegetation upon properties having slopes of more than 15 percent or are adjacent to a creek, river or the ocean, the responsible party must contact the planning department for regulations regarding hillside development. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 10-O-671 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 59-O-134 § 5. Formerly 8.05.020.]


8.05.040 Accumulations on roofs.

It shall be unlawful to allow or permit to remain upon roofs any accumulation of paper, hay, moss, or other inflammable or combustible material. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 59-O-134 § 6. Formerly 8.05.030.]


8.05.050 Prohibited materials.

It shall be unlawful to burn the following materials: rubber, asphalt, paint, oil, tires, kitchen garbage, disposable diapers, plastics, fiberglass or any other item that creates a black smoke or an offensive odor, as determined by the fire chief. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2.]


8.05.060 Prohibited burns.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a Class A burn within the limits of the city of Brookings.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any open burn within 1,000 feet of a skilled nursing facility. [Ord. 14-O-737 § 2; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2.]


8.05.070 Permitted burns.

A.  Class B, Class C and Class E Burn Permits. Any person desiring to conduct a Class B, Class C or Class E burn must first obtain a written permit from the fire chief. Any person desiring to conduct a Class C burn must also first obtain a written permit from the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).

B. Class D Burns Without Permit. There shall be no permit required for Class D burning. The fire chief shall have the authority to require any Class D burn to be immediately extinguished upon making a determination that such burn is creating a hazard or public nuisance. [Ord. 13-O-717 § 3; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2.]


8.05.080 Permit standards.

A. All Class B and Class C burns must be conducted between the hours of sunrise and dusk, with no starting or stoking of fires after 4:00 p.m. Attendance at the site of the burn by the permittee, or by permittee’s adult designee, is required at all times. Attendant shall have immediately available a shovel and sufficient water to extinguish the fire or prevent escape of the fire from the burn location.

B. Class B permits shall be valid for a maximum of two consecutive days and shall not be renewed for 48 hours after conclusion of any previous burn.

C. Class C permits shall be valid for a maximum of seven days in a 30-day period.

D. Class E permits shall be valid for a 24-hour period. Times for starting and stoking the fire will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the fire chief and will be stated on the permit. Attendance at the site of the burn by the permittee, or by permittee’s adult designee, is required at all times. Attendant shall have immediately available a shovel and sufficient water to extinguish the fire or prevent escape of the fire from the burn location.

E. Burning is prohibited on windy days.

F. The fire chief may prescribe additional standards of care and procedures for obtaining burn permits in order to administer this section and provide for the safety of life and property. The fire chief may cancel, modify or suspend permits at any time in the interest of public safety. [Ord. 13-O-717 § 4; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2.]


8.05.090 Permit fees.

Burn permit fees shall be as established by the city’s master fee resolution. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2.]


8.05.100 Abatement of fire hazards.

The fire chief or his designee shall, upon determining that a fire hazard exists as described in this chapter, notify the person responsible for the property upon which said fire hazard exists. Such notice shall be delivered personally in writing or by registered mail to the last known address of such person and shall state specifically the condition which has caused the fire hazard. Such fire hazard shall be removed within 24 hours after delivery of said notice. If removal is not completed within such time, the fire chief or his designee shall cause such fire hazard to be removed and the cost thereof shall become a lien upon the property upon which said fire hazard exists. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 59-O-134 § 12. Formerly 8.05.070.]


8.05.110 Abatement costs – Lien.

The procedures contained in BMC 8.15.090(F) shall apply. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 59-O-134 § 13. Formerly 8.05.080.] 


8.05.120 Penalties and violations.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-643 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 59-O-134 § 15. Formerly 8.05.100.]


Chapter 8.10 WATERCOURSES, DRAINAGE CHANNEL MAINTENANCE, STORM DRAIN PROTECTION

(Repealed by Ord. 13-O-713)


Chapter 8.15 NUISANCES

Sections: 

8.15.010    Definitions.

8.15.015    Policy.

8.15.020    Control of domestic animals.

8.15.030    Public health.

8.15.040    Hazards.

8.15.045    Deteriorated condition.

8.15.050    Noxious vegetation.

8.15.060    Repealed.

8.15.065    Trees and fences.

8.15.067    Surface waters and drainage.

8.15.070    Earth from abutting property falling into street.

8.15.080    Noise prevention.

8.15.083    Chronic disorderly property.

8.15.084    Chronic disorderly property – Enforcement.

8.15.085    Recodified.

8.15.087    Temporary use of a recreational vehicle or travel trailer.

8.15.090    General abatement procedure.

8.15.100    Summary abatement.

8.15.110    Penalties.


8.15.010 Definitions.

A. “Chronic disorderly property” means:

1. Any real property on which three or more prohibited activities have occurred during any 60-day period; or

2. Any real property within 200 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more prohibited activities during any 60-day period; or

3. Any combination of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section totaling three occurrences during any 60-day period.

B. “Code enforcement officer” means any city employee authorized by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to building inspectors, police officers, public works inspectors and fire department employees.

C. “Construction” includes, but is not limited to, constructing any of the following: a building, an addition to a building, landscaping, sidewalks, or driveways, irrespective of size.

D. “Contaminant” means any substance or material such as, but not limited to, oil, gasoline, antifreeze, animal waste, lawn and yard fertilizers, defoliants, paint, or chemicals intended for insect control, that could cause harm, or otherwise have an adverse effect on the city’s storm drain system.

E. “Controlled substance” has the same definition as is contained in ORS 475.005.

F. “Debris” means any foreign material such as, but not limited to, trackout, sediment from erosion, landscaping supplies, lawn clippings, leaves, brush, tree trimmings, household trash, litter, and concrete.

G. “Landscaping” means the process of arranging soil, trees, shrubs, grass, irrigation systems, or other commonly used landscaping materials on a piece of property. For this chapter, landscaping does not include routine lawn or yard maintenance such as grass mowing.

H. “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

I. “Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, tenant or other person having possession or control of property.

J. “Person responsible for abatement” means the person responsible for abating a nuisance and liable for any penalties imposed hereunder and shall include, jointly and severally, the following:

1. The owner;

2. The person in charge of property;

3. The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in this chapter.

K. “Prohibited activity” means any of the following:

1. Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a);

2. Intimidation as provided in ORS 166.155 through 166.165;

3. Disorderly conduct as provided in ORS 166.025; 

4. Assault or menacing as provided in ORS 163.160, 163.165, 163.175, 163.185, or 163.190;

5. Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct as provided in ORS 163.415, 163.425, 163.427, 163.435, or 163.445;

6. Public indecency as provided in ORS 163.465;

7. Prostitution or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.007, 167.012, and 167.017;

8. Alcoholic liquor violations as provided in ORS 471.105 through 471.482;

9. Offensive littering as provided in ORS 164.805;

10. Criminal trespass as provided in ORS 164.243, 164.255 and 164.265;

11. Theft as provided in ORS 164.015 through 164.140;

12. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285, or 475.940 through 475.980;

13. Illegal gambling as provided in ORS 167.117, 167.122 or 167.127;

14. Criminal mischief as provided in ORS 164.345 through 164.365;

15. Property which, in addition to or in combination with the prescribed number and duration of prohibited activities, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.285 or 475.940 to 475.980 have occurred;

16. Violation of BMC 8.15.020(D), dog fighting;

17. Violation of BMC 9.10.040, discharge of firearms;

18. Frequenting a place where controlled substances are used as provided in ORS 167.222; or

19. Violation of BMC 8.15.080, noise prevention.

L. “Public place” means a building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public.

M. “Recreational vehicle” or “travel trailer” means a self-propelled or towable mobile unit used for temporary dwelling purposes by travelers.

N. “Recreational vehicle park” means a commercially developed lot upon which two or more recreational vehicles occupied for living or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether a fee is paid for such service or accommodations.

O. “Responsible party” or “person responsible” means an owner, occupant or other person entitled to possession.

P. “Storm drainage system” means the system of pipes, manholes, curbs, gutters, curb inlets, catch basins, canals, ditches, detention basins, ponds and streams intended to convey storm water runoff.

Q. “Trackout” means the tracking of mud, soil, debris, or contaminant onto any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way. [Ord. 18-O-773 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-O-761 § 2; Ord. 14-O-736 § 2; Ord. 13-O-713 § 3; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 93-O-406.A § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 1.]


8.15.015 Policy.

It is expressly found and determined by the city of Brookings that the conditions and objects specifically enumerated within this chapter do, in one or more particulars, constitute a public nuisance by promoting blight, deterioration, unsightliness, plundering, fire hazards, flood hazards, hazards to the health and safety of minors, disruption of the public peace, harborage for rodents, insects and vermin, and other circumstances generally injurious or detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants and occupants of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 18-O-773 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.15.020 Control of domestic animals. 

A. Repealed by Ord. 14-O-736. 

B. The owner or keeper of any dog or other domestic animal shall not allow such animal to be a public nuisance. A dog, cat, or other such animal is deemed herein to be a public nuisance if it bites a person; chases persons or vehicles; damages or destroys property of persons other than the animal’s owner; scatters garbage; trespasses on private property of persons other than the animal’s owner; disturbs any person or neighborhood by frequent or prolonged barking, yelping, howling or any other such noise making; defecates on the property of another or of the public; or is a female in heat and running at large. Such animal shall not be considered a public nuisance if it bites a person who wrongfully is assaulting the animal or the animal’s owner or if it bites a person trespassing upon premises owned or occupied by said animal’s owner. 

C. No person owning or harboring or having the care or custody of a vicious dog or other animal shall permit such animal to go unconfined beyond the premises of such person unless such an animal is securely leashed and muzzled or otherwise restrained. “Vicious” as herein defined means any dog or other animal or fowl with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals, any animal which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation, or any dog or other such animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog or animal fighting.

D. No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of dog fighting or for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked or willfully provoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. 

E. No dog is allowed to run at large within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings. 

F. The city of Brookings hereby adopts by reference all provisions, as contained in Curry County Code Section 4.01.030 through and including Section 4.01.200 et seq. 

G. The Brookings police department is authorized and directed to provide mutual aid assistance to county officers, employees and volunteers engaged in animal control activities within the city of Brookings.

H. No person shall own, harbor, take care of, or have in custody any dog without it being licensed with Curry County. Said person is responsible for payment of licensing fees, as well as securing any and all shots, vaccinations, or records which may be needed to license the animal.

I. No person shall permit the carcass of any animal owned or controlled by him to remain upon the public streets or ways to be exposed on private property for a period of time any longer than is necessary to remove the said carcass. It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant forthwith to cause such carcass to be buried or have other disposition made of the same. [Ord. 14-O-736 § 2; Ord. 14-O-729 § 2; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 93-O-406.A § 3; Ord. 86-O-406 § 2.]


8.15.030 Public health.

No owner or person in charge of property shall cause or permit to be or remain on public or private property the following objects or conditions: 

A. Privies. Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the health division regulations. 

B. Debris. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the city. 

C. Stagnant Water. An open pit, quarry, cistern, well, cesspool or other excavation in which stagnant water affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

D. Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream, drainage facilities or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes, construction wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water. 

E. Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption, or which causes an offensive odor.

F. Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor, or premises which are in an unsanitary condition.

G. Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises. 

H. Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor. 

I. Garbage Containers. Garbage and noncombustible refuse that is not stored in flytight, watertight, and rodent-proof containers that are kept clean and in good repair. 

J. Repealed by Ord. 14-O-736.1

K. Sanitation. A business or residence that is kept or maintained in such a condition as to permit rats, rodents, vermin, or other pests to burrow or live therein. [Ord. 14-O-736 § 2; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 93-O-406.A § 4; Ord. 86-O-406 § 3.] 


8.15.040 Hazards.

No responsible party shall permit thereon:

A. Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;

B. Lumber or logs stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children;

C. An open pit, quarry, cistern, well, cesspool or other excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children. Any such opening or hole having a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more shall be covered or fenced with suitable protective construction;

D. Any junk unless such is completely enclosed within a building or kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house. The term “junk” as used in this section includes all motor vehicles, machinery, or appliances, and any parts thereof or therefor; discarded or abandoned vehicles or components thereof; and old iron or other metal, glass, paper or discarded materials. “Discarded” shall mean any vehicle which does not have properly affixed thereto an unexpired license plate and is either inoperative, wrecked, dismantled (or partially so), or abandoned; 

E. Failure to maintain or obstruction of private storm drainage conveyance. [Ord. 13-O-713 § 3; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 4.]


8.15.045 Deteriorated condition.

No owner or person in charge of property having frontage on Chetco Avenue, between the Chetco River Bridge and Easy Street; or Railroad Street, between Mill Beach Road and Alder Street, shall defer maintenance of a structure to cause or permit the following conditions:

A. Paint that is peeling, faded or mildewed over an area greater than 25 percent of any exterior wall area; windows and door openings shall be excluded from the area calculation.

B. Siding material that is failing over an area greater than 25 percent of any exterior wall; windows and door openings shall be excluded from the area calculation.

C. Fascia board that is failing over an area greater than 25 percent of the fascia board.

D. Roofing which is failing over an area greater than 25 percent of the roof area.

If any of the above conditions are deemed to be present, the building official shall file a report with the city manager who may declare such conditions as a public nuisance. The property owner shall be notified of such finding in the same manner as provided in BMC 8.15.090, General abatement procedure.

A property owner may appeal such finding of a public nuisance under this section to the city council within 15 days of the date of such notice. The city council shall hear the appeal within 30 days of receipt of an appeal, and shall render a decision within 15 days thereafter. [Ord. 14-O-740 § 2.]


8.15.050 Noxious vegetation.

The Department of Agriculture has declared many species of vegetation to be a menace to the public welfare (ORS 570.505). A list of the vegetation covered under this declaration may be found in OAR 603-052-1200. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, agent, or other person in possession of any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings to permit the following:

A. The growth or propagation of gorse. The city may allow an abatement plan to be filed if it is determined that the gorse infestation is severe enough to merit a long-range eradication program.

B. The uncontrolled growth of nuisance vegetation. “Nuisance vegetation” is defined as vegetation that:

1. Encroaches onto the property of another; the encroachment must be by the plant itself and not by seed or underground root systems; and

2. Is listed in OAR 603-052-1200.

Exception: Vegetation growing on slopes of greater than 15 percent or adjacent to a water course or body of water that is providing erosion control. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 10-O-671 § 3; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 93-O-406.A §§ 5, 6; Ord. 93-O-134.A § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 5; Ord. 59-O-134 § 8.] 


8.15.060 Scattering rubbish.

Repealed by Ord. 14-O-735. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 6.] 


8.15.065 Trees and fences.

No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk shall: 

A. Permit trees or bushes on his property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all trees and bushes on his premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 13.5 feet above the roadway;

B. Allow to stand a dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property;

C. Allow to stand a tree that has been identified as a high potential blowdown hazard by a professional engineer or forester, as designated by the city;

D. Construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence thereon, or permit barbed-wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high;

E. Construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-589 § 2; Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 94-O-406.B § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 7.]


8.15.067 Surface waters and drainage.

No responsible party shall:

A. Suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk;

B. Fail to install and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk;

C. Fail to maintain or cause the obstruction of a private storm drainage conveyance;

D. No person shall, intentionally or unintentionally, allow any debris, water contaminant, or potential water contaminant to enter the city’s storm drainage system;

E. No person or persons shall allow any debris, contaminant, or potential contaminant to accumulate on any city street, alley, sidewalk, or public way adjacent to his/her property to an extent that said debris, contaminant, or potential contaminant, if allowed to enter the city’s storm drainage system, could cause a disruption to the proper functioning of the system and necessitate cleaning of any portion of the city storm drainage system. [Ord. 13-O-713 § 3; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 8.]


8.15.070 Earth from abutting property falling into street.

Any earth, debris, or other material which caves or falls into or upon any street or sidewalk from any adjacent or abutting real property is a nuisance, and the owner or occupant of such real property shall remove forthwith said earth, debris, or material. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any real property to permit such earth, debris, or other material to remain upon any street or sidewalk. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 51-O-013 § 99.] 


8.15.080 Noise prevention. 

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise; and further, no person shall conduct or maintain any condition, activity, operation, vocation or avocation which causes unreasonably offensive noise to either the neighborhood or the public at large. In the case of noise that is generated due to an activity that is permitted within the zone, specifically in the case of industrial or manufacturing zones, such noise shall not be deemed unreasonably offensive.

B. The following acts are declared to be violations of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:

1. The use of any automobile or other vehicle, engine, stationary or moving instrument, device or thing so out of repair or used in such manner as to create a loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other such noise;

2. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a necessary warning of danger to property or persons or as so used on emergency equipment;



3. Entertainment devices used in an abusive manner for the creation of prolonged and excessively loud noise;

4. The use of an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes interference with radio or television reception by radio or television receiver of good engineering design unless said device or apparatus is duly licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission;

5. Any person who operates powered construction equipment; erects, constructs, demolishes, excavates for; alters or repairs any building, structure, roadway or utility within the city in such a manner as to cause noise to be received beyond the boundaries of the property on which the construction work is occurring shall comply with the following:

a. Except for the pouring of concrete and roofing, no construction work shall be performed before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on weekdays.

b. Except for the pouring of concrete and roofing, no construction work shall be performed before 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on weekends or holidays.

c. Provided, however, that in case of urgent necessity, permission may be granted by the city manager for construction activities to occur during otherwise proscribed hours. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 10-O-674 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 9.]


8.15.083 Chronic disorderly property.

A. When the chief of police receives two or more police reports documenting the occurrence of prohibited activity on or within 200 feet of a property in a residential neighborhood within the city, the chief of police will independently review the reports to determine whether they describe prohibited activities enumerated in BMC 8.15.010. Upon such a finding, the chief of police may take the following actions:

1. Notify the person in charge of property, in writing, that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic disorderly property. The notice must contain the following information:

a. The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

b. A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be a chronic disorderly property, with a concise description of the prohibited activities that may exist, or that have occurred. 

c. Demand that the person in charge of property respond to the chief of police within 10 days to discuss the prohibited activities.

B. After notification of the occurrence of prohibited activities to the person in charge of property, when the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a third prohibited activity at or within 200 feet of a property within a 60-day period and determines that the property has become a chronic disorderly property, the chief of police must:

1. Notify the person in charge of property in writing that the property is a chronic disorderly property. The notice must contain the following information:

a. The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

b. A statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be a chronic disorderly property with a concise description of the prohibited activities leading to the finding.

c. Demand that the person in charge of property respond within 14 days to the chief of police and propose a course of action (“abatement plan”) to abate the prohibited activities giving rise to the violation. The abatement plan may include actions such as measures to increase security, evict problem tenants, or change business practices, such as operating hours. The abatement plan must also include a timeline for implementation.

d. Service must be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge of property at the address of the property determined to be a chronic disorderly property, or any other place which is likely to give the person in charge of property notice of the determination.

e. A copy of the notice must also be served on the owner at the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons are different from the person in charge of property, and must be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid.

f. A copy of the notice must also be posted at the property.

g. The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a chronic disorderly property, if notice was given in accordance with subsections (B)(1)(d), (e) and (f) of this section, will not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this section.

2. Chronic disorderly property, as defined by BMC 8.15.010, is entitled only to the notification requirements of subsection (B) of this section.

3. The chief of police will review and approve or deny the abatement plan within 10 days of its receipt. If the abatement plan is approved, the person in charge of property must proceed in accordance with the plan. If the abatement plan does not result in the abatement of the prohibited activity(s) or if no plan for abatement is approved within the time allowed, then the chief of police may refer the matter to the city attorney to commence a legal proceeding to abate the nuisance caused by the chronic disorderly property.

4. Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the chief of police will send copies of the notice, as well as any other documentation which supports legal proceedings against the property, to the city attorney.

C. When a person in charge of the property makes a response to the chief of police as required by subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response do not constitute an admission that any prohibited activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. [Ord. 18-O-773 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.15.084 Chronic disorderly property – Enforcement.

A. Commencement of Action. 

1. In an action seeking the closure of a chronic disorderly property, the city will have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic disorderly property. 

2. It is a defense to an action for chronic disorderly property that neither the owner nor the person in charge of property at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic disorderly property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the property is a chronic disorderly property.

3. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider the following factors:

a. The actions taken by the owner, or other person in charge of property, to mitigate or correct the problem at the property;

b. Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;

c. The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

d. The cooperativeness of the owner, or other person in charge of property, with the city;

e. The cost to the city of investigating and handling the problem;

f. Any other factor the court deems relevant.

B. Closure During Pendency of Action. If it is determined that the property is an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the city may apply to the court for interim relief deemed by the city to be appropriate, including the temporary closure of the property.

C. Enforcement of Closure Order – Civil Penalties.

1. If the court determines property to be chronic disorderly property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of not less than 30, but not more than 180, days. The court may employ any other remedy(s) it deems appropriate to abate the prohibited activity(s) in addition to or instead of closure of the property. The court may authorize the city to physically close the property against use or occupancy if the owner fails to do so within the time specified in the court’s order. The court will retain jurisdiction during any period of closure.

2. In addition to the remedies provided in subsection (C)(1) of this section, the court may impose upon the owner of the property/person in charge of property a civil penalty in the amount of up to $500.00 per day, payable to the city, for each day the owner/person in charge of property had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic disorderly property and permitted the property to remain a chronic disorderly property. The owner/person in charge of property is considered to have actual knowledge if notice was provided to the owner/person in charge of property in accordance with BMC 8.15.083. The penalties must be set forth as part of the court’s judgment.

3. If the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to effect the closure will be awarded to the city as part of the judgment.

a. “Costs” means those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of the structures on the property and any attorneys’ fees awarded by the court. 

b. The city manager may prepare a statement of costs and submit it to the court for its review as prescribed by Oregon Rule of Civil Procedure 68.

4. Any monetary judgment imposed pursuant to this chapter will bear interest at the statutory rate.

5. A lien will be created against the property for the amount of the city’s monetary judgment and will be entered in the city’s lien docket.

6. Unless otherwise specifically ordered by the court, all persons who are assessed a civil penalty by the court will be jointly, severally and personally liable for payment to the city.

D. Relief from Closure Order.

1. An owner of property determined to be a chronic disorderly property may obtain relief from the court’s order if:

a. The owner of the property appears and pays all costs associated with proceedings under this chapter;

b. The owner of the property files a bond in such a place and form as the court may by order direct in an amount not less than the tax-assessed value of the property, and maintains said bond in force for a period of not less than one year or for such period as the court directs; and

c. The owner enters into a stipulation with the city that he or she will immediately abate the conditions giving rise to the chronic disorderly property and prevent the same from being established or maintained for a period of one year thereafter. The stipulation will then be made part of the court’s order.

2. If the owner violates the terms of the stipulation, the city may apply to the court for an order awarding up to the entire amount of the bond to the city as a penalty and such other relief, including closure for an additional period of up to one year. 

E. Attorneys’ Fees. In an action seeking closure of the property under this chapter, the court may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party. 

F. Cumulative Remedies. The rights and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive, and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the city under other provision of law. The city’s actions in pursuit of remedies under this chapter are not to be construed as an election of remedies and such other remedies as may be available by law may also be pursued. [Ord. 18-O-773 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.15.085 Motor vehicles.*

Recodified at BMC 10.30.005. [Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 06-O-571 §§ 1 – 5.]

*    Code reviser’s note: Ords. 06-O-571 §§ 1 – 5 and 07-O-591 § 2 were recodified at the request of the city.


8.15.087 Temporary use of a recreational vehicle or travel trailer. 

A. All recreational vehicle parks within the city of Brookings shall conform to the electrical, fire, health, building, and plumbing ordinances of the city of Brookings, as amended, except as hereinafter specified.

B. It is a violation to use a recreational vehicle or travel trailer for living purposes within the city of Brookings except when parked within a licensed recreational vehicle park. A recreational vehicle or travel trailer may be used for temporary sleeping purposes within the city of Brookings provided as follows:

1. That the recreational vehicle or travel trailer is located entirely on private property that is residentially zoned and developed with a dwelling unit or there is an active building permit for a dwelling unit;

2. That no connection of any kind may be made to the city’s water or sewer system; and

3. That the period of use for the property shall not exceed 14 days out of any calendar year.

C. It shall be a violation for any person, firm, or corporation owning or operating a recreational vehicle park in the city of Brookings to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation for any person, firm, or corporation owning, maintaining, or in control of any recreational vehicle or travel trailer, or the occupant or tenant of any recreational vehicle or travel trailer in whatever capacity, to violate any provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 09-O-642 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2.]


8.15.090 General abatement procedure. 

A. Upon determination by a code enforcement officer that a nuisance/violation exists, the city shall cause a notice to be posted at the site of the nuisance/violation or mail the notice by certified mail or personally deliver the notice to the responsible party, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance/violation. 

B. The notice to abate shall contain:

1. A general description, location or address of the real property on which the nuisance/violation exists;

2. A direction to abate the nuisance/violation within 10 days from the date of the notice;

3. A description of the nuisance/violation;

4. A statement that, unless the nuisance/violation is removed, the city may abate the nuisance/violation and charge the person responsible for abatement and administrative costs;

5. A statement that failure to abate a nuisance/violation may warrant imposition of a penalty;

6. An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void.

C. The person responsible for maintaining said nuisance shall remove or abate the nuisance/violation within 10 days of receipt or posting of notice. If, within such time, the abatement has not been completed, or a plan for abatement has not been approved by the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer may cite the responsible person into municipal court for a violation of this chapter pursuant to BMC 8.15.110. In addition to the levying of a fine, if the city so requests, the municipal judge may order the nuisance abated by the city, the cost of such abatement to be recovered through a lien against the property. In BMC Title 17 cases, where the potential violation is a matter of ambiguity, the code enforcement officer determination of violation may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.156 BMC.

D. If the city abates the nuisance/violation, the following shall apply:

1. The city, its officers and employees so charged with abatement of the nuisance/violation shall have the right at all reasonable times to enter into or upon the property to investigate and cause the removal of the nuisance/violation.

2. The city shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred in abating the nuisance/violation, and shall additionally include a charge of $150.00 or 15 percent of the abatement expenses, whichever is greater, for administrative overhead. Any bill unpaid from 30 days of mailing shall carry interest at the statutory rate per annum. The administrative services director, by registered or certified mail, shall forward to the person responsible a notice stating:

a. The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead;

b. That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;

c. That the administrative services director will temporarily enter the cost of abatement in the city’s lien docket;

d. That if the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he/she may file a notice of objection with the administrative services director not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

3. If an objection is received on or before the expiration of 10 days after the notice was served, the city manager shall consider the objection and make a final determination regarding the cost to be assessed.

4. The lien shall thereupon be entered in the docket of the city liens; and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance/violation was removed or abated. The lien shall be enforced and shall bear interest at the statutory rate. The interest shall commence to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket. An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Ord. 16-O-761 § 3; Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 93-O-406.A §§ 7, 8; Ord. 86-O-406 § 10.]


8.15.100 Summary abatement.

The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive, but is in addition to procedures provided by other chapters and the general police powers of the city; and the city manager, the chief of the fire department, the chief of the police department and the building/fire safety officer may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers human life or property. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 11.] 


8.15.110 Penalties. 

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 11-O-686 § 2; Ord. 10-O-671 § 3; Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 86-O-406 § 12.] 1

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 14-O-736 stated that Section 8.15.020(J) was repealed. The intent of the city was to repeal Section 8.15.030(J). 


Chapter 8.20 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE AND LITTERING

Sections:

8.20.010    Definitions.

8.20.020    Unlawful disposal of solid waste.

8.20.030    Scattering rubbish.

8.20.040    Penalty.


8.20.010 Definitions.

A. “Person” means any natural person, association, partnership or corporation or any other legal entity or entity in fact.

B. “Right-of-way” as used in this chapter, means any highway, road, street, alley, lane, trail, sidewalk, access, other public way, or any beach, park, recreational facility or other similar facility owned and operated by the state of Oregon, Curry County, or the city of Brookings, and located within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings.

C. “Solid waste” means all solid or semisolid waste material, including, but not limited to: garbage; rubbish; refuse; trash; ashes or swill; newsprint or waste paper; corrugated board or cardboard; grass clippings; compost; residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional wastes; discarded home or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture; vehicle parts or tires; animal parts or wastes. [Ord. 14-O-735 § 2.]


8.20.020 Unlawful disposal of solid waste.

A. Except as provided by subsection (B) of this section, no person shall deposit solid waste produced by the person or any business owned by the person or with which the person is associated as an employee or agent in or about any solid waste receptacle owned or rented by another person, without first obtaining the permission of that person.

B. No person shall deposit solid waste produced by the person or any business owned by the person or with which the person is associated as an employee or agent on any publicly owned property.

C. No person shall use, or attempt to use, any publicly owned solid waste receptacle as a means to dispose of residential, commercial, or industrial solid waste regularly generated by the person or any business owned by the person or with which the person is associated as an employee or agent. [Ord. 14-O-735 § 2.]


8.20.030 Scattering rubbish.

No person shall deposit upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property, or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle upon a public right-of-way. [Ord. 14-O-735 § 2.]


8.20.040 Penalty.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty, except that the fine shall not be less than $100.00 for the first offense. [Ord. 14-O-735 § 2.]


Title 9 CRIMINAL CODE

Chapters:

9.05    Adoption of State Statutes

9.10    Offenses

9.15    Repealed

 


Chapter 9.05 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES

Sections: 

9.05.010    Adoption of Oregon State Statutes.


9.05.010 Adoption of Oregon State Statutes.

The following enumerated portions of the Oregon Revised Statutes concerning the Oregon Criminal Code, the liquor control laws, the controlled substance laws, the motor vehicle codes, together with all acts and amendments thereto now existing or made a part hereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter, as if fully set forth herein, to be enforceable and enforced by the city of Brookings within the corporate limits of the city, as follows: Oregon Revised Statutes Chapters 161 through 167, 471, 475 and 801 through 823 specifying violations, infractions, misdemeanors and other such offenses so specified, set forth and defined therein. [Ord. 91-O-408.A § 1; Ord. 86-O-408 § 1; Ord. 85-O-390 § 1.] 


Chapter 9.10 OFFENSES

Sections: 

9.10.010    Definitions.

9.10.020    Penalty.

Article I. Order and Peace

9.10.030    Examination of premises of pawnbroker, junk shop or secondhand dealer.

9.10.040    Unauthorized discharge of firearms within the city limits prohibited.

9.10.050    Air guns prohibited.

9.10.055    Exemption.

9.10.060    Climbing on autos.

9.10.070    Minors selling or serving spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors.

9.10.080    Serving wine or beer to persons seated in automobiles.

9.10.090    Right of city officers and employees to enter buildings.

9.10.100    False fire alarm forbidden.

9.10.110    Using premises to promote crime.

Article II. Minor Children

9.10.120    Minors, purchase of property from.

9.10.130    Causing minors to become delinquent or dependent.

9.10.135    Compulsory school attendance.

9.10.140    Children on street at night.

Article III. Gambling

9.10.150    Gambling not allowed.

9.10.160    Definition of gambling.

9.10.170    Gambling not to include social games.

9.10.180    Money slot machines.

9.10.190    Pool selling and bookmaking.

Article IV. Protection of Public Interest

9.10.200    Unlawful to poison dogs.

9.10.210    Driver injuring dog to stop.

9.10.220    Animal fights.

9.10.230    Innkeepers, defrauding of.

9.10.240    Religious assemblies, disturbing.

9.10.250    Public records, taking or retention.

9.10.260    Plants, destruction.

9.10.270    Posted notices, defacement.

9.10.280    Liquor, delivery to prisoners.

9.10.290    Offenses, attempt to commit.

9.10.300    Exhaust pipe gas.

Article V. Protection against Personal Injuries and Inconvenience

9.10.310    Waste material.

9.10.320    Broken glass.

9.10.330    Protection against spilling.

9.10.340    Obstruction by pedestrians.

9.10.345    Abusive solicitation.

Article VI. Prevention of Personal Injury

9.10.350    Blasting without permit prohibited.

Article VII. Card Games

9.10.360    Card games.

Article VIII. Shoplifting

9.10.370    Detention and interrogation.


9.10.010 Definitions. 

A. Short Title. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the police ordinance and may be so cited and pleaded. 

B. Offenses. The doing of any act or thing prohibited, or the failing to do any act or thing commanded to be done in this chapter within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings and within such other areas as may be specified in this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense against the public peace, safety, health, morals, and general welfare of the people of the city of Brookings. 

C. “Dangerous or deadly weapon” shall mean any firearm, dirk, dagger, knife, brass knuckles, sap, slingshot, or any similar instrument capable of injuring persons or property. 

D. “Peace officer” shall mean any sheriff of a county or constable of a precinct, marshal, or an officer of the bureau of police. 

E. “Person” shall mean and include any natural person, firm, copartnership, association, or corporation, whether he/she is acting for him/herself or itself, or as the clerk, servant, employee, or agent of another; and the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. [Ord. 82-O-367 § 2; Ord. 51-O-013 § 1.] 


9.10.020 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 16-O-757 § 5; Ord. 82-O-367 § 2; Ord. 51-O-013 § 2.] 

Article I. Order and Peace


9.10.030 Examination of premises of pawnbroker, junk shop or secondhand dealer.

The chief of police may empower any member of the Brookings police department to examine the books of any pawnbroker, or his business premises, or the business of any junk shop, keeper, or dealer in secondhand merchandise, or intelligence office keeper, and such member of the force so authorized shall be allowed to examine any property purporting to be pawned, pledged, or deposited in the possession of whomever such property may be; but no such property shall be taken from the possessor thereof without due process or authority of law. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 10.] 


9.10.040 Unauthorized discharge of firearms within the city limits prohibited.

“Firearm,” as used in this section, shall mean any pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, cannon, artillery piece, or other ordnance which acts by the force of gunpowder or other explosive, including any instrument or device designed to propel any missile by the use of jet or rocket propulsion.

A. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to fire or discharge any firearm within the limits of the city of Brookings. The prohibition contained herein shall not apply to any federal, state, county, or local government employee having authority to, or required by his employment or office to carry or use firearms; to any person having a valid permit issued by competent authority to carry or use firearms; or to any person lawfully defending his life or property, or the life or property of another, from any person engaged in the commission of a felony, or attempting the commission of a felony.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow in the hunting of animals within the city of Brookings or to carry a bow and arrow within the city with the intent to use such instruments for hunting within the city. [Ord. 86-O-408 § 3; Ord. 51-O-013 § 12.] 


9.10.050 Air guns prohibited.

“Air gun,” as used in this section, shall mean any small gun or rifle capable of discharging a leaden or metallic bullet, or any pellet capable of injuring persons or property by means of a spring or air pressure. 

A. It shall be unlawful for any minor in the city of Brookings to have in his possession, carry, or discharge any air gun. 



B. It shall be unlawful for any minor or adult person to discharge any air gun within the limits of the city of Brookings. 

C. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor to permit such minor to carry or discharge any air gun in the city of Brookings. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 13.] 


9.10.055 Exemption.

A. Any person or organization may request an exemption from BMC 9.10.050 for the limited purpose of conducting an event, demonstration, or educational course that promotes air gun safety.

B. Any person or organization seeking such an exemption shall make a written request to the chief of police, who shall determine whether the event, demonstration, or educational course promotes air gun safety. The chief of police may issue a permit for the conduct of such event. [Ord. 10-O-663 § 2.]


9.10.060 Climbing on autos.

It shall be unlawful for any person, except a peace officer, without the consent of the owner or person lawfully in charge of any motor vehicle, to climb upon or into such motor vehicle, whether the same be at rest or in motion; or, while such motor vehicle is at rest or unattended, attempt to manipulate any of the levers, the starting crank, or other device, brakes, or mechanism, or to set said vehicle in motion, or to remove therefrom any article or thing whatsoever. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 18.] 


9.10.070 Minors selling or serving spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors.

It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or employ any person under 21 years of age to sell or to serve spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors in any place where such liquors are to be drunk on the premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to sell or serve spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors in any place where such liquors are to be drunk on the premises. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 20.] 


9.10.080 Serving wine or beer to persons seated in automobiles.

It shall be unlawful for any person lawfully possessed of a retail beer license to serve wine or beer for immediate consumption to a person or persons seated in automobiles. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 21.] 


9.10.090 Right of city officers and employees to enter buildings.

Any duly authorized officer or employee of the city of Brookings may enter any building during business hours for the purposes of inspection, or of enforcing any ordinance, when such inspection or enforcement is in the line of his duty; and it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse admission to any such officer or employee, or to obstruct him in the performance of his duty. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 24.] 


9.10.100 False fire alarm forbidden.

It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given an alarm of fire without having reasonable grounds for giving such alarm. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 26.] 


9.10.110 Using premises to promote crime.

It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of any premises as a place for planning or promoting crime, vandalism, or violating any city ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person having the possession and control of any premises to allow such premises to be used as a rendezvous or congregating place for planning or promoting any such thing. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 28.] 

Article II. Minor Children


9.10.120 Minors, purchase of property from.

It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase any property or article of value from any minor, or to have any dealing respecting the title of any property in the possession of any minor without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 46.] 


9.10.130 Causing minors to become delinquent or dependent.

It shall be unlawful for any person to do willfully any act which causes or tends to cause any minor child to become dependent or delinquent, as such dependency or delinquency is or may be defined by the laws of the state of Oregon. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 47.]


9.10.135 Compulsory school attendance.

A. School Attendance Required. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, all children between the ages of seven and 18 years who have not completed the twelfth grade are required to attend regularly a public full-time school.

B. Duty to Send Children to School. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, every person having control of any child between the ages of seven and 18 years who has not completed the twelfth grade and is either enrolled or eligible to be enrolled in a school located within the city limits of Brookings is required to send such child to and maintain such child in regular attendance at a public full-time school during the entire school term.

C. Penalties. Any person found by the municipal court judge to have violated subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall pay a fine for a Class C violation in accordance with ORS 153.018 and 153.019 in amounts that may be revised from time to time. The municipal court judge may impose a civil penalty or a court fee in an amount established by court rule in lieu of a fine.

D. Affirmative Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to the charge of violation of this section if any of the following situations apply:

1. The child alleged to be not attending school is being taught in a private or parochial school in the courses of study usually taught in grades one through 12 in the public schools and in attendance for a period equivalent to that required of children attending public schools in the applicable school year; or

2. The child alleged to be not attending school is able to prove to the satisfaction of the district school board that he or she has acquired equivalent knowledge to that acquired in the courses of study taught in grades one through 12 in the public schools and is able to produce proof thereof; or

3. The child alleged to be not attending school has received a valid high school diploma; or

4. The child alleged to be not attending school is being taught for a period equivalent to that required of children attending public schools by a private teacher the courses of study usually taught in grades one through 12 in the public school; or

5. The child alleged to be not attending school is being educated in the child’s home by a parent or legal guardian as provided by law; or

6. The child alleged to be not attending school is otherwise excluded from attendance in school as provided by law; or

7. The State Board of Education has, by rule, established an exemption from compulsory attendance which has been granted to the parent or legal guardian of the child alleged to not be attending school due to lawful full-time employment, lawful part-time employment, and concurrent enrollment in school, a community college, or an alternative education program as defined in ORS 336.615; or

8. The State Board of Education or an Oregon Circuit Court has granted an exemption to any child who is an emancipated minor or who has initiated the procedure for emancipation under ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558.

E. Procedure. 

1. In addition to any other persons permitted to enforce violations, the school district superintendent or education service district superintendent, or any employee specifically designated by either superintendent, may issue citations for violations established under ORS 339.990.

2. Prior to issuing the citation described in subsection (E)(2)(c) of this section to the parent or guardian of a student not regularly attending full-time school:

a. A parent or guardian of the student and the student shall be provided with written notification that:

i. States that the student is required to attend regularly a full-time school;

ii. Explains that the failure to send the student and maintain the student in regular attendance is a violation;

iii. States that law enforcement or the superintendent may issue a citation;

iv. Requires the parent or guardian of the student and the student to attend a conference with a designated official; and

v. Is written in the native language of the parent or legal guardian of the student.

b. The conference described in subsection (E)(2)(a)(iv) of this section shall be scheduled.

c. The form of citation to be used by superintendents in citing violations of this section shall be established by the State Board of Education by rule. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each of the parts of the citation issued by superintendents shall contain the information required by the State Board.

F. Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provision or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this section are severable. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this section irrespective of the invalidity of any particular portion thereof and intends the invalid portions should be severed and the balance of this section be enforced. [Ord. 18-O-774 § 2 (Exh. A).]


9.10.140 Children on street at night. 

A. It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to be in or remain in or upon any street, alley, park, or other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. during every month of the year, unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person 18 years of age or older and authorized by the parent, guardian or by law to have care and custody of the minor, or:

1. Such minor is then engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which requires the presence of the minor in such public places during the hours specified in this section; or

2. Such minor is returning home from a lawful pursuit or activity approved by the parent, guardian, or other person in charge of the minor; or

3. The minor is lawfully emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558.

B. No parent, guardian, or person having the care and custody of a minor who is under the age of 18 years shall allow such minor to be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley, or other public place between the hours specified in subsection (A) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this section.

C. A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to take charge of any person under the age of 18 years violating the provisions of this section. It shall be the duty of an officer taking charge of the minor to immediately notify the parent or guardian of the minor that the minor has been taken into the charge of the officer. The officer may then release the minor to the parent or guardian, or other person in the charge of the minor. [Ord. 07-O-586 § 2; Ord. 51-O-013 § 50.] 

Article III. Gambling


9.10.150 Gambling not allowed.

No person shall participate in, operate or assist in operating any gambling game or activity, including a lottery. [Ord. 74-O-252; Ord. 51-O-013 § 66A.] 


9.10.160 Definition of gambling.

“Gambling” shall mean any contest, game, gaming scheme, gaming device or machine played for anything of value in which the outcome depends in a material degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding that skill of the contestants may also be a factor therein. [Ord. 74-O-252; Ord. 51-O-013 § 66B.] 


9.10.170 Gambling not to include social games.

The term “gambling” shall not include social games. “Social games” means: 

A. A game other than a lottery between players in a private home where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the social game; and 

B. Games other than a lottery, between players in a private business, private club, or place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the social game. [Ord. 74-O-252; Ord. 51-O-013 § 66C.] 


9.10.180 Money slot machines.

It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, keep, or have in possession, or to manufacture, sell, or distribute any nickel-in-the-slot or other money slot machine or similar device adapted, devised, or designed for the purpose of playing any games of chance for money or property. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession any operating part capable of being assembled or used in any such machine or device. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 67.] 


9.10.190 Pool selling and bookmaking.

It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any bookmaking establishment, or to sell pools or tickets, or to gamble in any manner whatsoever, upon animal races conducted either within or without the corporate limits of the city of Brookings. This section shall not apply to pari-mutuel betting taking place at the track or at race meets conducted under the supervision of the Oregon Racing Commission. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 71.] 

Article IV. Protection of Public Interest


9.10.200 Unlawful to poison dogs.

It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to kill or injure any dog or dogs, to put out or place, where it is likely to be eaten by a dog or dogs, any meat or other dog food containing, poison, ground glass, or other substance likely to kill or seriously injure a dog. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 74.] 


9.10.210 Driver injuring dog to stop.

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle involved in injury or death to a dog upon a street or highway in the city of Brookings to fail immediately to stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, to take reasonable steps to locate the owner of the dog so injured or killed and render such aid to the said dog as shall be reasonable under the circumstances, to remove such injured or dead dog to the curb, or away from the main traveled portion of the highway, and to leave his/her name and address and the registration number of the motor vehicle he is driving with such owner, if found. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 75.] 


9.10.220 Animal fights.

It shall be unlawful for any person, wantonly or for the amusement of himself/herself or others, or for gain, to cause any bull, bear, cock, dog, or other animal to be fought, chased, worried, or injured by any man or animal. It shall be unlawful to permit any of said acts to be done on any premises, or to aid, abet, or to be present at such fighting, chasing, worrying, or injuring of such animal as a spectator. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 76.] 


9.10.230 Innkeepers, defrauding of.

It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain, with intent to defraud, food, lodging, or other accommodations at any hotel, apartment house, boarding house, tourist camp, or restaurant. It shall be unlawful for any person who, after having obtained such food, lodging or other accommodations at any hotel, apartment house, boarding house, or tourist camp, surreptitiously to remove his baggage and clothing from such hotel, apartment house, board house, or tourist camp without first paying or tendering payment for such food, lodging, or other accommodations. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 80.] 


9.10.240 Religious assemblies, disturbing.

It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious worship or for any other lawful purpose by making loud and unnecessary noises, or by rude and indecent behavior or profane language within any place of assembly, or so near to the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 82.] 


9.10.250 Public records, taking or retention.

It shall be unlawful for any person to take or remove any paper, document, or personal property owned by the city unless the permission of the legal custodian thereof is first obtained; and no person shall keep or retain any such paper, document, or other personal property after demand for the return thereof has been made by the legal custodian. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 83.] 


9.10.260 Plants, destruction.

It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously or wantonly to cut down, destroy, or injure any flower, bush, shrub, or tree standing or growing upon the property of another. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 84.] 


9.10.270 Posted notices, defacement.

It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to deface or tear down any official notice or bulletin posted in conformity with law. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 85.] 


9.10.280 Liquor, delivery to prisoners.

It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, by any method whatsoever, any intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug to any person confined in the city jail or to attempt to convey or deliver to any such person any article without permission and consent of the officer in charge. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 90.] 


9.10.290 Offenses, attempt to commit.

Any person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this code, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 91.] 


9.10.300 Exhaust pipe gas.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the gas emanating from the exhaust pipe of any motor vehicle to be ignited or combusted by any gadget, fuse, spark, or any other means whatsoever. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 93.] 

Article V. Protection against Personal Injuries and Inconvenience 


9.10.310 Waste material.

It shall be unlawful for any person to throw into or deposit upon any street, sidewalk, or public place any junk, ashes, paper, leaves, dirt, rubbish, garbage, refuse, filth, litter, or waste material, except at such dumping places or in such receptacles as may be designated by the department of public works, or throw into or upon any street, sidewalk, or public place any glass, crockery, nails, or other things whereby the feet of persons or animals may be injured. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 96.] 


9.10.320 Broken glass.

It shall be unlawful for any person directly or indirectly responsible for broken glass of any kind being upon any sidewalk or pavement, or upon any unimproved street or public place in the city of Brookings to fail, refuse, or neglect to remove such broken glass immediately. Such failure, refusal, or neglect shall be deemed a violation of this code. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 97.] 


9.10.330 Protection against spilling.

It shall be unlawful for any person to transport earth, sand, gravel, sawdust, stone, rock, rails, timber, or lumber upon any vehicle without suitable protection so as to effectually prevent the spilling or depositing or scattering of such materials upon any street, or in the air. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 98.]


9.10.340 Obstruction by pedestrians.

It shall be unlawful for any person to stand upon any street or sidewalk so as to obstruct the same, or to hinder, interfere with, obstruct, or inconvenience the passage of any vehicle or pedestrian, or any traffic thereon. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 100.]


9.10.345 Abusive solicitation.

A. Purpose. The city council deems it advisable and in the city’s best interest to provide for the safety of the community by adopting regulations regarding solicitation of an abusive nature within the city’s jurisdiction. 

B. Abusive Solicitation. No person shall engage in abusive solicitation as defined in this section. A person shall not be deemed to be in violation of this subsection when he or she passively displays a sign unless that person takes abusive action to obtain and/or retrieve an item of value from another person caused by the sign being displayed.

C. Definitions. The following words or phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

1. “Solicitation” means an in-person request made to obtain an immediate donation of money or other item of value.

2. “Threatening” means conduct that has the effect of placing one in reasonable apprehension of imminent physical harm.

3. “Abusive solicitation” means intentionally, recklessly or knowingly engaging in threatening conduct immediately before, during, or immediately after making a solicitation, including, but not limited to, the following listed conduct:

a. Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;

b. Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside of him or her after the person solicited has declined the request;

c. Touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s consent;

d. Using words, signage, gestures, and/or actions directed toward the person being solicited which are threatening.

D. Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section constitutes a violation of Brookings Municipal Code and subject to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty.

E. Severance. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of the ordinance codified in this section is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall in no way affect the validity of any remaining portions of the ordinance codified in this section. [Ord. 16-O-763 § 2; Ord. 16-O-754 § 2.]

Article VI. Prevention of Personal Injury


9.10.350 Blasting without permit prohibited.

It shall be unlawful, without first having received a permit from the city engineer, to explode, or cause to be exploded, any gunpowder, dynamite, giant powder, gun cotton, or other explosive for the purpose of blasting out rock, gravel, earth, or other substance within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 51-O-013 § 101.] 

Article VII. Card Games


9.10.360 Card games.

No person may engage or participate in any type of card game in a public place between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. The owner or manager of a card table may not permit his facilities to be used by a person to engage or participate in playing card games in a public place between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. [Ord. 60-O-150; Ord. 51-O-013 § 104.] 

Article VIII. Shoplifting


9.10.370 Detention and interrogation. 

A. A peace officer, merchant, or merchant’s employee who has reasonable cause for believing a person has committed the offense of shoplifting under Oregon State Statute 164.015 may detain and interrogate such person in regard thereto and in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable time. 

B. Where a peace officer, merchant, or merchant’s employee with reasonable cause for believing that a person has committed the offense of shoplifting as defined under Oregon State Statute 164.015, detains and interrogates him in regard thereto, and such person thereafter brings against the peace officer, merchant, or merchant’s employee a civil or criminal action for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, assault, battery, or wrongful detention based upon the detention and interrogation, such reasonable cause shall be a defense to the action if the detention and interrogation were done in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable time. [Ord. 66-O-184; Ord. 51-O-013 § 107.]


Chapter 9.15 TOBACCO SALES

(Repealed by Ord. 14-O-728)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    General Provisions

10.10    Parking

10.15    Parades and Processions

10.20    General Regulations

10.25    Bicycles

10.30    Impounding Vehicles

10.35    Traffic Citations

 


Chapter 10.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS1

Sections:

10.05.010    Definitions.

10.05.020    Powers of the city council.

10.05.030    Duties of the police department – Trees and fences.

10.05.040    Authority of police and fire officers.


10.05.010 Definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted sections of the motor vehicle laws of Oregon, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

A. “Alley” means a narrow street through the middle of a block.

B. “Bicycle” means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter.

C. “Bus stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers.

D. “Curb” means the extreme edge of the roadway.

E. “Holidays,” where used in this title or on signs erected in accordance with this title, mean Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.

F. “Loading zone” means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of materials or freight.

G. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when a vehicle is temporarily standing for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.

H. “Parkway” means that portion of a street not used as a roadway or as a sidewalk.

I. “Passenger loading zone” means a loading zone reserved only for the loading or unloading of passengers and their luggage.

J. “Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

K. “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

L. “Stop” means complete cessation of movement.

M. “Taxicab stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.

N. “Traffic lane” means that portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of vehicles.

O. “Play street” means a street temporarily set aside for use as a playground on which usual or general vehicular traffic is prohibited. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 2.]


10.05.020 Powers of the city council.

Subject to the authority vested in the State Highway Commission, the council by resolution may establish traffic controls which shall become effective upon the installation of appropriate signs, signals or other markings. Such traffic controls may designate and regulate:

A. The parking and standing of vehicles by:

1. Classifying portions of streets upon which either parking or standing or both shall be prohibited, or prohibited during certain hours,

2. Establishing the time limit for legal parking in limited parking areas,

3. Designating the angle of parking if other than parallel to the curb,

4. Designating city-owned or city-leased property on which public parking will be permitted,

5. Designating areas within which, or streets or portions of streets along which, parking meters will be installed, and the denomination of coins to be used or deposited in parking meters;

B. Through streets, one-way streets and truck routes;

C. For trucks exceeding specified weights, streets to which they shall be restricted and streets on which they are prohibited;

D. Traffic control signals and the time of their operation;

E. Bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier vehicles;

F. Loading zones;

G. Turn regulations at intersections;

H. Marked pedestrian crosswalks and safety zones;

I. Play streets and the hours during which they may be so used;

J. Special speed regulations in city parks. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 3.]


10.05.030 Duties of the police department – Trees and fences.

The police department through its officers: 

A. Shall cause all signs, signals, parking meters and markings necessary to traffic controls provided for by enactments of the council to be installed, marked and maintained in accordance with standards established by the State Highway Commission and nationally recognized traffic control standards (such as the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the U.S. Bureau of Public Roads), and may cause to be placed and maintained additional and incidental traffic control devices necessary to regulate traffic under this title or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.

B. May trim or remove or cause to be trimmed or removed any tree, shrub or hedge which is within or extends over the street and interferes with the use of the sidewalk or roadway or obstructs a driver’s view of an intersection or traffic upon streets approaching an intersection or otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard. Trees, shrubs and hedges shall be maintained at an unobstructed height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 13-1/2 feet above the roadway. [Ord. 07-O-589 § 2; Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 61-O-157 § 4.]


10.05.040 Authority of police and fire officers.

A. It shall be the duty of the police department through its officers to enforce the provisions of this title.

B. In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this title.

C. Members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 5.]1

For the adoption of state statutes, including the motor vehicle codes, see Chapter 9.05 BMC. 


Chapter 10.10 PARKING

Sections:

10.10.010    Method of parking.

10.10.020    Parking of oversize vehicles.

10.10.030    Use of loading zone.

10.10.040    Use of passenger loading zone.

10.10.050    Stopping, standing, or parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.

10.10.060    Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

10.10.070    Prohibited parking.


10.10.010 Method of parking.

A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking, in which case motor vehicles shall be parked with the front head-in to the curb at the angle of and between painted stripes or other markings upon the pavement where such head-in parking is indicated.

B. Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than at the indicated direction and within a single marked space.

C. Whenever the owner or driver of a vehicle discovers that such vehicle is parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, he shall immediately remove such vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. [Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 61-O-157 § 10.]


10.10.020 Parking of oversize vehicles.

Any vehicle which because of its size or shape cannot be parked as provided by BMC 10.10.010 may be parked outside the restricted or limited parking area of the city in a manner which will not impede or interfere with vehicular traffic. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 11.]


10.10.030 Use of loading zone.

No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials or freight in any place designated as a loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop in an unmetered loading zone for loading and unloading of passengers and personal baggage exceed 30 minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 13.]


10.10.040 Use of passenger loading zone.

No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a passenger loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger loading zones are in effect. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 14.]


10.10.050 Stopping, standing, or parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.

The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 15.]


10.10.060 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab about to enter or using such zone. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 16.]


10.10.070 Prohibited parking.

In addition to provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon pertaining to prohibited parking, no person shall park:

A. A vehicle upon any bridge or elevated structure used as a street, unless otherwise indicated by lawfully installed signs.

B. A vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than to load or unload materials not to exceed 45 minutes.

C. A vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:

1. Displaying such vehicle for sale.

2. Repairing such vehicle except for repairs necessitated by an emergency.

3. Displaying merchandise from such vehicle. 

4. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of this city.

5. Storage for more than 72 hours, except that a licensed and operable vehicle parked in front of the vehicle owner’s residence may exceed the time limit.

D. A vehicle upon any parkway except where specifically authorized. 

E. A vehicle leaving a child or children under 12 years of age inside, unless said child or children are uninterruptedly attended by a competent person of at least 18 years of age.

F. A vehicle in violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code or in violation of a parking limitation device. Where maximum parking time limits are designated, moving a vehicle to another parking space within the same block or parking lot shall not extend the time limits for parking.

G. A nonmotorized vehicle or trailer that is not connected to a tow vehicle in city owned or leased parking lots. [Ord. 16-O-758 § 2; Ord. 08-O-602 § 2.]


Chapter 10.15 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS

Sections:

10.15.010    Permits required for parades.

10.15.020    Funeral processions.


10.15.010 Permits required for parades.

No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the United States armed forces and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police. Such permit may be granted where it is found that such parade is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any manner tend to a breach of the peace, cause damage, or unreasonably interfere with the public use of the streets, or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of this city. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 21.]


10.15.020 Funeral processions.

A. Vehicles in a funeral procession may be escorted by at least one person authorized by the chief of police to direct traffic for such purposes and shall follow routes established by the chief of police.

B. Drivers in Procession. Except when approaching a left turn, each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive along the right-hand traffic lane and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe.

C. Driving Through Procession. No driver of a vehicle shall cross through a procession except where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or when so directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. [Ord. 61-O-157 §§ 22, 23, 24.]


Chapter 10.20 GENERAL REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.20.010    Duties of drivers and witnesses at accidents.

10.20.020    Vehicles in motion – Right-of-way.

10.20.030    Driving on divided streets.

10.20.040    Emerging from vehicle.

10.20.050    Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

10.20.060    Riding on motorcycles.

10.20.070    Unlawful riding.

10.20.080    Clinging to vehicles.

10.20.090    Use of roller skates restricted.

10.20.100    Play streets.

10.20.110    Prohibited trucking streets.

10.20.120    Oversize vehicles – Permits.

10.20.130    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.20.140    Obstructing streets.

10.20.145    Unlawful transfer.

10.20.150    Removing glass and debris.


10.20.010 Duties of drivers and witnesses at accidents.

A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident which results in injury or death to any person or causes damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person, immediately shall stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, or as close thereto as possible, and shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of subsection (B) of this section. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.

B. The drivers of any vehicles involved in any accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damages to any such vehicles shall:

1. Give to the other driver or surviving passenger, or any person not a passenger injured as a result of such accident, his name, address and the registration number of the vehicle which he is driving, and the name and address of any other occupants of such vehicle.

2. Upon request and if available, exhibit and give the number of his operator’s or chauffeur’s license to the persons injured, or to the occupant of or person attending any vehicle damaged.

3. Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the conveying or the making of arrangements for the conveying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such conveying is requested by any injured person.

C. Any witness to the accident shall furnish to the driver or occupant of such vehicles or injured person his true name and address. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 28.]


10.20.020 Vehicles in motion – Right-of-way.

A vehicle which has stopped or parked at the curb shall yield to moving traffic. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 29.]


10.20.030 Driving on divided streets.

Whenever any street has been divided into two roadways by a marked intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space provided for vehicle movement or at any intersection. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 31.]


10.20.040 Emerging from vehicle.

No person shall open the door of, or enter, or emerge from, any vehicle into the path of any approaching vehicle. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 32.]


10.20.050 Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 33.]


10.20.060 Riding on motorcycles.

A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is equipped to carry more than one person. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 34.]


10.20.070 Unlawful riding.

No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person or persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 35.]


10.20.080 Clinging to vehicles.

No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon the streets. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 36.]


10.20.090 Use of roller skates restricted.

No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any street except a play street, or except to cross at a crosswalk. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 37.]


10.20.100 Play streets.

No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street during the hours when it has been designated and is being used as a play street except drivers having business on such street or whose residences are along such street, and then such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving on such street. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 38.]


10.20.110 Prohibited trucking streets.

When the use of certain streets is prohibited to all trucks or those exceeding a specified weight, no person shall operate a truck on such streets contrary to such prohibition, except for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, but then only by entering such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and leaving by the shortest route. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 39.]


10.20.120 Oversize vehicles – Permits.

When written application is made therefor, the council, in accordance with applicable provisions of the motor vehicle laws of Oregon, may grant permits for the use of the streets by vehicles, combination of vehicles or other property, which are prohibited by state law from using the streets because of excessive weight, length, or width; and the council may set out in such permit such conditions, regulations, and restrictions as the public interest may require, and which will be sufficient to prevent injury or damage to streets, sidewalks, and all other improvements or private property and to protect the public. Such permit may be cancelled at any time by the council upon satisfactory proof that the permittee has violated any of the terms of the permit, or when in the judgment of the council the public interest requires cancellation. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 40.]


10.20.130 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

A. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

B. A temporary driveway may be used only after first obtaining a written permit therefor from the council which may impose such requirements as are necessary to protect the public improvements within the street at the temporary driveway.

C. Any person who damages or causes to be damaged any public improvement within the street by driving a vehicle upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area shall be liable for such damage regardless of whether or not the damage resulted from the authorized use of a temporary driveway. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 42.]


10.20.140 Obstructing streets.

Except as provided by this title or any other ordinance of the city, no person shall place, park, deposit, or leave upon any street or other public way, sidewalk, or curb any article or thing or material which in any way prevents, interrupts, or obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or obstructs a driver’s view of traffic, control signs, and signals. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 43.]


10.20.145 Unlawful transfer.

A. Purpose. The city council deems it advisable, and in the city’s best interest, to provide for the safety of the community by adopting regulations regarding unlawful transfer on highways, roads and streets within the city’s jurisdiction. 

B. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer if the person:

1. While a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Brookings, gives or relinquishes possession or control of, or allows another person in the vehicle to give or relinquish possession or control of, any item of property to a pedestrian; or

2. While a pedestrian, accepts, receives or retains possession or control of any item of property from a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Brookings.

3. This subsection does not apply if the vehicle is legally parked. This subsection also does not apply to persons participating in a “pedestrian activity,” as defined in OAR 734 Division 58, for which a permit has been issued by the Oregon Department of Transportation, so long as all terms of such permit are being met.

C. Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section constitutes a violation of Brookings Municipal Code and subject to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty.

D. Severance. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of the ordinance codified in this section is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall in no way affect the validity of any remaining portions of the ordinance codified in this section. [Ord. 16-O-754 § 3.]


10.20.150 Removing glass and debris.

Any party to a collision or other vehicle accident or any other person causing glass or other material or substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle to be upon any street in this city shall as soon as possible remove or cause to be removed from such street all such glass or other material or substance. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 44.]


Chapter 10.25 BICYCLES

Sections:

10.25.010    Effect of regulations.

10.25.020    Brakes.

10.25.030    Rental agencies.

10.25.040    Speed.

10.25.050    Racing.

10.25.060    Riding on sidewalks.

10.25.070    Parking.


10.25.010 Effect of regulations.

A. No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this title.

B. Except as otherwise provided herein, every person riding or operating a bicycle upon any street or other public place in the city shall be subject to all the provisions of this title and the laws of the state of Oregon applicable to the drivers of vehicles, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 45.]


10.25.020 Brakes.

Every bicycle operated upon the streets in this city shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 46.]


10.25.030 Rental agencies.

A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is equipped with all equipment required by the motor vehicle laws of Oregon and this title. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 47.]


10.25.040 Speed.

No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 50.]


10.25.050 Racing.

No person shall engage in, or cause others to be engaged in, any bicycle racing upon the streets or other public places in this city. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 51.]


10.25.060 Riding on sidewalks.

No person shall ride or operate any bicycle upon a sidewalk in a business district. Any person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 53.]


10.25.070 Parking.

No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or upon a sidewalk except in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 54.]


Chapter 10.30 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES

Sections:

10.30.005    Motor vehicles.

10.30.010    Repealed.


10.30.005 Motor vehicles.

A. Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions apply:

1. “Owner of motor vehicle” shall be the same definition as that of ORS 801.375 or any successive definition.

B. Vehicle(s) Subject to Forfeiture.

1. A motor vehicle being operated by a person whose operator’s license is suspended, canceled, or revoked for any felony conviction under the Oregon Vehicle Code (Chapters 801 through 823 ORS, inclusive) is declared a nuisance and subject to forfeiture.

2. A motor vehicle being operated by a person whose operator’s license is suspended, canceled, or revoked as a result of a conviction for driving under the influence of intoxicants in violation of the provisions of Chapter 813 ORS is declared a nuisance and subject to forfeiture.

3. Forfeiture proceeding pursuant to this section shall be done in accordance with the provisions of Oregon law.

C. Vehicle(s) Subject to Impound.

1. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, whenever a motor vehicle is being operated by a person whose operator’s license or driving privilege is suspended, canceled, or revoked and a traffic citation is issued or a physical arrest made for any violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code or Brookings city ordinances, or the driver of the motor vehicle is without proof of liability insurance as required by the Oregon Vehicle Code, the motor vehicle is subject to immediate tow by a licensed towing company.

2. Whenever the owner of a motor vehicle has failed to transfer the title or failed to register the vehicle, the motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate tow by a licensed towing company.

3. A vehicle being operated by a motorist who is taken into police custody for any reason, but which vehicle is not otherwise subject to impound, shall be subjected to tow to protect the property and interest of the person arrested and the city of Brookings.

4. A vehicle towed shall be towed to a storage place licensed by the state of Oregon for purposes of vehicle impound or storage.

5. A vehicle towed for reasons of a suspended, unlicensed, unprivileged or uninsured driver may be redeemed by the owner upon presentation of a valid operator’s license and proof of insurance.

6. Vehicles towed and unclaimed or unredeemed may be disposed of after a time and in a manner by the tow company as prescribed by Oregon law. All notices and actions associated with the disposal of any unclaimed or unredeemed vehicle are the responsibility of the tow company having taken the possession of the vehicle.

D. Towing and Storage Liens, Costs.

1. The owner of a motor vehicle, when redeeming the impounded vehicle, shall be responsible for any and all towing storage fees owed to the towing company.

2. The owner of an impounded vehicle shall pay the city of Brookings an administrative fee of $100.00 at the time the vehicle is authorized for release. The amount of the administrative fee can be adjusted by the city of Brookings council by resolution.

3. A vehicle towed under subsection (C)(3) of this section shall not be subject to the administrative fee established in subsection (D)(2) of this section, but will be responsible for all towing fees to the towing company.

4. Any towing company taking a vehicle into custody under the provisions of this section shall have a lien on the vehicle for the just and reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain possession of the vehicle until charges are paid, and may have the vehicle sold at public auction to satisfy the lien. The lien that attaches to the vehicle shall be a possessory chattel lien in accordance with ORS 87.142 and shall be foreclosed in the manner provided in ORS 87.152 through 87.212. If the appraised value of the vehicle is $750.00 or less, the vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided in ORS 819.220.

E. Hearing.

1. Request for Hearing. The owner of the vehicle must request a hearing within five calendar days.

2. Hearing Procedure.

a. When a timely request for a hearing is made, a hearing shall be held before a municipal judge.

b. The hearing shall be set and conducted within the next scheduled municipal court session. The hearing may be set for a later date if the owner so requests.

c. At the hearing, the person may contest the validity of the impound, providing proof of insurance for the vehicle and driver at the time of the tow and providing proof of the validity of the driver’s privilege at the time of tow.

d. The city of Brookings shall have the burden of providing by a preponderance of evidence the validity of the impound. The city may present by oral or written testimony of the police officer and all documents which provide testimony of the cause for impound.

3. Decision of the Municipal Judge.

a. If the municipal judge finds that the impound of the vehicle was proper, the judge shall:

i. Enter an order supporting the removal; and

ii. Find that the owner is liable for any towing and storage charges resulting from the impound; and

iii. Find the owner is liable for the costs of the tow hearing, including costs of the municipal court and any witnesses.

b. If the municipal judge finds that the impound of the vehicle was improper, the judge shall:

i. Order the vehicle released to the owner;

ii. Find that the owner is not liable for any towing and storage charges resulting from the impound; and

iii. Order the city to satisfy the towing and storage lien.

c. Any time an owner of a vehicle properly insured at the time of the traffic stop presents such proof to the municipal judge, but where proof of such insurance was not provided the police officer at the time of the stop, a decision of proper impound shall be entered.

d. The decision of the municipal judge is final.

4. Failure to Appear at Hearing. If the person requesting a hearing does not appear at the scheduled hearing, the municipal judge may enter an order supporting the impound and assessment of towing and storage costs, and shall add an assessment for the costs of the municipal court and any witnesses who appear at the time set for hearing. [Ord. 07-O-591 § 2; Ord. 06-O-571 §§ 1 – 5. Formerly 8.15.085]*

*    Code reviser’s note: Ords. 06-O-571 §§ 1 – 5 and 07-O-591 § 2, previously codified as BMC 8.15.085, were recodified to BMC 10.30.005 at the request of the city.


10.30.010 Impounding of vehicles – Redemption – Sale.

Repealed by Ord. 08-O-602. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 55.]


Chapter 10.35 TRAFFIC CITATIONS

Sections:

10.35.010    Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.

10.35.020    Citation.

10.35.030    When warrant to be issued.


10.35.010 Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner except where approved by the municipal judge. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 58.]


10.35.020 Citation.

For the violation of any provisions of this title, the police department may issue a citation which shall be in the form required by law. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 59.]


10.35.030 When warrant to be issued.

If any person fails to comply with the terms of a traffic citation, the city recorder shall secure and have served a warrant for the arrest of such person. [Ord. 61-O-157 § 60.]

 


Title 11 (Reserved)

 


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.05    Street System

12.10    Sidewalks

12.15    Excavations

12.20    Fire Hydrants

12.25    Public Parks and Recreational Areas

12.30    Skate Park Guidelines and Rules

12.40    Alcohol Regulations for City Premises

12.45    Public Rights-of-Way

12.50    Vacations

 


Chapter 12.05 STREET SYSTEM

Sections: 

12.05.010    Establishment of street system.

12.05.020    Acceptance of official map.

12.05.030    Preparation of official map.

12.05.040    Adoption of official street names.

12.05.050    Location of official streets.

12.05.060    Establishment of street grades.

12.05.070    Display of official map.

12.05.080    Establishment of house and building numbers.


12.05.010 Establishment of street system.

A system of streets and intersections is hereby adopted and established for the city of Brookings, Oregon, and the use thereof is hereby dedicated to the public. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 1.] 


12.05.020 Acceptance of official map.

Each and all of the streets and intersections in this chapter established and dedicated to the public use, as each and all thereof are set forth, named and included in a final map heretofore submitted to the council by the city engineer, are hereby declared to be and exist as the same are set forth, named and included in said final map and this said final map is herewith accepted and approved and is hereby declared to be the official map of the streets and intersections of the city of Brookings, Oregon, and as such official map shall be filed and included in the official records of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 2.] 


12.05.030 Preparation of official map.

It is hereby declared that this said official map of the streets and intersections of the city has been prepared from all of the plats, together with all survey records and data, as all of the same appears within the official records of Curry County, Oregon, and that said official records of Curry County contain all locations, courses, distances and other mathematical information required to properly locate the streets and intersections contained, included, shown and set forth on this aforesaid official map. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 3.] 


12.05.040 Adoption of official street names.

The names of each and all of the streets, as each and all of the streets are named upon the said official map, are hereby adopted as the official names of each of the said streets and the said official names shall not be changed except by ordinance. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 4.] 


12.05.050 Location of official streets.

The location of each and all of the aforesaid official streets, together with all intersections, as the same have been set forth and made apparent upon the aforesaid official map, are declared to be the lawful location thereof and, accordingly, are hereby designated as the official streets of the city of Brookings. The location of an official street of the city, as the same has been herein created and designated, shall not be vacated, changed, or altered except by city ordinance, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 5.] 


12.05.060 Establishment of street grades.

The grade for each and all of the streets and intersections set forth and included within the aforesaid official map is hereby declared to be the established grade heretofore lawfully established. In the event that it shall become necessary to establish an original grade upon any of the aforesaid streets and intersections, or to change or alter a street grade now lawfully in existence, the creation, change, or alteration of such grade shall be made by the city engineer under the direction of the city council. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 6.] 


12.05.070 Display of official map.

The city engineer shall prepare a copy, certified by him to be a true and correct copy and the whole thereof, of the aforesaid official map of the streets and intersections of the city of Brookings and deliver the said copy to the city recorder. The recorder shall post the same and cause the same to be displayed in a conspicuous place in the office of the recorder in the City Hall, and at and during all business hours to keep this said copy of the said official map continuously posted and displayed for the use of any person desiring to examine, or refer to the same. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 7.] 


12.05.080 Establishment of house and building numbers.

The city planning commission shall establish a system of house and building numbers upon all of the official streets of the city for the further and better identification thereof, and for the purpose of conforming to the rules and regulations of the Post Office Department of the United States in the matter of the delivery of United States mail. [Ord. 54-O-056 § 8.] 


Chapter 12.10 SIDEWALKS1

Sections: 

12.10.010    Applicability.

12.10.020    Definitions.

12.10.030    Declaration of the city’s jurisdiction over sidewalks.

12.10.040    Prohibition against blocking sidewalks.

12.10.050    Permit and fee required.

12.10.055    Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act standards.

12.10.060    Exemption for installation of sidewalks.

12.10.070    Violations and penalty.


12.10.010 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply only to sidewalks located within the public right-of-way. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.] 


12.10.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter:

A. “Sidewalk” shall mean a walk or footway for pedestrians constructed out of material other than the ground traversed by the walk or footway and located in the public right-of-way.

B. “Nonconforming sidewalk” shall mean any sidewalk constructed that is not in conformance with BMC Title 18. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.] 


12.10.030 Declaration of the city’s jurisdiction over sidewalks.

The city of Brookings claims, maintains, exerts, and reserves jurisdiction over all sidewalks within the public right-of-way of the city of Brookings. Engineering requirements and standards for sidewalk improvements are contained in BMC Title 18. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.] 


12.10.040 Prohibition against blocking sidewalks.

It shall be prohibited to obstruct or in any way restrict the width of the sidewalk unless specifically approved by the site plan committee. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.] 


12.10.050 Permit and fee required.

A public works permit and inspection fee are required as provided under Chapter 12.45 BMC. Engineered documents will also require a public works plan review fee. Fees are determined as provided under Chapter 1.10 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.]


12.10.055 Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act standards.2

A. Location of all temporary and permanent fixtures, including trash receptacles, mailboxes, light fixtures, fire hydrants and other infrastructure, must provide minimum Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility clearance as determined by current ADA standards. Current standards may be obtained from the public works department.

B. A survey may be required prior to sidewalk installation in order to ensure current ADA compliance. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]


12.10.060 Exemption for installation of sidewalks.

Unless a project meets the exemptions listed in BMC 17.04.070 or is specifically exempted by the site plan committee, a conforming sidewalk must be constructed along the full length of the property abutting the street frontages. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.] 


12.10.070 Violations and penalty.

A violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 09-O-624 § 2.] 1

Prior legislation: Ords. 55-O-073 and 66-O-186. 2

Code reviser’s note: This section, which was added as BMC 12.10.060 by Ord. 12-O-704, has been editorially renumbered as BMC 12.10.055 to avoid duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 12.15 EXCAVATIONS1

Sections:

12.15.010    Generally.

12.15.020    Permit and fee required.

12.15.030    Permittee’s responsibilities.

12.15.040    Prohibited.

12.15.050    Violation and penalty.


12.15.010 Generally.

No entity or person shall dig or excavate in or upon any street or alley of the city of Brookings; change, alter, or destroy the surface of any such street or alley; obstruct the reasonable use of such street or alley by the public or the regular flow of vehicular or pedestrian travel over and upon such street or alley; or cause, or attempt to cause, any or all of the same to be done by any other person, firm, or corporation, employee, agent, or representative whomsoever, without first having an approved public works permit. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]


12.15.020 Permit and fee required.

A public works permit and inspection fee are required as provided under Chapter 12.45 BMC. Engineered documents will also require a public works plan review fee. Fees are determined as provided under Chapter 1.10 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]


12.15.030 Permittee’s responsibilities.

Permittee is required to follow all the terms and provisions as provided under BMC Title 18. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]


12.15.040 Prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, using, or operating any water main, irrigation, or drainage pipeline or ditch, flume, or other structure to permit any water from such water main, pipeline, ditch, flume, or other structure to flow, waste, or seep into any street or alley of the city of Brookings in such manner as to damage or injure such street or alley, or as to interfere with traffic thereon. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]


12.15.050 Violation and penalty.

A violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]1

Prior legislation: Ord. 71-O-221. 


Chapter 12.20 FIRE HYDRANTS

Sections: 

12.20.010    Spacing.

12.20.020    Testing.

12.20.030    Permit and fees.

12.20.040    Violations.


12.20.010 Spacing. 

A. Industrial Areas. One or more fire hydrants shall be placed at each street intersection depending on the needed fire flow with an intermediate fire hydrant being placed so that the fire hydrants are no more than 300 feet apart and so located that all buildings in a complex can be reached by a comparatively short hose line from more than one fire hydrant. The above spacing shall be the same for large individual buildings of industrial, mercantile, nature, or multiple-unit residential structures.

B. For single-family residential areas, there shall be a fire hydrant located at each street intersection with intermediate hydrants spaced so they are no more than 500 feet apart. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 78-O-303 § 1.] 


12.20.020 Testing.

Fire hydrants shall be tested and inspected prior to any framing construction being commenced on structures which may demand a high fire flow. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 78-O-303 § 2.] 


12.20.030 Permit and fees.

A public works permit and inspection fee are required as provided under Chapter 12.45 BMC. Applications, including engineered drawings, are also subject to a public works plan review fee. Fees are determined as provided under Chapter 1.10 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2; Ord. 78-O-303 § 3.]


12.20.040 Violations.

A violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-704 § 2.]


Chapter 12.25 PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS

Sections: 

12.25.010    City-owned public parks and city-owned public recreational areas hours.

12.25.012    Rules and regulations specific to city-owned parks.

12.25.015    Dogs prohibited in Easy Manor Park.

12.25.016    Dogs prohibited in Kidtown playground at Azalea Park.

12.25.017    Smoking prohibited in designated park areas.

12.25.020    Exceptions.

12.25.030    Penalties.


12.25.010 City-owned public parks and city-owned public recreational areas hours.

Except as provided in BMC 12.25.020, all city-owned public parks and city-owned public recreational areas located within the city of Brookings shall be open for use by the public from one-half hour prior to sunrise to one-half hour past sunset. [Ord. 94-O-505 § 1.] 


12.25.012 Rules and regulations specific to city-owned parks.

A. The following activities and uses are prohibited in all city parks, except by city park employees, volunteers or contractors in the performance of authorized maintenance or construction:

1. Camping.

2. Parking or use of motorized vehicles, other than wheelchairs, on walkways, landscaped areas, natural vegetation areas, playgrounds and sports fields, except for authorized maintenance or the purpose of set-up or tear-down of an event.

3. Possession or use of fireworks or explosives; unlawful possession or use of firearms.

4. Throwing of rice or seeds, including bird seed.

5. Damage to or removal of any vegetation.

6. Modification or painting of any structure, equipment or furniture.

7. Bicycles, skateboards, skates or roller blades, except in designated areas.

8. Unleashed dogs, except in designated areas.

9. Failure to remove animal excrement by the animal owner.

10. Attaching signs to any city sign post, trees or other vegetation.

11. Any use of the park for an organized event without having first obtained an approved park use permit. An organized event includes weddings, memorials, athletic activities, concerts, holiday displays, picnics where the host wishes to reserve a specific area, use of the snack shack, bandshell or Capella, and the conduct of business activities. 

12. Amplified sound and/or music at a level that is not contained within the immediate area of the activity, subject to BMC 8.15.080.

13. Placement of any sign without first having obtained approval by the city manager or his designee.

14. Failure to remove signs within two hours of the conclusion of an event.

15. Fires, except fires in camp stoves, portable barbeques or fireplaces provided for such purposes.

16. The use of camp stoves or portable barbeques except in designated picnic areas.

17. Unattended fires, camp stoves or portable barbeques.

18. Leaving the location of a fire until the fire is completely extinguished with no hot coals remaining.

19. The use of amplified sound at Bankus Park.

20. The use of Bankus Park for more than single-day events, except as approved by the parks and recreation commission.

B.  Penalties and Fines.

1. The fine for a first offense under subsection (A) of this section is $50.00, a second violation is $100.00, and any third or subsequent violation shall be the maximum allowed under Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty.

2. Upon a third violation/conviction, the offending person may be prohibited from using or entering all city-owned parks for a period of one year.

3. If a person is given a citation for violating subsection (A) of this section, he or she must immediately cease the offending conduct. If the person given the citation continues the offending use or activity, he or she will be subject to additional citations and/or immediate trespass under ORS 164.245. [Ord. 13-O-708 § 2; Ord. 10-O-667 § 2.]


12.25.015 Dogs prohibited in Easy Manor Park.

Dogs are prohibited in Easy Manor Park, except for dog guides as defined in ORS 346.610. [Ord. 10-O-662 § 2.]


12.25.016 Dogs prohibited in Kidtown playground at Azalea Park.

Dogs are prohibited in Kidtown playground at Azalea Park, except for dog guides as defined in ORS 346.610. [Ord. 10-O-664 § 2.]


12.25.017 Smoking prohibited in designated park areas.

A. Persons are prohibited from smoking in city parks at all times.

B. Penalties under this section shall be $75.00 for each separate offense. [Ord. 15-O-746 § 2; Ord. 13-O-718 § 2; Ord. 12-O-690 § 2.]


12.25.020 Exceptions.

The city manager may, upon prior application, permit use of a city-owned public park or city-owned public recreational area at times other than the times that the premises are open for use by the public.

Park operating hours for the Mill Beach access road, parking lot and picnic area will be open and available to the public from one-half hour before sunrise until midnight, daily. [Ord. 16-O-759 § 2; Ord. 94-O-505 § 2.] 


12.25.030 Penalties.

Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 10-O-662 § 2; Ord. 94-O-505 § 3.] 


Chapter 12.30 SKATE PARK GUIDELINES AND RULES

Sections:

12.30.010    Creation of general guidelines and policies.

12.30.020    Prohibited acts.

12.30.030    Enforcement.

12.30.040    Penalties.

12.30.050    Fines and forfeitures.

12.30.060    Severability.


12.30.010 Creation of general guidelines and policies.

The city may develop and authorize by resolution additional rules to govern the operation of the Brookings Skate Park. [Ord. 07-O-583 § 2.]


12.30.020 Prohibited acts.

A. No person shall use the skate park unless such person is wearing, at all times during such use, a safety helmet as approved under ORS 815.052. Additional safety equipment is recommended.

B. No person shall damage or deface any part of the skate park.

C. No person shall bring into the skate park or possess within the skate park any glass containers.

D. No person shall use the skating area of the skate park with anything other than a skateboard or in-line skates. No BMX bicycles, other types of bicycles and motorized or nonmotorized scooters or similar devices are to be used at the skate park.

E. No person shall bring onto or possess within the skate park any alcohol, tobacco or controlled substances.

F. No person shall modify or attempt to modify any element, surface or area within or around the skate park.

G. No person shall enter or remain in the skate park except during hours posted by the city. 

H. Horseplay, violence and profanity are prohibited. [Ord. 07-O-583 § 2.] 


12.30.030 Enforcement.

Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a skateboard, in-line skates, BMX bicycles or bicycles of all kinds are being used in violation of this chapter, the skateboard, in-line skates, BMX bicycles or bicycles of all kinds may be seized as evidence and held until the disposition of any charges. [Ord. 07-O-583 § 2.]


12.30.040 Penalties.

A. A violation of the prohibited acts of this chapter shall be a violation of the Brookings Municipal Code.

B. The person who violates any provisions of this chapter may be fined, prohibited from using the skate park and have any property used in violation of this chapter seized, and forfeited pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 07-O-583 § 2.]


12.30.050 Fines and forfeitures.

A. The fine for a first offense under this chapter shall be $50.00, the second violation shall be $100.00 and the third or subsequent violation shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty.

B. Upon a third conviction, the court may, in addition to any other penalty, order that the skateboard, in-line skates, BMX bicycles or any type of bicycle that was used at the time of the offense be impounded for a time not to exceed 30 days or forfeited.

C. Upon a third conviction, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboard, in-line skates, BMX bicycle or any type of bicycle which was ridden in violation of this chapter, unless it is proven to the court by preponderance of the evidence that the offender is not the owner of the skateboard, in-line skates, BMX bicycle or any other type of bicycle and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard, in-line skates, BMX bicycle or any other type of bicycle would be ridden in violation of this chapter. [Ord. 16-O-757 § 6; Ord. 07-O-583 § 2.]


12.30.060 Severability.

The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be independent from one another, and if any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter which shall be confined in its operation thereof directly to the section involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. [Ord. 07-O-583 § 2.]


Chapter 12.40 ALCOHOL REGULATIONS FOR CITY PREMISES

Sections: 

12.40.010    Alcohol prohibited on city premises.

12.40.020    Alcoholic beverage defined.

12.40.030    City premises defined.

12.40.040    Permitted uses.

12.40.050    Authority to revoke permit.

12.40.060    Penalties and fines.


12.40.010 Alcohol prohibited on city premises.

It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry, or possess, sell or consume any alcoholic beverage, on city premises except as permitted under BMC 12.40.040. [Ord. 13-O-716 § 2; Ord. 08-O-618 § 2.]


12.40.020 Alcoholic beverage defined.

The term “alcoholic beverage,” as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean and include any liquid intended for human consumption containing more than one-half of one percent by volume of alcohol. [Ord. 13-O-716 § 2; Ord. 08-O-618 § 3.]


12.40.030 City premises defined.

For the purpose of this chapter, “city premises” shall include city parks, city buildings, city parking lots, and other premises under the control of the city, but shall not include public highways. [Ord. 13-O-716 § 2; Ord. 08-O-618 § 4.]


12.40.040 Permitted uses.

A. Possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on city premises may only be authorized through the issuance of a park use permit, event permit, or Capella use permit. 

1. Only malt beverages, wine or cider shall be allowed under the aforementioned permits. All such permits must be approved by the chief of police or chief’s designee.

2. The sale of any alcoholic beverage on city premises shall also require a temporary sales license issued by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) and approved by the chief of police or chief’s designee for drinking within a licensed area. All rules and regulations of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission shall be strictly enforced. 

3. The possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be conducted only within a well defined boundary as depicted by permittee in an exhibit to be attached to the park use permit, event permit or Capella use permit. 

B. No permit shall be issued authorizing the consumption, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages on any city athletic field, including spectator areas, or within 100 feet of Kidtown in Azalea Park. [Ord. 13-O-716 § 2.]


12.40.050 Authority to revoke permit.

Any officer of the Brookings police department shall have the authority to immediately revoke any park use permit, event permit or Capella use permit if said officer determines that:

A. An activity taking place at the permitted location is creating a danger to public safety.

B. The event is being conducting in a manner which is creating a nuisance. 

C. Illegal activities are taking place. [Ord. 13-O-716 § 2.]


12.40.060 Penalties and fines.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 13-O-716 § 2; Ord. 08-O-618 § 5. Formerly 12.40.040]


Chapter 12.45 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.45.010    Purpose.

12.45.020    Definitions.

12.45.030    Permit required.

12.45.040    Permit procedure and requirements.

12.45.050    Fees and charges.

12.45.060    Permit restrictions.

12.45.070    Violation and penalty.

12.45.080    Claims.


12.45.010 Purpose.

The public works department is responsible for all city public rights-of-way and public infrastructure. This includes any infrastructure, above and below ground, dedicated for public use. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter:

A. “Encroachment” refers to a privately owned and maintained structure located in the right-of-way, such as a mailbox.

B. “Permittee” refers to the owner and/or contractor as named on the public works permit. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.030 Permit required.

A. Public Works Permit and Inspection. A public works permit and inspection are required for any construction, or construction related activity, that takes place within a city public right-of-way, easement, and/or city maintained facility.

B. Right-to-Use Permit. A right-to-use permit is required for any encroachment in the city public right-of-way. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.040 Permit procedure and requirements.

A. Permit applications shall be submitted to the city public works department. The application shall include a sketch or engineered plan as specified under BMC 18.05.007, and shall comply with all relevant conditions specified in BMC Title 18.

B. Permit applications shall be reviewed for compliance with BMC Title 18. Approved applications shall be issued within 20 days of application. Written notification of an incomplete application shall be issued within 10 days of submittal.

C. Prior to issuance, a permit time limit shall be established. The city shall allow a reasonable time for completion given current circumstances. All work under the permit shall be completed within the set time limit.

D. Permit approval shall be provided by public works staff, as authorized by the city manager.

E. All applicable fees must be paid in full prior to permit approval. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.050 Fees and charges.

Fees and charges under this chapter shall be adopted by the Brookings master fee resolution as provided under Chapter 1.10 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.060 Permit restrictions.

No new permit as defined in this chapter shall be issued to any entity or person whose work has necessitated city action for failure to perform or complete the work as approved. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.070 Violation and penalty.

The permittee shall be notified in writing of any violation of this chapter. Failure to remedy the violation within the specified time limit provided in the notification, or to obtain a permit for any activity described in this chapter, shall be punishable as provided under Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


12.45.080 Claims.

Acceptance or approval by the city of any public works improvements shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee for any incomplete or defective work found within 12 months of project completion. [Ord. 12-O-703 § 2.]


Chapter 12.50 VACATIONS

Sections:

12.50.010    Generally.

12.50.020    Application procedures.

12.50.030    Vacation criteria.

12.50.040    Recording costs.


12.50.010 Generally.

A request to vacate a public street, alley, easement, plat or public place shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 271 ORS, which requires the holding of a public hearing. Vacations may be initiated either by petition pursuant to ORS 271.080 or on the council’s own motion, pursuant to ORS 271.130. [Ord. 13-O-711 § 3.]


12.50.020 Application procedures.

Petitioners or persons requesting the council to initiate a vacation on its own motion, pursuant to ORS 271.130, shall file an application which shall contain the following:

A. Vicinity map drawn to scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet identifying the area proposed to be vacated and adjoining properties;

B. Legal description of area proposed to be vacated;

C. County assessor’s parcel maps of the proposed vacation area identifying abutting and affected properties. Identified upon the assessor’s parcel maps shall be those abutting and affected properties whose owners have consented to the proposed vacation;

D. Consent to vacate forms completed and signed by all consenting property owners within the abutting and/or affected area;

E. Names and addresses of all abutting and/or affected property owners, including map and tax lot numbers, prepared on mailing labels;

F. Written findings of fact prepared by the petitioner(s) or the petitioner(s)’ representative;

G. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council, no part of which is refundable. [Ord. 13-O-711 § 3.]


12.50.030 Vacation criteria.

A request to vacate will be reviewed by the site plan committee to verify consistency with city ordinances and policies. If the planning staff determines the proposed vacation affects any of the Brookings comprehensive plan statewide planning goal policies, the vacation request will be heard by the planning commission who will make a recommendation to the city council. In these cases, the vacation matter will be processed as a land use decision and notice will be provided as required by Chapter 17.84 BMC, Public Hearings Notice Procedures.

A request to vacate that is determined not to be a land use decision will be considered by the city council following a determination based upon the findings prepared and submitted by the petitioner(s), which shall address the following criteria:

A. Compliance with the comprehensive plan, circulation element or other applicable sections of the document.

B. If initiated by petition pursuant to ORS 271.080, the council shall make the determinations pursuant to ORS 271.120 based upon evidence provided by the petitioner(s) in the written findings.

C. If initiated by the city council on its own motion pursuant to ORS 271.130, a determination shall be made that the vacation will not substantially affect the market value of all such abutting property to the area proposed to be vacated, unless the city council proposes to provide for paying such damages.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall cause or require the removal or abandonment of any public or private sewer, water main, gas main, conduit of any kind, wire, pole or object used or intended to be used for any public service and the right hereby is reserved for the owner of any such utility or object to maintain, continue, repair, reconstruct, renew, replace, rebuild or enlarge all utilities and objects. [Ord. 13-O-711 § 3.]


12.50.040 Recording costs.

Pursuant to ORS 271.150, following an action by the city council to vacate an area, such enacting ordinance vacating any street, alley, easement, plat or public place shall be recorded with the county clerk, together with any maps, plat or other record in regard thereto. The petitioner(s) for such vacation shall bear the recording cost and the cost of preparing and filing the certified copy of the ordinance and map. [Ord. 13-O-711 § 3.]


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:

13.05    Water

13.10    Sewer Use Regulations

13.15    Sewer Service Charges

13.20    Systems Replacement Charges

13.25    Systems Development Charges

13.30    Administrative Services and Charges

13.35    Storm Water

13.40    Storm Water Fees


Chapter 13.05 WATER

Sections: 

13.05.001    Safe and adequate service required.

13.05.002    City council authority.

13.05.003    Order of the city council.

13.05.004    Compliance with order.

13.05.005    Violations.

13.05.006    Penalty.

13.05.007    Preservation of public health and welfare.

13.05.010    Definitions.

13.05.020    Water system established.

13.05.030    Council to make rules.

13.05.040    Water service.

13.05.050    Use of public water system.

13.05.060    Description of service.

13.05.070    Water main extensions.

13.05.080    Service pipe extension.

13.05.090    Application for service.

13.05.100    Location and ownership of lines.

13.05.110    Contracts.

13.05.120    Responsibility and service preferences.

13.05.130    Services.

13.05.140    Meters.

13.05.150    Water rates.

13.05.160    Notices.

13.05.170    Billing and payment.

13.05.180    Charges – Appeal procedures.

13.05.190    Discontinuance of service.

13.05.195    Water quality – Cross connection control program.

13.05.200    Restoration of service.

13.05.210    Unusual demands.

13.05.220    Access to property.

13.05.230    Responsibility for equipment.

13.05.240    Fire hydrants.

13.05.250    Water curtailment.

13.05.260    Suspension of rules.

13.05.270    Penalties.


13.05.001 Safe and adequate service required.

Every public utility producing, transmitting, delivering or furnishing water to the city of Brookings and the inhabitants thereof shall render service that is safe and adequate. [Ord. 53-O-049 § 1.] 


13.05.002 City council authority.

Whenever the city council of the city of Brookings determines that service is not safe and adequate, the city council shall make an order directing the utility to provide service that is safe and adequate, describing in what respects the service provided is not safe and adequate and providing a reasonable time within which said utility shall provide safe and adequate service. [Ord. 53-O-049 § 2.] 


13.05.003 Order of the city council.

A copy of such order of said city council, duly certified to be a true and correct copy thereof, and the whole thereof, by the city attorney, shall be served upon said utility. [Ord. 53-O-049 § 3.] 


13.05.004 Compliance with order.

Every public utility shall comply with orders of the city council made pursuant to BMC 13.05.002. [Ord. 53-O-049 § 4.] 


13.05.005 Violations.

Each day of failure by said public utility to obey and comply with the provisions of such order, or orders, is a separate violation of BMC 13.05.001 through 13.05.007. [Ord. 53-O-049 § 5.] 


13.05.006 Penalty.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-590 § 2; Ord. 53-O-049 § 6.] 


13.05.007 Preservation of public health and welfare.

BMC 13.05.001 through 13.05.007 are adopted in order to preserve the public health and welfare pursuant to the power granted to cities and towns by ORS 221.420, and the police power of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 53-O-049 § 7.] 


13.05.010 Definitions. 

A. “Applicant” shall mean the person or persons, firm, or corporation making application for water service from the city under the terms of these regulations. 

B. “City” shall mean the legally constituted municipal government of the city of Brookings, Curry County, Oregon, acting through the city manager or his authorized designee. 

C. “City council” shall mean the legally elected group of members composing the city council, including the mayor, of the city of Brookings. 

D. “Consumer,” “customer” or “user” shall mean and include any person, firm, corporation, or association using or receiving or applying for the right to use water and/or water service from the municipal water system of the city of Brookings whether a tenant or property owner of property to which service is granted by the city. 

E. “Customer service line” shall be that part of the piping on the customer’s property that connects the service to the customer’s distribution system. 

F. “Service connection” or “service line” shall be that part of the water distribution system which connects the meter to the main and shall normally consist of corporation stop, service pipe, curb stop and box, meter, meter yoke, and meter box. 

G. “Water main” shall normally mean a six- inch pipe or larger in diameter, laid in the street or alley right-of-way, for the purpose of water distribution to consumers through service lines. Size exceptions are determined by the site plan committee (BMC 17.80.020). 

H. “Service extension” or “extension of water service” shall mean the act of making application for service, tendering of the service deposit, approval of service by the city together with receipt for and establishment of a billing account and water turn-on by the city which provides water to the subject premises. [Ord. 91-O-190.B § 1; Ord. 89-O-450 § 1; Ord. 66-O-190 § 2.] 


13.05.020 Water system established. 

A. Authorization. Pursuant to the City Charter, the city of Brookings is hereby authorized and empowered by and through its city council, and in the name of the city, to purchase or build, construct, maintain, extend and repair one or more municipal water systems, either within or without, or partially within and partially without, the corporate limits of the city, and to do all necessary things in connection therewith. 

B. Scope. The city and all customers receiving services from the water system, whether inside or outside the city limits, are bound by these ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 3.] 


13.05.030 Council to make rules.

The ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations governing consumers of water from said municipal water system, the rates to be charged such consumer, and the policy and manner of operating, managing and maintaining such municipal water system, shall be fixed, formulated and adopted by the city council. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 4.] 


13.05.040 Water service. 

A. Water service may be extended to properties only when those properties have frontage on a public water main which has been built to current city standards to serve the requesting property and which is so constructed and extended as to provide service to adjacent property and which has been dedicated to and accepted by the city, together with the necessary easements and rights-of-way thereof, all in conformance with the requirements of this and other relevant ordinances of the city, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section. The site plan committee (as established in Chapter 17.80 BMC) shall determine the appropriateness of water main extensions and water main size requirements for areas within the city limits so as to properly serve the applicant’s lot and allow for future water main extensions and/or usage. For areas outside the city limits but within the urban growth boundary, water main extensions and water main sizing shall be determined by the city council, with recommendations from the site plan committee. 

B. In order to ensure compatibility of utility systems and improvements within both the city and the urban growth area of the city, water service extensions may be permitted to properties which are in all respects developed in accordance with adopted city development standards and regulations and with the Charter and ordinances of the city. 

C. For purposes of this chapter, and for indivisible single lots or parcels existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, as amended by Ordinance No. 88-O-432, frontage on a public water main may be satisfied by means of either an easement or land in fee simple abutting a public right-of-way containing the water main. Water service to a single lot or parcel which has been created prior to adoption of the ordinance amendment may be provided by a water service lateral but service to more than a single lot or to such parcels which are divisible into more than a single lot shall be provided by means of the extension of a public water main meeting current adopted city standards, with provision for dedication of appropriate and necessary public utility easements for installation and maintenance purposes. 

D. Where the installation of a public water main would pose substantial risk to the main line or to surrounding properties as a result of identified geological hazards, the city council, upon recommendation by the city’s site plan committee, may approve the installation of water service to properties which do not have frontage on a public water main. Such approval by the city council shall be in accordance with terms and conditions as recommended by the city’s site plan committee and by the city’s engineer to minimize risk to the city’s facilities and to surrounding properties and such approval may specify conditions of approval which must be satisfied prior to connection to the city’s water system. [Ord. 91-O-190.C §§ 1, 2; Ord. 89-O-450 § 2; Ord. 66-O-190 § 5.] 


13.05.050 Use of public water system. 

A. The owner and the occupant of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, commerce, industry, recreation, or other purposes, or requiring fire protection services, which is situated within or served by the city water system and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public water line, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable water facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water main in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public water line is within 300 feet (91.5 meters) of the property line; except that, after the initial construction of the public water main is completed, connection to such facilities shall be completed within 12 months after official notice to do so. The city council may set a shorter time for correction or connection to public water main for users having problems which are determined to be a threat to public health, safety or general welfare. 

B. When, in the judgment of the city, the water lines and appurtenances of the city are of insufficient capacity or size or the reservoirs of the city are of insufficient capacity or size or cannot reasonably be expected to provide a safe and dependable supply of water for domestic use and for fire protection, or other reasonable justification exists relating to the health, safety and welfare of the customers and citizens of the city of Brookings, then applications for additional water service may be refused. The city council may, from time to time, designate sections of the city or areas served by the water system in which additional water services will be prohibited until such time as the conditions described in this section have been corrected. 

C. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, negligently or otherwise, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the municipal water system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest by law enforcement personnel. [Ord. 89-O-450 § 3; Ord. 66-O-190 § 6.] 


13.05.060 Description of service.

Services shall be residential, commercial, standby fire, utility work and contract, as follows:

A. Inside City Limits.

1. Residential Service. Residential service shall consist of all services for domestic purposes, single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, mobile homes, and municipal purposes.

2. Commercial Service. Commercial services shall consist of those services where water is used for commercial services, such as businesses, restaurants and recreational vehicle parks.

3. Standby Fire. Standby fire services shall consist of those services where water is available or used for fire protection only. 

4. Utility Work. Utility work shall consist of water needed to facilitate agency utility work, such as flushing culverts, street cleaning and other maintenance activities. 

a. As used herein, “agency” is defined as: cities, school districts, fire districts, water and sewer districts, health districts, parks and recreation districts, transit districts, irrigation districts, library districts, port districts, public facility districts, public utility districts, housing districts, and other authorized special districts. 

5. Contract Service. Contract services shall consist of those services for industrial or independent water district purposes under contracts authorized by the city council.

B. Outside City Limits.

1. Residential Service. Residential service shall consist of all services for domestic purposes, single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, mobile homes, and municipal purposes.

2. Commercial Service. Commercial services shall consist of those services where water is used for commercial services, such as businesses, restaurants and recreational vehicle parks.

3. Standby Fire. Standby fire services shall consist of those services where water is available or used for fire protection only.

4. Utility Work. Utility work shall consist of water needed to facilitate agency utility work, such as flushing culverts, street cleaning and other maintenance activities. 

5. Contract Service. Contract services shall consist of those services for subdivisions, developments, industrial or independent water district purposes under contracts authorized by the city council.

C. Special Contracts. When the applicant’s requirements for water are unusual or large, such as an independent water district, or necessitates considerable special or reserve equipment or capacity, such as a subdivision or other development, the city council reserves the right to make a special contract, the provisions of which are different from and have exceptions to the regularly published water rates, rules, and regulations. This special contract shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and approved by the city council. 

D. Resale of Water. Resale of water shall be permitted only under special contract in writing between the city council and the persons, parties, or corporation selling the water.

E. Water Conservation. In case of shortage of supply, the city reserves the right to give preference in the matter of furnishing service to consumers, as in the judgment of its representatives shall be for the best interests of the city, from the standpoint of public convenience and necessity. The city council is hereby authorized and empowered, in any case of emergency, to establish such hours as it may find necessary for the use of water for irrigation of lawns and other irrigation purposes, and is authorized and empowered to otherwise limit the amount of water used by consumers, in order to conserve the city water supply. [Ord. 16-O-751 § 2; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 7.] 


13.05.070 Water main extensions. 

Extension of water mains will comply with the same procedure as BMC 13.10.280, Sewer main extensions. [Ord. 14-O-724 § 1; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 8.] 


13.05.080 Service pipe extension.

The installation of service pipes extending from the main to the nearest property line abutting the main in the direction of the applicant’s premises, including a meter, and the necessary labor and materials for such construction shall be made or approved by the city. If said service pipes are constructed by the city, the property owner and applicant shall pay the costs of said construction to include time expended, labor, equipment and materials, together with administrative overhead. Costs shall be assessed against the property or owner. All water connections to the main line shall be assessed a charge or charges as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council. In the case of multiple-family dwellings, such as apartment buildings, duplexes, and other multiple-family dwellings, and motels and hotels, each unit using said connection shall be assessed a charge or charges as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council for said connection. Any applicant or property owner failing to pay said costs of construction or connection fee shall be subject to the provisions as set forth by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 9.] 


13.05.090 Application for service. 

A. Application Form. Each applicant for water service shall sign an application form provided by the city giving the date of application, location of premises to be served, the date applicant desires service to begin, purpose for which service is to be used, the address for mailing of the billings, the class and the size of the meter service, and such other information as the city may reasonably require. In signing the application, the customer agrees to abide by the ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations of the city. The application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the city to serve. In the event the request for water service is approved by the city, the application shall be and become a binding contract between the consumer or property owner or both and the city, as provided in BMC 13.05.110(A).

B. Service Account Fee. Any new application for a sewer service account shall be charged, at the time of application, a nonrefundable fee, as adopted or as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. Any customer having services reinstated after forfeiture of deposit shall be charged the same nonrefundable fee prior to reinstatement of those services. 

C. Deposits and Establishment of Credit. At the time application for service is made, the applicant shall establish his credit with the city. 

1. Establishment of Credit. The credit of the applicant will be deemed established when the applicant makes a cash deposit with the city to secure the payment of bills for service. The deposit amount shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 

2. Deposits. At the time the deposit is given to the city, the applicant will be given a receipt for the same. The deposit is not to be considered as a payment on account. In the event the service is discontinued, the deposit will be applied to the closing bill and any amount in excess of the closing bill will be refunded. The city will not pay interest on any deposit. 

3. Forfeiture of Deposit. If an account becomes delinquent and it is necessary to turn off the service, the deposit shall be applied to the unpaid balance due. Water service will not be restored to that premises or that customer at different premises until all outstanding bills due the city have been paid and the cash deposit replaced, together with a service charge as provided in the rate resolution adopted by the city council. 

D. Application Amendments. Customers desiring a material change in the size, character, or extent of equipment or operation which would result in a material change in the amount of water used shall give the city written notice of such change prior to the change and the application for service shall be amended and the amendment subject to approval of the city. [Ord. 12-O-697 § 2; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 11.] 


13.05.100 Location and ownership of lines. 

A. Locations of Extensions. The city will make water main extensions only on rights-of-way, easements, or publicly owned property. Easements or permits secured for main extensions shall either be obtained in the name of the city of Brookings or transferred to the city of Brookings, along with all rights and title to the main at the time the service is provided to the customers paying for this extension. 

B. Every property owner shall install his own pipe line from his property line onto his premises and shall install his own valve in his own pipe line for the control of water service to his premises. The city shall be the owner of all service lines and mains located inside or outside the city limits, whether original installations or extensions or enlargements and whether paid for by the city or paid for by the consumer, and the city shall maintain, repair and replace the service lines, mains and meters within the city at the city’s expense. The city shall be the owner of all meters. 

C. Outside the City Limits. Water mains outside the city limits shall be extended only at the expense of the customers served. The main extensions shall become the property of the city at the time installed. The city council shall determine the size of the main extensions and all extensions shall be of a suitable material approved by the city council. Extensions outside the city limits shall be installed by the city or by contractors approved by the city. The installation procedures and materials used shall be in accordance with the city and the state of Oregon standards. 

D. Service lines, mains, meters, pumps, tanks and all appurtenances located outside the city shall be maintained by the city at the sole cost and expense of the customers served thereby and at no cost or expense to the city. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 12.] 


13.05.110 Contracts. 

A. In case the premises of the applicant for water service are connected for water service as a result of his application being accepted, the application given in writing shall be considered as a binding contract in which the applicant agrees to abide by such rates, ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations as are in effect at the time of signing the application, or as may be adopted or modified thereafter by the city, and to pay all bills promptly. 

B. The city reserves the right to make special contracts, the provisions and conditions of which are different from or have exceptions to the regular published schedules. When the consumer’s requirements for water are unusual or large, or necessitate considerable special or reserve equipment, or capacity or special rates, the city may also require the consumer to furnish security satisfactory to the city to protect the city against loss and to guarantee the performance of the provisions of the contract. Special contracts shall be in writing and signed by the proper consumer and the mayor, after a resolution authorizing such contract shall have been passed by a majority vote of the city council; provided however, that temporary contracts may be entered into by the city subject to the approval of the city council at its next council meeting. 

C. Except for special contracts which specify the length of time to which the contract rate shall be extended, all rates, ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations are subject to change or modification by the city without notice. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 13.] 


13.05.120 Responsibility and service preferences. 

A. The city shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the consumer’s lines, plumbing or equipment, and the city may, without further notice, discontinue service to any consumer when a defective condition of plumbing or equipment upon the premises of the consumer results, or is likely to cause contamination of the water. The city does not assume the duty of inspecting the consumer’s line, plumbing and equipment, and shall not be responsible therefor, and will not be liable for failure of consumer to receive service on account of defective plumbing or apparatus on the consumer’s premises, or for excessive consumption. 

B. The city, whenever it shall find it necessary for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system shall have the right to suspend temporarily the delivery of water.

C. The city will exercise reasonable diligence and care to furnish and deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of pure water to the consumer, and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery of same. The city will not be liable for high or low pressure conditions, chemical or bacteriological conditions, interruption or shortage or insufficiency of supply, or any loss or damage occasioned thereby. The use of water upon the premises of the consumer is at the risk of the consumer, and the responsibility of the city shall cease at the point of delivery of water. Unless otherwise specified in agreement, the point of delivery shall be the point where the city’s service line attaches to the consumer’s line. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 14.] 


13.05.130 Services. 

A. Ownership, Installation, and Maintenance. The city shall own, install, and maintain all services and installation and maintenance shall only be performed by authorized employees or contractors approved by the city. The customer shall own, install, and maintain the customer service line. 

B. Service Connection Charge. At the time the applicant files for service where no service previously existed, or if he is filing for a change in service size or location, he shall submit with his application the service connection charge. This charge is to cover the actual cost to the city to install the service from the main to and including the meter and the meter housing. The service connection charge shall be as determined by the city in the current published water rate schedule. 

C. Size of Service. The city will furnish and install a service of such size and at such locations as the applicant requests, provided such requests are reasonable and that the size requested is one that is listed by the city. The minimum size of service shall be three-fourths inch. The city may refuse to install a service line which is undersized or oversized as determined by the city. 

D. Changes in Service Size. Permanent changes in the size of the service line requested by the customer shall be paid by the customer on the basis of actual cost to the city for making the change. 

E. Length of Service Lines. Where the main is in a public right-of-way, the meter will be placed at the right-of-way line nearest the property to be served for the standard connection fee, provided the length of service line does not exceed the width of the right-of-way.

Where the main is on an easement or publicly owned property other than designated rights-of-way, the services shall be installed to the boundary of the easement or public property by the city, provided the length of service does not exceed 30 feet.

If, in either case cited above, the length of service line to the meter location exceeds the maximum stated, the applicant shall pay the extra cost of the line on the basis of actual cost to the city for labor, materials, and equipment plus 15 percent for administration and overhead. 

F. Joint Service Connections. The city may, at its option, serve two or more premises with one connection. On new service connections, the inside diameter of such joint lines shall be sufficient to provide a carrying capacity not less than the combined capacity of individual service lines of the same size as the meters installed.

Service extensions from an existing service to occupancies or ownerships other than that for which the existing service was intended shall not be permitted nor shall separate residences be permitted to receive service through one meter except under special considerations approved by the city council. 

G. Number of Service Connections on Premises. The owner of a single parcel of property properly zoned for multifamily residential purposes may apply for and receive as many services as he and his tenants may be entitled to, provided his application or applications meet the requirements of the policies, ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations and the development regulations of the city. 

H. Standby Fire Protection Service Connections. 

1. Purpose. Standby fire protection service connections of two-inch size and larger will be installed only if adequate provisions are made to prevent the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing. Sealed fire sprinkler systems with water-operated alarms shall be considered as having such provisions. The city may require that a suitable detector check meter be installed in the standby fire protection service connections, to which hose lines or hydrants are connected. All piping on the customer’s premises shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the state of Oregon. 

2. Charges for Service. Charges for standby fire protection service will be stated in the published water rate schedule. No charge will be made for water used in the standby fire protection services for routine testing of the fire protection system. The customers shall pay the full cost of the standby fire protection service connection, any required detector check meters, together with any required special water meter installed for the service to the standby connection. 

3. Violations of Regulations. If water is used from a standby pipe connection service in violation of these regulations, an estimate of the amount used will be computed by the city. The customer shall pay for the water used at the regular rates, including the minimum charge based on the size of the service connection and subsequent bills rendered on the basis of the regular water rates. 

J. Fire Service Connections Other Than Standby. A service having fire protection facilities on the premises and water for other purposes flowing through the same service connection shall be considered as an ordinary service and metered as such. All water used through that service, regardless of its use, will be charged at the regular rates. 

K. Temporary Service Connections. Temporary service connections shall be made at the discretion of the city and according to the following terms and conditions: 

1. Time Limit. Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the city. 

2. Charge for Water Served. Charges for water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be at the established rates set forth in the current water rate schedule. 

3. Installation Charge and Deposits. The applicant for temporary service will be required: 

a. To pay the city, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and removing all facilities necessary to furnish each service;

b. To deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during the entire period such temporary service may be used, or to otherwise establish credit approved by the city; and 

c. To deposit with the city an amount equal to the value of any equipment loaned by the city to such applicant.

4. Responsibility for Meters and Installation. The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities of the city. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be deducted from the deposit refund. If the loaned materials are returned in satisfactory condition and all bills paid, the full amount of the equipment deposit will be returned to the temporary customer at the termination of service. 

L. Customer’s Plumbing. 

1. Plumbing Code. The customer’s plumbing, which shall include the customer’s service line and all plumbing, piping, fixtures, and other appurtenances carrying or intended to carry water, sewer, or drainage, shall comply with the plumbing code of the state of Oregon. 

2. Control Valves. Customers shall install a suitable control valve in the customer service line as close to the meter as possible, the operation of which will control the entire water supply to the premises served. In the event a customer’s service is discontinued for any reason, a control valve must be installed, if none exists, as provided by this section. It shall be a violation of these ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations for the customer to operate, cause, or permit unauthorized operation of the meter stop or any appurtenances on the service connection. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 15.] 


13.05.140 Meters. 

A. Each separate house, mobile home, apartment house, store, business building, commercial building, factory, mill, recreational vehicle park, campground, hotel or motel (hereinafter referred to as “building”) which uses (or will be serviced by) water from the municipal water system shall be provided with a separate water meter for each such building; and two or more buildings, even though upon the same premises or owned by the same person, shall not be serviced by the same meter. The city shall install a meter or meters at each such building, and such meter or meters shall be installed before any water is furnished to such building. This subsection applies both to buildings already constructed or under construction and to buildings hereafter constructed. The legal owner (and, if any, contract purchaser) of a premises already serviced which requires any additional meter for any additional building shall make application for such meter and pay a fee which shall from time to time be designated by the city for such additional meter at said premises. 

B. The city shall determine the size of the meter, and the size and kind of pipe in connection with each extension. The city shall determine the location of the tap to the main and also the meter location. 

C. Subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section shall not apply to real property located outside the city limits of Brookings. A prospective consumer desiring service to a premises outside the city limits shall make application to the city council therefor; the application shall be accompanied by an application fee which shall from time to time be designated by the city (to be paid in addition to the deposit required by BMC 13.05.090, and in addition to the cost of such extension as hereinafter mentioned). The city council may, at its option, reject such application for reason of insufficient supply or pressure or for inability of the system to provide fire protection. If the application is granted, the city shall construct any portion of such extension which is located inside the city limits and the prospective consumer shall pay the actual cost of said portion of such extension (said payment to be made before any water is furnished) and the prospective consumer shall build and maintain all water lines located outside the city limits. The city shall install a meter for each consumer before water is furnished, but the city may permit more than one building outside the city limits to be serviced by the same meter. 

D. Ownership. The city will own and maintain all water meters. The city will not pay rent or any other charge for a meter or other water facilities, including housing and connections on a customer’s premises. 

E. Installation. Installation of water meters shall be performed only by authorized employees of the city. All meters shall be sealed by the city at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of its authorized employees. 

F. The Size and Type of Meter. Applicant may request and receive any size meter regularly stocked or furnished by the city; provided the request is reasonable; and further provided, that the meter is not greatly oversized or undersized, as determined by the city. The city reserves the right to determine the type of meter to be installed. 

G. Location of Meters. Meters shall normally be placed at the curb or property lines; the meter will be installed wherever the applicant desires within reason, but the location must be approved by the city. The meters will not be located in driveways or other locations where damage to the meter or its related parts may occur. 

H. Joint Use of Meters. The joining of several customers to take advantage of the single minimum charges and large quantity rates shall be prohibited. 

I. Changes in Size or Location. If, for any reason, a change in the size of a meter and service is required, the installation will be accomplished on the basis of a new connection, and the customer’s application shall be so amended. Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated only at the customer’s expense. 

J. Meter Accuracy. All meters will be tested prior to installation. No meter will be placed in service or allowed to remain in service which is suspected or known to have an error in registration in excess of two percent under conditions of normal operation. 

K. Meter Test. 

1. Standard Test. Meter tests will be conducted in accordance with standards of practice established by the American Water Works Association. 

2. On Customer Request. A customer may, giving not less than seven days’ notice, request the city to test the meter serving his premises. The city will require the customer to deposit the testing fee. This fee shall be an amount as adopted or as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. The deposit will be returned to the customer if the test reveals the meter to over-register more than two percent under conditions of normal operation. If the meter is operating satisfactorily or if the meter under-registers more than two percent under the standard test conditions, the deposit shall be retained by the city. Customers may, at their option, witness any meter tests which they request. 

3. On City Request. If, upon comparison of past water usage, it appears that a meter is not registering properly, the city may, at its option, test the meter and adjust the charges accordingly if the meter either over-registers or under-registers. No charge for meter testing will be made to the customer for the meter test under these conditions. 

L. Adjustment of Bills for Meter Error. 

1. No credits or debits will be borne by the city or the customer should the tested meter show variance high or low from the accuracy defined in subsection (K)(2) of this section. 

2. Nonregistering Meters. The city will bill the customer for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer’s prior use during the same season of the year, or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same season and under similar circumstances and conditions. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 16.] 


13.05.150 Water rates.

The rates, fees, and other charges to be charged by the city of Brookings to the users of any of its water supply services or facilities shall be as adopted or as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 17.] 


13.05.160 Notices. 

A. Notices to Customers. Notices from the city to the customer will normally be given in writing and either mailed or delivered to him at his last known address. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, the city may notify either by telephone or messenger. 

B. Notices from Customers. Notices from the customer to the city may be given by the customer or his authorized representative orally or in writing to City Hall or to an agent of the city duly authorized to receive notices or complaints. 

C. Notice to Shut Off Water. Each consumer about to vacate any premises or who desires water service discontinued for any other reason, shall give written notice of his desire, specifying the date service is to be discontinued; otherwise, he will be held responsible for the payment for all water supplied to such premises until the city shall have notice of such discontinuance. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 18.] 


13.05.170 Billing and payment. 

A. Liability for Payment. All bills for water service shall be charged against the applicant for water service. The applicant shall be held liable for the payment of such service, together with such fines and penalties as may accrue against the same by reason of any of the provisions of this chapter. In the event that the customer is not the property owner, the property owner may also be held liable for the charges under the provisions of this chapter. Service will not be provided to the same premises or to the same customer, at any other premises, until all delinquent charges have been paid in full.

B. Meter Readings. Meters will be read and customers billed on the basis of the meter reading to the nearest cubic foot. The city will keep an accurate account on its books of all readings of meters and such account, so kept, shall be offered at all times, places, and courts as prima facie evidence of the use of water service by the customer. 

C. Rendering of Bills. 

1. Billing Period. All meters shall be read and bills rendered therefor monthly. 

2. Bills for Other Than Normal Billing Period. Opening or closing bills, or bills that for any other reason cover a period containing 10 percent more days or 10 percent less days than in the normal billing period, shall be prorated. 

3. Bills for More Than One Meter. All meters supplying a customer’s premises shall be billed separately, except that where the city has, for operating purposes, installed two or more meters in place of one, the reading may be combined for billing. 

D. Disputed Bills. When a customer disputes the correctness of a bill, he shall deposit the amount of the disputed bill at the time the complaint is lodged, to preclude discontinuance of service pending final settlement of the bill or bills. Subsequent bills shall be paid or placed on deposit in a similar manner. Failure of the customer to make such a deposit shall warrant discontinuance of service, as provided under BMC 13.05.190. 

E. Failure to Read Meters. In the event that it shall be impossible or impractical to read a meter on the regular reading date, the water consumption shall be prorated on the basis of 30 days per month and the total water consumption for billing purposes for that period shall be estimated. 

F. Payment of Bills. Each bill rendered shall contain the final date on which payment is due. If the bill is not paid by that date, the account shall be considered delinquent unless other arrangements have been made with the city in writing that specify another due date. 

G. Delinquent Accounts. 

1. Delinquent and Turn-Off Notice. At the end of each month, a delinquent notice will be sent, which will include late fee. Said notice shall state a date on which water will be turned off if delinquent account is not paid in full prior thereto. If customer is different than property owner, delinquent notice will also be sent to the property owner at the address where real property taxes are sent.

2. Service Turn-Off. On the turn-off date, the meter reader or other agent of the city of Brookings shall deliver a written notice to the customer stating that the water service is being turned off until all delinquent amounts have been paid. The meter reader or other agent of the city shall immediately thereafter turn off the service. A delivery to the premises served by the meter shall be considered a delivery to the customer. 

3. Service Charge. In all instances where water has been turned off because of delinquent accounts, a service charge shall be made for the restoration of services and replacement of the cash deposit, as stated in BMC 13.05.090(B). The service charge will be an amount as adopted or as amended from time to time by the city council. 

H. Installment Payments of Delinquent Accounts. In cases of extreme hardship, the city recorder shall have the discretion of renewing service to a delinquent account upon receipt of a satisfactory installment plan for the payment of the overdue amount, such installment period not to exceed the period of time the account was delinquent. Failure to meet installment payments as agreed shall result in immediate termination of service without additional notice. 

I. Nonpayment of Bills. 

1. A customer’s water service may be discontinued if the water bill is not paid in accordance with the procedures listed in this section of these ordinances, resolutions, and applicable rules and regulations.

2. Liens. In the event any of the fees or charges provided by this chapter are not paid promptly when due, the city recorder is authorized to enter the amount of such charges immediately in the docket of city liens as a lien against the real property described in the application for the sanitary sewer connection. Payment made by a check which is not honored by the customer’s bank constitutes a continuing delinquency from the posted past-due date. 

3. The city may refuse service to applicant(s) for nonpayment of bills on another property. [Ord. 12-O-697 § 2; Ord. 02-O-553 § 1; Ord. 02-O-190.D § 2; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 19.] 


13.05.180 Charges – Appeal procedures. 

A. All rates and charges for water service shall be due and payable by the recipient thereof and/or the owner of the property to which the same is supplied within 10 days after the first day of each month, and if not paid within 20 days after the first day of each month, water services to the premises shall be disconnected. 

B. Any person or persons who contest any charge as being excessive or complain of being charged for services not rendered or seek to protest a refusal of water service or a proposed termination of water services as being unjustified shall have the right, after paying the contested bill or charge in full, to request in writing an informal hearing before the city manager or his designee any time within 15 days after the first day of the month when the billing becomes due. The city manager shall, upon receipt of the request for hearing, immediately schedule an informal hearing to be held at the City Hall, at which time the person protesting shall be given the opportunity to present evidence in support of his position. The city manager shall take evidence from the city clerk or his/her designee as to the reasonableness, fairness, and validity of the charges and shall render his decision within 24 hours after closing the hearing and shall notify the complainant of his decision. 

C. If the person so protesting feels aggrieved by the decision of the city manager, he/she may appeal that decision to the city council so long as said appeal is filed, in writing, with the city clerk within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the city manager. After an appeal has been filed, the city council shall notify the complainant of the time and place that it shall consider the appeal, and the complainant shall have the right to be present at the appeal. The city council shall give full consideration to the evidence presented by the complainant and by the city and shall render its decision after discussion of the same and shall notify the complainant of its decision. 

D. No water services shall be terminated during the course of the hearing or appeal procedure described in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. 

E. Once water service is disconnected, the person or persons desiring resumption of water services shall pay all amounts due and owing the city, and a reconnection fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council, together with all arrearages due and owing the city, before service shall be resumed. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 20.] 


13.05.190 Discontinuance of service. 

A. On Customer Request. Each customer about to vacate any premises supplied with water service by the city shall give the city written notice of his intentions at least two days prior thereto, specifying the date service is to be discontinued; otherwise, he will be responsible for all water supplied to such premises until the city shall receive notice of such removal. At the time specified by the customer that he expects to vacate the premises where service is supplied or that he desires service to be discontinued, the meter will be read and a bill rendered which is payable immediately. In no case will the bill be less than the monthly base rate. 

B. Nonpayment of Sewer and Water Service Charges. If the sewer service charges provided for in Chapter 13.15 BMC are not paid when due by any such person, firm, or corporation whose premises are served or who are subject to the charges herein provided, water service provided to that customer by the city may be discontinued because of the default in the payment of the sewer service charges. As an additional alternative method of collection, if such rates and charges are not paid when due by any such person, firm, or corporation, the amounts so unpaid may be certified by the city recorder to the county assessor of Curry County, Oregon, and shall be by him assessed against the premises served as provided by law and shall be collected and paid over to the city in the same manner as other taxes are assessed, collected, and paid over, with interest. Interest on unpaid bills shall run from the due date thereof at the rate adopted by resolution of the city council. Such unpaid charges may also be recovered in an action at law in the name of the city, with interest as aforesaid. 

C. Improper Customer Facilities, Unsafe Facilities. The city may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue services to any premises without prior notice where plumbing facilities, appliances, or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe, or not in conformity with the plumbing code of the state of Oregon. 

D. Water Waste. Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer’s premises, seriously affecting the general service, the city may discontinue service if such conditions are not corrected after due notice by the city. 

E. Service Detrimental to Others. The city may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demands by one customer will result in inadequate service to others. 

F. Fraud or Abuse. The city will refuse or discontinue service to any premises where it is deemed necessary to protect the city from fraud or abuse. Discontinuance of service from one or both of these causes will be made immediately upon receipt of knowledge by the city that the condition or conditions exist. 

G. Unauthorized Turn-On. Where water service has been discontinued for any reason and the water is turned on by the customer or other unauthorized person, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed. The charges for shutting off the water at the main or removing the meter shall be computed at actual cost to the city plus 15 percent overhead, but not less than $50.00. These charges shall be billed to the offending customer and water shall not be furnished to the premises or customer until such charges are paid and the city has reasonable assurance that the violation will not reoccur. 

H. Noncompliance with Regulations. The city may, without notice, discontinue service to a customer’s premises for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, the city’s resolutions, and regulations of the city where such failure to comply constitutes a threat to public health, safety or general welfare. [Ord. 13-O-709 § 2; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 21.]


13.05.195 Water quality – Cross connection control program.

A. Definitions.

1. “Auxiliary supply” means any water source or system other than the city of Brookings water system. 

2. “Approved backflow prevention assembly” or “backflow assembly” or “assembly” means an assembly to counteract back-pressure and/or prevent back-siphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the Oregon Health Authority. 

3. “Backflow” means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city of Brookings. 

4. “Certified backflow assembly tester” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Oregon Health Authority to be a tester in the state of Oregon. 

5. “Certified cross connection control specialist” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Oregon Health Authority to be a specialist in the state of Oregon. 

6. “City water system” shall refer to and mean the city of Brookings water system, maintained by the city of Brookings, which shall include wells, treatment mechanisms or processes, pumping stations, reservoirs, supply trunk or feeder lines, service lines, meters and all other appurtenances, device lines and items necessary to the operation of the system and to supply water service to individual property or premises and shall include the city of Brookings potable water with which the system is supplied. 

7. “Contamination” means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water. 

8. “Cross connection” means any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nondrinkable water system or auxiliary system, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers or any other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices or other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow may occur, are considered to be cross connections. 

9. “Degree of hazard” means the non-health hazard or health hazard classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross connections.

10. “Double check valve backflow prevention assembly,” “double check assembly,” “double check” or “DCVA” means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a resilient seated shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. 

11. “Double check detector assembly” or “DCDA” means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. It shall also be provided with a factory bypass arrangement with a meter and a minimum of an approved double check assembly. 

12. “Health hazard” means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical, chemical or biological nature to the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system that would be a danger to health. 

13. “In-premises protection” means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer’s water system at or near the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 

14. “Mobile units” shall mean units that are temporary in nature, connecting to the water system through a legally-permitted hydrant, hose bibb, or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the city of Brookings water system or a permanent water service to a premises. Examples can include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units or tanks, waste hauler’s trucks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/concrete batch plants or any other mobile equipment or vessel that poses a threat of backflow in the city of Brookings water system. Uses that are excluded from this definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance with other city of Brookings policies pertaining to recreational vehicles and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other provisions of this, or other, city of Brookings policies pertaining to provision of water service to a premises. 

15. “Non-health hazard” shall mean the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that could allow a substance that may be objectionable, but not hazardous to one’s health, to backflow into the potable water supply. 

16. “OHA” shall mean Oregon Health Authority. 

17. “OAR” shall mean Oregon Administrative Rule. 

18. “Person(s)” shall mean a natural person (individual), corporation, company, city, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture company or city, and other such entity. 

19. “Pollution hazard” means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system, but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances. 

20. “Premises” means any piece of property to which water service is provided, including, but not limited to, all improvements, mobile structures and other structures located upon it. 

21. “Premises isolation” means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the premises. This location will be at or near the property line and downstream from the service connection meter. 

22. “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” or “reduced pressure principle assembly” or “RP assembly” shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time, below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off valves. 

23. “Reduced pressure detector assembly” or “RPDA” shall mean an approved assembly consisting of two approved reduced pressure backflow assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. The assembly should include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut off valves. 

24. “Resident” means a person or persons living within the area(s) served by the city of Brookings water system. 

25. “Retrofitting” means to furnish a service connection with parts or equipment made available after the time of construction or assembly installation. 

26. “Specialist” means an Oregon Health Authority-certified cross connection specialist, either employed with the city of Brookings or contracted by the city of Brookings. 

27. “SOP manual” shall mean the city’s standard cross connection control program operating procedures and guidance manual. 

28. “Submerged heads” means irrigation sprinkling or delivery devices that are located below the surface of the landscaped area in which they are installed. 

29. “Supervisor” shall mean the public works supervisor or his/her designee. 

30. “Thermal expansion” means the pressure created by the expansion of heated water. 

31. “Unapproved substance” means any substance, gas, or liquid other than the city’s drinking water or the city’s used drinking water. 

32. “Used water” means any water supplied by the city to a customer’s property after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the city. 

B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the water supply and distribution system of the city of Brookings from contamination or pollution due to any existing or potential cross connections and to comply with OAR Chapter 333-061 or as amended.

C. Application and Responsibilities. This section applies throughout the city of Brookings water system and to every premises and property served by the city of Brookings water system. It applies to all premises, regardless of date of connection to the city of Brookings water system. Every owner, occupant or person in control of any concerned premises is responsible for the terms and provisions contained in this section.

D. Cross Connections Regulated.

1. No cross connections shall be created, installed, used or maintained within the area(s) served by the city of Brookings water system, except in accordance with this section.

2. The specialist shall carry out or cause surveys to be carried out to determine if any actual or potential cross connection exists. If found necessary, an assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required at the service connection. 

3. The owner, occupant or person in control of any given premises is responsible for all cross connection control within the premises. 

4. All premises found in OAR 333-061-0070, Table 48, shall install a reduced pressure backflow assembly at the service connection in accordance with this section. 

5. It is the responsibility of the property owner to purchase, install, test, repair and maintain all backflow assemblies. 

6. If there is a change in ownership of any and all property within the city’s service area, it shall be the responsibility of the new owner to determine that all assemblies are in compliance with this section. 

E. Backflow Prevention Assembly Requirements.

1. A specialist employed by, or under contract with, the city of Brookings, shall determine     the type of backflow assemblies to be installed within the city of Brookings water system. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection unless it is determined by the specialist and approved by the supervisor that in-premises protection would be adequate. Such in-premises protection must be installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code. 

2. An approved assembly shall be required for all premises identified in OAR 333-061-0070, Table 48. 

3. Premises with cross connections not listed or defined in Table 48 shall be individually evaluated by a specialist. The city shall require the installation of an approved assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard on the premises, as defined in OAR 333-061-0070, Table 49. Any such premises shall be required to install an approved assembly under the following circumstances: 

a. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into potable water system, the potable water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

b. When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity at premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 

c. When a premises has one or more cross connections, as that term is defined in subsection (A) of this section. 

d. When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable. 

e. When intricate plumbing arrangements are present making it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist. 

f. When the premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established. 

g. When entry is restricted to the premises and where the survey report form indicated a possible cross connection may exist. 

h. When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result. 

i. When an appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the city of Brookings supervisor. 

j. Any and all used water return systems. 

k. If an in-premises assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this section, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection. 

l. There is piping or equipment for conveying liquids other than potable city of Brookings water and that piping or other equipment is under pressure and installed and operated in a manner that could cause a cross connection. 

m. When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by a specialist to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this section and OAR 333-061-0070. 

n. The use of any type of chemical spray attachment connected to the premises plumbing, including garden hose fertilizers and pesticide applicators, is not allowed within the city of Brookings water system without proper protection from the potential of backflow occurring. 

o. The use of any type of radiator flush kits attached to the premises plumbing is not allowed within the city of Brookings water system without proper protection from backflow occurring. 

p. Wherever reclaimed water or separate irrigation water is used on premises. 

q. When there is a premises with an auxiliary water supply which has the potential to be interconnected to the city of Brookings water service or supply system. 

4. When a premises is required to install an approved assembly, the city shall: 

a. Ensure the approved assembly is installed at a location adjacent to the service connection or point of delivery; and

b. Ensure any alternate location used must be with the approval of the city and must meet the city’s cross connection control requirements. 

5. When a premises is required to install an approved assembly, the premises owner shall:

a. Ensure no cross connections exist between the point of delivery from the city water system and the approved backflow prevention assemblies, when these are installed in an alternate location; and

b. Assume responsibility for testing, maintenance, and repair of the installed approved backflow prevention assembly to protect against the hazard.

F. Discontinuation of Water Service – Noncompliance with Program. Water service may be disconnected to a premises for any of the following reasons:

1. Failure to remove or eliminate an existing unprotected or potential cross connection;

2. Failure to install a required approved backflow prevention assembly;

3. Failure to maintain an approved backflow prevention assembly; or

4. Failure to conduct the required testing of an approved backflow prevention assembly.

G. Retrofitting. Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or potential cross connection exists, and wherever else the city of Brookings deems retrofitting necessary to comply with the OAR, this section and the city’s SOP manual.

H. Irrigation Systems. All irrigation systems shall be protected according to the Uniform Plumbing Code. In the event any system is equipped with an injector system, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection. 

I. Thermal Expansion. If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, or other appurtenances, it is the responsibility of the property owner, the occupant, or person in control of the property to eliminate the possibility of damage from thermal expansion in accordance with the plumbing code. The city will notify the premises owner and water user, in writing, of thermal expansion concerns. 

J. Mobile Units – Portable Water Trucks. Any mobile unit or apparatus, as defined in subsection (A)(14) of this section, which uses the water from any premises within the city of Brookings water system, shall first obtain a business license from the city of Brookings and be inspected to assure an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle assembly is installed on the unit.

K. Installation Requirements.

1. All backflow prevention assembly installations shall follow the requirements as stipulated by the city of Brookings SOP manual and OAR Chapter 333, Division 061. 

2. If the premises isolation assembly is allowed to be installed at an alternate location, the city of Brookings must have access to the assembly. No connections can be made between the meter and the backflow assembly. 

3. The type of backflow prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists and must, at all times, meet the standards of the Oregon Health Authority. All backflow prevention assemblies required under this section shall be of a type and model approved by the OHA. 

L. Pressure Loss. Any decrease in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city of Brookings.

M. Fire Systems. An approved double check detector assembly shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through. A reduced pressure principle detector assembly must be installed, if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system.

Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:

1. Where improper maintenance has occurred;

2. On all health hazard systems;

3. Wherever required by the OAR.

In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a detector assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required. 

N. Temporary Meters and Hydrant Valves. Backflow protection will be required on all temporary meters and hydrant valves before any use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard and will be determined on a case-by-case basis by a city of Brookings specialist.

O. Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code. As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the Uniform Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as amended. If there is a conflict between this section and the Code, the Code shall prevail.

P. Right-of-Way Encroachment Permit. All backflow assemblies must be installed in accordance with BMC Title 18, Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. Applicants proposing to install their backflow device in the city right-of-way must obtain and comply with a “right to use” permit. 

Q. Access to Premises. For premises where surveys indicate a possible cross connection, authorized personnel of the city of Brookings, with proper identification and not less than 48 hours’ notice, shall have access during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. to all parts of a premises and within the structure to which water is supplied. However, if any owner, occupant or person in control refuses authorized personnel access to a premises, or to the interior of a structure, during these hours for inspection, a reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection to that premises.

R. Annual Testing and Repairs. All backflow prevention assemblies installed within the area(s) receiving water service from the city of Brookings shall be tested immediately upon installation, and at least annually thereafter by an OHA certified backflow assembly tester. All such assemblies found not functioning properly shall be promptly repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises. In the event an assembly is moved, repaired or replaced it must be retested immediately. All repairs on backflow assemblies within the city of Brookings service area must be performed according to all state and county regulations.

S. Responsibilities of Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers.

1. All backflow assembly testers operating within the city of Brookings water system service area shall be certified in accordance with all applicable regulations of the OHA and must abide by the requirements of this section and the city’s SOP manual. 

2. Persons certified as backflow assembly testers shall agree to abide by all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) and Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OR-OSHA”). 

3. It is the responsibility of backflow assembly testers to submit records of all backflow assembly test reports to the city of Brookings within 10 days of completing the test. 

4. All backflow assembly testers providing service to premises served with city of Brookings water are required to have a current Brookings business license.

T. Costs of Compliance. All costs associated with purchase, installation, surveys, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts and repairs of the backflow prevention assembly, and all costs associated with enforcement of this section are the financial responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises.

U. Recovery of Costs. Any water customer violating any of the provisions of this section and who causes damage to or impairs the city of Brookings water system, including, but not limited to, allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution or used water to enter the city of Brookings water system, shall be liable to the city of Brookings for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation. The city of Brookings shall collect from the violator the cost incurred by the city of Brookings for any cleaning, purifying, repair or replacement work or any other expenses caused by the violation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be resolved by enforcement as provided in BMC 8.15.090, General abatement procedure. 

V. Termination of Service.

1. Failure on the part of any owner, occupant or person in control of the premises to install a required assembly, have it tested a minimum of annually and repaired if necessary, and/or to discontinue the use of all cross connections and to physically separate cross connections in accordance with this section is sufficient cause for the discontinuance of public water service to the premises pursuant to OAR 333-061-0070, or as amended. In the case of an extreme emergency or where an immediate threat to life or public health is found to exist, discontinuance or termination of public water service to the premises shall be immediate. 

2. In lieu of termination of service, the city of Brookings may, at the property owner’s expense, have installed a reduced pressure assembly at the meter based on the level of risk. Testing, maintenance and repair of the assembly will be the responsibility of the property owner. 

W. Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this section, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any backflow assembly, device or method required under this section shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law.

X. Constitutionality and Saving Clause. Should any provision, section, sentence, clause or phrase of this section, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances, are for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void, invalid, or for any reason unenforceable, the validity of the remaining portions of this section, or its application to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected; thereby, it being the intent of the city of Brookings water system in adopting and approving the ordinance codified in this section that no portion hereof or provision or regulation contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion, provision, or regulation. [Ord. 13-O-709 § 3.]


13.05.200 Restoration of service.

Restoration of service after discontinuance for nonpayment of bills shall be made after payment of current and past due charges plus a restoration charge established by the city council and posting a deposit as hereinbefore provided. Restoration of service after discontinuance of service for unsafe facilities, water waste, fraud, abuse, or for noncompliance with any of the policies, rules, or regulations will only be made after the irregularity has been corrected and the city has been assured that the irregularity will not reoccur. The restoration charge shall be in addition to all other charges due or past due that the city may have incurred to correct the irregularity. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 22.] 


13.05.210 Unusual demands.

When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool, construction, fire suppression, log pond, or for other purposes, arrangements must be made with the city prior to taking such water. Permission to take water in unusual quantities will be given only if the city facilities and other consumers are not inconvenienced. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 23.] 


13.05.220 Access to property.

A. All duly appointed employees of the city, under the direction of the city manager, shall have free access at all reasonable hours of the day to any and all parts of structures and premises in which water is or may be delivered or used for the purposes of inspecting connection, the conditions of conduits, appliances and fixtures, and the manner and extent in which the water is being used. The city does not, however, assume the duty of inspecting the customer’s line, plumbing, and equipment, and shall not be responsible therefor.

B. Water Meter Obstruction. Overgrown shrubs, vines, plants or landscape materials shall not obstruct access to water meters for inspection, reading and testing. [Ord. 07-O-590 § 3; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 24.] 


13.05.230 Responsibility for equipment. 

A. Responsibility for Customer Equipment. The city shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the customer’s line, plumbing, equipment, or appliances, nor shall the city be liable for loss or damage due to interruption of service or temporary changes in pressure. The customer shall be responsible for valves on his premises being turned off when the water service is reconnected and turned on. 

B. Responsibility for City Equipment. City equipment on the customer’s premises remains the property of the city and may be repaired, replaced, or removed by the city employees at any time without consent of the customer. No payment will be made to the property owner for the right to install, maintain, replace, or remove city equipment on his premises. The property owner must keep vicious dogs or other animals secured or confined to avoid interference with the utility operation and maintenance. 

C. Damage to City Equipment. The customer shall be liable for any damage to equipment owned by the city which is caused by an act of the customer, his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, or permittees. Damage to equipment shall include but not be limited to breaking of seals and locks, tampering with meters, injury to meters, including but not limited to damages by hot water or steam, and damaged meter boxes, curb stops, meter stops, and other service appurtenances. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 25.] 


13.05.240 Fire hydrants. 

A. Operation. No person or persons other than those designated and authorized by the city shall open any fire hydrant belonging to the city, attempt to draw water from it, or in any manner damage or tamper with it. Any violation of this regulation will be prosecuted according to law. No tool other than special hydrant wrenches shall be used to operate a hydrant valve. In cases where a temporary service has been granted and receives water through a fire hydrant, an auxiliary external valve will be provided to control the flow of water. 

B. Moving a Fire Hydrant. When a fire hydrant has been installed in the locations specified by the proper authority, the city has fulfilled its obligation. If a property owner or other party desires to change the size, type, or location of the hydrant, he shall bear all costs of such changes. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the city and the fire department. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 26.] 


13.05.250 Water curtailment.

It is the policy of the city of Brookings to provide clean, healthful, and plentiful water to its residents. To address the impact of a potential water shortage on the city’s residents and the ability of the Chetco River to serve as a viable habitat to important fishery resources, the following rules shall apply.

A. Implementation. In order to limit water withdrawal from the Chetco River to a daily average of 5.1 cfs whenever the three-day average flow of the river is below 80 cfs, the following guideline for levels of curtailment may be implemented. The city may implement levels of curtailment at other times as determined necessary:

Grade 1: River flow is below 100 cfs and water withdrawal is above 4.5 cfs.

Grade 2: River flow is below 80 cfs and water withdrawal is above 4.5 cfs.

Grade 3: River flow is below 80 cfs and water withdrawal is above 4.7 cfs.

Grade 4: River flow is below 80 cfs and water withdrawal is above 5.0 cfs.

1. River flows shall be a three-day average using a USGS approved method of measurement conducted by a trained person and measured at a location approved by Oregon Water Resources.

2. Water withdrawal shall be a 24-hour average. Water withdrawal shall be metered and data shall be available to the public.

B. Levels of Water Curtailment.

1. Grade 1: Voluntary Curtailment.

a. Press release shall be sent to local media encouraging water conservation.

2. Grade 2: Limited Water Restrictions. The following activities or actions are restricted or prohibited under a Grade 2 water restriction:

a. Watering, sprinkling or irrigating lawn, grass or turf during the odd days of the month except:

i. New lawn, grass or turf that has been seeded or sodded 90 days prior to declaration of a water shortage may be watered as necessary until established; and

ii. High-use athletic fields that are used for organized play;

b. Watering, sprinkling or irrigating flowers, plants, shrubbery, groundcover, crops, vegetation, or trees except from 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m.;

c. Washing, wetting down, or sweeping with water, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, open ground or other hard surfaced areas except:

i. Where there is a demonstrable need in order to meet public health or safety requirements, such as (A) to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards, (B) for dust control to meet air quality requirements mandated by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality;

ii. Power washing of buildings, roofs and homes prior to painting, repair, remodeling or reconstruction, and not solely for aesthetic purposes;

d. Washing trucks, cars, trailers, tractors or other land vehicles or boats or other water-borne vehicles, except by commercial establishments or fleet washing facilities which recycle or reuse the water in their washing processes, or by bucket and hose with shut-off mechanisms except:

i. Where the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as (A) clean garbage trucks, (B) vehicles that transport food and other perishables, or (C) otherwise required by law. Owners/operators of these vehicles are encouraged to utilize establishments which recycle or reuse the water in their washing process;

e. Cleaning, filling or maintaining decorative water features, natural or manmade, including but not limited to: fountains, lakes, ponds and streams, unless the water is recirculated through the decorative water feature. Water features which do not include continuous or constant inflowing water are not included;

f. Wasting water by leaving unattended hoses running;

g. Supplying water for above or in-ground swimming pools; and

h. Other actions deemed necessary by the city manager.

3. Grade 3: Moderate Water Restrictions.

a. Where not otherwise restricted under a Grade 2 water restriction, all Grade 1 water restrictions apply;

b. Watering of any lawn, grass or turf, regardless of age or usage;

c. Watering, sprinkling or irrigating flowers, plants, shrubbery, groundcover, crops, vegetation, or trees;

d. Washing of vehicles other than in establishments which recycle their water; and

e. Power washing of buildings, regardless of purpose.

4. Grade 4: Severe Water Restrictions.

a. Where not otherwise restricted under Grade 3 water restrictions, Grade 1 and 2 water restrictions apply;

b. A maximum daily allotment of water per residential water user set by the city manager;

c. Any restriction, which is identified by the fire chief.

C. Variances. Customers not capable of immediate water restrictions shall submit a written request for a variance. The written request will be granted at the discretion of the city manager. The following information must be provided to the city in requesting a variance:

1. Name and address;

2. Purpose of water use;

3. Specific provision from which the petitioner is requesting relief;

4. Description of the relief desired;

5. Period of time for which the variance is sought;

6. Economic value of the water use;

7. Damage or harm to the petitioners or others if petitioner complies with the water restrictions;

8. Restrictions with which the petitioner can comply;

9. Steps petitioner is taking to achieve full compliance; and

10. Any other pertinent information.

D. Notification. Upon declaration of any grade of water restriction, the city manager or designee shall:

1. Mail the appropriate written notice to each service address inside and outside the city limits declaring the grade of water restriction, findings of fact and conclusions supporting the declaration, and the effective dates of the water restriction;

2. Publish the same notice in at least one local newspaper of general circulation;

3. Notify other area newspapers, radio and television stations by a press release;

4. Post the declaration at City Hall, Library, Post Office, Fire Hall and at least one other place in the city where citizens might be expected to congregate;

5. If available, place a notice on the Fire Department Reader Board;

6. Failure of any water user to receive actual notice of the declaration of a water restriction or emergency or the actions deemed necessary by the city manager or city council to address the water shortage shall not relieve the user of obeying the restrictions.

E. Enforcement.

1. Warning. Each violation shall receive a warning. The letter of warning shall be in writing, shall specify the violation, may require compliance measures, and shall be served upon the resident either personally, by office or substitute service, or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.

2. Citation. After the resident has received a warning letter, any subsequent violation shall be treated as a civil violation pursuant to BMC 13.05.270. [Ord. 16-O-757 § 7; 02-O-553 § 2.]


13.05.260 Suspension of rules.

No employee of the city is authorized to suspend or alter any of the policies, rules, and regulations cited herein without specific approval or direction of the city council, except in cases of emergency involving and imminent threat of the loss of life or property or which would place the water system operation in jeopardy. [Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 27.] 


13.05.270 Penalties. 

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-590 § 4; Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 88-O-432; Ord. 66-O-190 § 28.] 


Chapter 13.10 SEWER USE REGULATIONS

Sections:

Article I. Definitions

13.10.010    Definitions.

Article II. Public Sewer System

13.10.020    Sewer system established, controlled.

13.10.030    Council to make rules.

13.10.040    Sewer service.

13.10.050    Prohibition of service.

Article III. Use of Public Sewers Required

13.10.060    Owner required to connect to public sewer.

13.10.070    Unlawful to deposit unsanitary waste.

13.10.080    Treatment required.

13.10.090    Unlawful to construct facility for disposal of sewage.

13.10.100    Unlawful to damage equipment of sewage works.

Article IV. Public Building Sewers and Connections

13.10.110    Permit required.

13.10.120    Application form.

13.10.130    Repealed.

13.10.140    Inspection required.

13.10.150    Information required.

13.10.160    Classes of sewer permits.

13.10.170    Conditions for issuance of permits.

13.10.180    Repealed.

13.10.190    Separate sewer for each building required.

13.10.200    Conformity to city standards.

13.10.210    Repealed.

13.10.220    Groundwater or surface runoff.

13.10.230    Fees and charges for public sewer connection.

13.10.240    Installation requirements.

13.10.250    As-constructed drawings required.

13.10.260    Responsibility for sewer laterals.

13.10.265    Sewer lateral rebate program.

13.10.270    Connections outside city limits.

13.10.280    Sewer main extensions. 

Article V. Use of the Public Sewers

13.10.290    Discharges – Waters.

13.10.300    Discharges – Storm sewer use.

13.10.310    Discharges – Prohibited substances.

13.10.320    Discharges – Harmful substances.

13.10.330    City actions.

13.10.340    Pretreatment equipment approval.

13.10.350    Grease, oil and sand interceptors.

13.10.360    Pretreatment devices – Installation and maintenance.

13.10.370    Control manholes.

13.10.380    Flow measuring and monitoring.

13.10.390    Test methods.

13.10.400    Sewer line modifications – Plans approval.

Article VI. Admission of Industrial Wastes into Public Sewers

13.10.410    Approval required.

13.10.420    Industrial user designation.

13.10.430    Pretreatment.

13.10.440    Submission of information.

13.10.450    Special agreements.

Article VII. Infiltration and Inflow

13.10.460    Problem contributors identified.

13.10.470    Grace period.

13.10.480    Corrective actions required.

13.10.490    Service termination.

13.10.500    Nuisance declaration.

Article VIII. Private Sewage Disposal

13.10.510    Authorized.

13.10.520    City approval required.

13.10.530    Participation in future public improvements.

13.10.540    State permitting authority.

13.10.550    Standards.

13.10.560    Public sewer connection required.

13.10.570    Operation – City expense.

13.10.580    Additional state requirements.

13.10.590    Discontinuance of use.

Article IX. Private Building Sewers and Connection

13.10.600    Connection options.

13.10.610    Mobile home parks, trailer parks, campgrounds, etc.

13.10.620    Testing.

13.10.630    Costs, expenses.

Article X. Powers and Authority of Inspectors

13.10.640    Authorized officials.

13.10.650    Owner liability.

13.10.660    Easement work.

Article XI. Penalties

13.10.670    Violation notice – Termination.

13.10.680    Penalties. 

Article I. Definitions


13.10.010 Definitions.

“AHJ” shall mean authority having jurisdiction.

“Approving authority” shall mean the mayor and the council of the city of Brookings, or its duly authorized representative.

 “BOD” (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter.

“Building” shall mean any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 

“Building drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.

“Building sewer” shall mean the extension from a building of the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 

 “Chlorine requirement” shall mean the amount of chlorine, in parts per million by weight, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of some other objective, in accordance with procedures set forth in “standard methods.”

“City” shall mean the city of Brookings, Oregon, as represented by the city manager or his designee.

“City engineer” shall mean the city engineer of the city of Brookings, Oregon, or the city’s duly authorized agent.

“Commercial building” shall mean all buildings or premises used for any purpose other than a dwelling unit having a sewage discharge of a kind, type and volume similar to a single-family dwelling unit or multiunit residential structure including a manufactured dwelling park or recreational vehicle park, but not an industrial waste contributor. 

“Commercial user” shall mean the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises used for commercial or business purposes which is not an industrial user as defined in this article.

“Council” shall mean the city council of the city of Brookings, Oregon. 

“Design life” shall mean the period during which a treatment works is planned and designed to be operated.

“Domestic user” shall mean any person who discharges only domestic sewage, or the owner of property which is connected to the public sewer system of the city.

“Dwelling unit” shall mean each single-family dwelling unit used for permanent human habitation, including manufactured homes and recreational vehicles if so used.

“Garbage” shall mean the residue from the preparation and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.

“Ground garbage” shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

“Industrial unit” shall mean any business, occupation or enterprise having a sewage discharge which, by reason of the manufacture or industrial process involved or through services rendered, is any volume in excess of a single-family residence or is of a kind or type dissimilar to that of a single-family residence because of the discharge of chemicals or by-products of the nonresidential or industrial process. 

“Industrial user” shall mean any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the divisions cited in 40 CFR, Part 35, Section 35.2005[19].

“Industrial wastes” shall mean any nondomestic liquid, gaseous substance or semi-solid from any producing, manufacturing business or trade, or processing operation of whatever nature (as distinct from sanitary sewage), and the contents of chemical toilets, septic tanks, and wasteholding tanks.

“Infiltration” shall mean any water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections and foundation drains) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 

“Inflow” shall mean any water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.

“Manufactured dwelling” shall mean a transportable single-family dwelling conforming to the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code (also referred to as the HUD code).

“Modular home” shall mean a transportable single-family dwelling conforming to the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and Fire Life Safety Regulations, latest edition, and intended for permanent occupancy.

“Multifamily dwelling unit” shall mean any building or dwelling unit as herein defined, designed or modified to be used as two or more dwelling units.

“Operation and maintenance” shall mean activities required to assure the dependable and economical function of sewage disposal works: 

1. “Maintenance” means preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of equipment and structures. This includes preventative maintenance, corrective maintenance and replacement of equipment. 

2. “Operation” means control of the unit processes and equipment which make up the sewage disposal works. This includes administration, financial and personnel management, records, laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning. 

3. “Operation and maintenance” shall also mean “replacement.”

“Parts per million” shall mean a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.

“Person” shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, government agency, or other entity. 

“pH” shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

“Private sewer disposal system” shall mean a nonpublic sewer disposal system approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), and operated and maintained in conformity with requirements of DEQ.

“Public sewer” shall mean a sanitary sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 

“Public works director” shall mean the public works director for the city of Brookings or the city’s authorized representative.

“Recreational vehicle” shall mean a self-propelled or towable mobile designed and used for temporary dwelling purposes by nonresident travelers. 

“Recreational vehicle dumping station” shall mean a facility connected to a public sewer which accepts liquid wastes dumped from holding tanks of recreational vehicles such as travel trailers, motor homes, campers and other mobile living units where such wastes pass into the public sewer system, regardless of whether such wastes are accepted by the recreational vehicle dumping station operator with or without charge.

“Recreational vehicle park” shall mean a lot upon which two or more recreational vehicles occupied for living or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether a fee is paid for such service or accommodations.

“Replacement” shall mean obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of the sewage disposal works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.

“Residence” shall mean buildings, structures and manufactured or modular units, including recreational vehicles that are constructed and/or used primarily for single-family residential purposes.

“Sanitary sewer” shall mean a conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.

“Septic tank” shall mean a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of sewage from a sanitary private drainage system and which is so designed, constructed and operated as to separate solids from liquids, digest organic matter during a period of detention and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through an absorption facility, all of which must be located upon and within the site or property which it serves.

“Service charge” or “user charge” shall mean the monthly fee charged for service to all users of the public sewer system.

“Sewage” shall mean the water-carried human and animal wastes from residences, buildings and industrial establishments or other sources together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present.

“Sewage disposal works” also referred to as “treatment works” shall mean all facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage and industrial waste, including sewerage as well as the sewage treatment plant.

“Sewage treatment plant” shall mean an assemblage of devices, structures, and equipment for treating sewage and industrial wastes and may be used synonymously with the term “wastewater treatment plant.”

“Sewer user” shall mean every person using a public sewer who owns a building connected to a public sewer, or who has a residence, commercial building, or industry within 200 feet of an available sewer, and who puts to use a sewer which requires sewage facilities, though not connected therewith. 

“Sewerage” shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.

“Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissible.

“Standard methods” shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes,” published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Associations.

“Storm sewer” shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface, and groundwater drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.

“Surcharge” shall mean a charge or assessment in addition to the service or user charge levied for a specific purpose.

“Suspended solids” shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “standard methods.”

 “Useful life” shall mean the period during which a treatment works operates.

“User charge” shall mean a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of such works, and the term “user charge” shall have the same meaning and may be used synonymously with the term “service charge.” 

“Wastewater” shall mean liquid or water-carried pollutants including any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the publicly owned treatment works.

“Wastewater treatment plant” shall mean the same and may be used synonymously with the term “sewage treatment plant.” [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 91-O-430.C § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. I.] 

Article II. Public Sewer System


13.10.020 Sewer system established, controlled. 

A. Authorization. Pursuant to the City Charter, the city of Brookings is hereby authorized and empowered by and through its city council, and in the name of the city, to purchase or build, construct, maintain, extend and repair one or more municipal sewer systems, either within or without, or partially within and partially without, the corporate limits of the city, and to do all necessary things in connection therewith. 

B. Scope. The city and all customers receiving services from the sewer system, whether inside or outside the city limits, are bound by these rules and regulations. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. II § 1.] 


13.10.030 Council to make rules.

The rules and regulations governing consumers of sewer from said municipal sewer system, the rates to be charged such consumer, and the policy and manner of operating, managing and maintaining such municipal sewer system, shall be fixed, formulated and adopted by the city council. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. II § 2.] 


13.10.040 Sewer service. 

A. Sewer service may only be extended to properties having frontage on a public sewer main which has been built to current city standards to serve the requesting property and which is so constructed and extended as to provide service to adjacent property and which has been dedicated to and accepted by the city together with necessary easement and rights-of-way therefor, all in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other relevant ordinances, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.

B. In order to ensure compatibility of utility systems and improvements within both the city and the urban growth area of the city, sewer service extensions may be permitted to properties which are in all respects developed in accordance with adopted city development standards and regulations and with the Charter and ordinances of the city. 

C. For purposes of this chapter, and for indivisible single lots or parcels existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, frontage on a public sewer main may be satisfied by means of either an easement or land in fee simple abutting a public right-of-way containing the sewer main. Sewer service to a single lot or parcel which has been created prior to adoption of the amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be provided by a sewer service lateral but service to more than a single lot or to such parcels which are divisible into more than a single lot shall be provided by means of the extension of a public sewer main meeting current adopted city standards, with provision for dedication of appropriate and necessary public utility easements for installation and maintenance purposes.

D. Where the installation of a public sewer main would pose substantial risk to the sewer main or to surrounding properties as a result of identified geological hazard, the city council may approve the installation of sewer service to properties which do not have frontage on a public sewer main in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be recommended by the city’s engineer to minimize risk to city facilities and surrounding properties, and such approval may specify conditions of approval which must be satisfied prior to connection to the city’s sewer system. [Ord. 91-O-430.B §§ 1, 2; Ord. 89-O-456 § 1; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. II § 3.]


13.10.050 Prohibition of service.

When, in the judgment of the city, the sewer lines and appurtenances or the treatment plant of the city are of insufficient capacity or size or cannot reasonably be expected to provide safe and dependable treatment of sewage, then applications for additional sewer service shall be refused. The city council may from time to time designate sections of the city or the area served by the sewer system in which additional sewer services shall be prohibited until such time as conditions preventing the safe collection and treatment of sewage shall have been corrected. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. II § 4.] 

Article III. Use of Public Sewers Required


13.10.060 Owner required to connect to public sewer.

Except as set forth in this section, the owner and the occupant of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, commerce, industry, recreation, or other purposes, situated within or served by the city treatment works and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line; except that, after the initial construction of the public treatment works is completed, connection to such facilities shall be completed within 12 months after official notice to do so. The city council may set a shorter time for correction or connection to public sewer for users having problems which are determined to be a threat to public health, safety or general welfare.

A. The sewer connection requirement described above shall not be applicable if topographic, manmade features or intervening properties (where the subject property does not front on a public sewer) make connection physically impractical.

B. When a public sewer is extended to be within 200 feet of a property in order to serve an upstream development or property, the owner and/or occupant of the property shall not be required to connect to the public sewer system if the property has a fully functioning septic system. The property shall thereafter connect to the public sewer when the property owner or occupant desires to connect; when the existing septic system fails; or when it is identified as a public health hazard. If connection to the public sewer is made within the line extension payback period, BMC 13.10.280(E) shall apply. Prior to connection the applicant must provide evidence that the septic system has been properly abandoned and accepted as such through the Curry County public services department.

C. The exceptions to the public sewer connection requirements contained in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall not apply to local improvement or assessment districts established for the purpose of constructing public sewers within said district. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 93-O-430.D § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. III § 1.] 


13.10.070 Unlawful to deposit unsanitary waste.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city of Brookings, or within the service area of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. III § 2.] 


13.10.080 Treatment required.

It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city of Brookings any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. III § 3.] 


13.10.090 Unlawful to construct facility for disposal of sewage.

Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. A private sewage disposal system may be installed as hereinafter provided. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. III § 4.] 


13.10.100 Unlawful to damage equipment of sewage works.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest by law enforcement personnel. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. III § 5.]

Article IV. Public Building Sewers and Connections 


13.10.110 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to open, uncover, or in any manner make connection with any sewer line of the city, or to lay drain or sewer pipes on any premises or in any street or alley in the city or in any area served by the city treatment works without first applying for and obtaining a permit therefor from the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ). The city shall issue a permit to a property owner who certifies on his application that the work covered by the permit will be performed by the property owner or a qualified licensed contractor if work is located within the city right-of-way and part of the city infrastructure. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 1.] 


13.10.120 Application form.

The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the AHJ. A permit and inspection fee in amounts to be established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed for connection to the public sewer for all work to occur in the public right-of-way and any applicable system development charges. Associated work that is to occur on private property is to be permitted and inspected through the public services department of Curry County. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 2.] 


13.10.130 Inspection required.

Repealed by Ord. 14-O-725. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 3.] 


13.10.140 Inspection required.

Inspection and written approval of the public works director or designee shall be obtained before any work covered by this chapter is covered or concealed. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 4.] 


13.10.150 Information required.

As part of the application for a permit, the property owner or his agent may be required to provide the following: 

A. Copies of plot plan to scale and specifications in duplicate, including, but not limited to, lot dimensions, location of building or structure or other improvements to be served;

B. Location of existing septic tanks, drain fields and building sewer lines; 

C. Location of water service lines and/or wells, and other underground utilities; 

D. Location of driveways; 

E. Location, depth, grade and material of proposed building sewer; 

F. Plans and specifications for materials and installation; 

G. Purpose for which the sewer connection is to be used, i.e., residential, multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, etc.;

H. Point of proposed connection of the new or existing building sewer to the building drain. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 5.] 


13.10.160 Classes of sewer permits.

There shall be two classes of sewer permits: 

A. For residential and commercial service; and 

B. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 6.] 


13.10.170 Conditions for issuance of permits.

Every permit shall be issued under the following conditions: 

A. Construction of the building sewer shall start within four months from the date of issuance of the permit. 

B. Construction of the building sewer shall be completed within 12 months from the date of issuance of the permit.

C. If the proposed connection or pipe installation does not violate any provision herein and does not violate any other laws of the city, the permit shall be issued. Such permit shall contain all information contained in said application and shall specify any and all sewerage and appurtenances to be utilized in such sewer construction together with the purpose of such use. 

D. The time limit provided in subsection (A) of this section may be extended to a maximum of six months by a showing of good cause by the sewer connection permit holder as specified in subsection (F) of this section. 

E. The time limit provided in subsection (B) of this section may be extended to a maximum of 18 months by a showing of good cause by the sewer connection permit holder as specified in subsection (F) of this section. 

F. A sewer permit holder may seek extension of the time limits for commencement of construction or completion of the building sewer by written request showing good cause delivered to the city in person or by mail prior to the expiration of a sewer connection permit. Good cause for extension of time shall be limited to a showing of circumstances that were outside the control of the sewer connection permit holder that prevented the commencement of construction of or completion of the building sewer within the time limits specified by this chapter. Good cause does not include financial problems of the sewer connection permit holder preventing commencement or completion of the building sewer. Any decision granting extension of time limits shall be limited to a period of time necessary to grant relief from the circumstances showing good cause, not to exceed the limits specified in subsections (D) and (E) of this section. A decision on a request for extension of time limits shall be made in writing and mailed to the sewer connection permit holder at the address shown on the permit. 

G. The city manager shall determine all requests for extension for good cause filed pursuant to subsection (F) of this section. Any sewer connection permit holder whose request for extension of time limits is denied may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder within 14 days of the date of the mailing of the decision of the city manager. At its next regular meeting, the city council shall review the decision of the city manager being appealed to determine whether good cause exists as defined by subsection (F). The city council may affirm the decision of the city manager or overrule the city manager’s decision and, if overruled, grant an extension of time limits as provided by subsection (F). [Ord. 91-O-430.C §§ 3, 4, 5; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 7.] 


13.10.180 Building sewer extension.

Repealed by Ord. 14-O-725. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 8.] 


13.10.190 Separate sewer for each building required.

A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewage disposal system is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, if both buildings are owned by one person. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 9.] 


13.10.200 Conformity to city standards.

All work must be constructed in accordance with current standards defined in the Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Infrastructures. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 10.] 


13.10.210 Elevation of building sewer.

Repealed by Ord. 14-O-725. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 11.] 


13.10.220 Groundwater or surface runoff.

No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, driveway drains, areaway drains, or other surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer and any such connections having been made previously shall be removed at the sole cost and expense of the owner of buildings or property so connected. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 12.] 


13.10.230 Fees and charges for public sewer connection.

When a connection of a building sewer requires a new connection or tap to be made into the public sewer, the city’s staff shall make or inspect the connection to the public sewer installing the building sewer (service lateral) from the public sewer main to the right-of-way line of the city, county, state, and public rights-of-way, or sanitary sewer easements. Fees and charges for public sewer connection as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid at the time the required connection permit application is filed with the city. Said fee shall be in addition to an appropriate property assessment charge and systems development charges. All connections, including the building sewer, shall be made gastight and watertight. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 13.] 


13.10.240 Installation requirements.

All excavations for building sewer installation shall be made in a safe and workmanlike manner, adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city and to the state. Such restoration, if not properly completed by the owner, shall be completed by the city and all costs of such restoration shall be and become a lien against the property to be collected as provided by law. The property owner shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits required by the city and state for construction in rights-of-way. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 14.] 


13.10.250 As-constructed drawings required.

Prior to final connection to an existing public sewer, and before the public sewer is used, the property owner or his agent shall provide the city with written documented evidence that the installation has been approved by the AHJ; such evidence may, at the city’s discretion, include as-constructed drawings bearing the seal and signature of a registered, professional engineer. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 15.] 


13.10.260 Responsibility for sewer laterals.

A. Gravity Lines. An owner is responsible for the operation, maintenance and condition of a sewer lateral on private property. In the case of an existing sewer lateral that does not have a cleanout located within 12 inches of the property line and within the city right-of-way or city utility easement, the owner is responsible for the line to the main.

The city is responsible for the operation, maintenance and condition of a sewer lateral from the existing cleanouts as described above, to the sewer main as long as all facilities are located in a recorded easement or city right-of-way. The city will accept maintenance of the lateral if the owner installs a cleanout within 12 inches of the property line and within the city right-of-way or city utility easement and the lateral and connection meets city standard specifications. 

All new cleanouts and laterals in the city right-of-way require a public works permit and shall comply with the current version of Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Infrastructure.

If a connection is proposed to an existing sewer lateral, the city site plan committee has the authority to require an inspection report be provided by the applicant to determine the condition of the existing lateral. During the building permit review processes, the city site plan committee will determine if the applicant is required to provide the city a TV inspection report. Factors requiring a TV inspection may include, but are not limited to, the age, whether the area has storm intrusion rates, history of sewer back-ups or sewer overflows, and/or lack of records on the sewer lateral construction. The city will review said inspection report and determine if the sewer lateral’s condition allows for storm water intrusion. If the lateral is conducive to storm intrusion, the city will determine the necessary corrective action required by the property owner.   

B. Pressure Lines. An owner is responsible for the operation, maintenance and condition of a pressure line in its entirety. The owner must obtain a public works right-of-way permit to perform repairs within the city right-of-way or city utility easement. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 10-O-660 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 16.]


13.10.265 Sewer lateral rebate program.

When funding is available through the annual fiscal year budget, the city will invite private owners to replace deteriorated and failing private sewer laterals in the right-of-way with a rebate subsidy. As funds are limited, reimbursement funds are made available to the following priorities; 

A. Sewer laterals in the street right-of-way scheduled for street paving. 

B. Sewer rehabilitation projects. 

C. Smoke testing or TV inspection issues. 

D. The pipe is in jeopardy of failure and is undermining the city right-of-way. 

E. The location has been identified as a high inflow and infiltration (I/I) area.   

Rebate funding shall not exceed one-half the cost of construction up to a maximum $2,000 per lateral. The rebate will apply only to lateral replacement in the city right-of-way, shall include a cleanout in the city right-of-way, and be constructed in accordance with the City’s Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Infrastructure. The city will assume future maintenance responsibility of permitted laterals meeting current design standards. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 3.]


13.10.270 Connections outside city limits.

In order to assure required control by the city of connections and input to its sewage system and treatment plant in perpetuity, all persons initiating or renewing requests for sewer service outside the corporate limits of the city shall execute an agreement by and between the requesting property owner and the city to annex to the city at such future time as all legal requirements for annexation have otherwise been met and at the discretion of the city. The said agreement shall be and become a covenant to run with the land so served. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 17.] 


13.10.280 Sewer main extensions. 

A. Any person or persons desiring a city sewer line to be extended to their property for connection thereto shall be responsible for the costs of said construction and for the construction of the same according to the requirements hereof and to standard specifications and drawings submitted to and approved by the city. 

B. All such sewer main line extensions, exclusive of service lines, shall become the property of the city upon completion of the same by the owner or contractor and inspection and acceptance by the city. The person or person constructing said sewer system shall provide and dedicate to the city an easement of a width and length required by the city for maintenance and operation of said sewer system prior to acceptance of the same by the city. 

C. If the sewer line, as extended, provides sewer service or is capable of providing sewer service to other property in the city not previously connected with the city sewer system, then the person or persons constructing the sewer line shall file a verified statement of the total cost of construction of the sewer main line with the city. The public works director, after verifying said statement of costs, shall compute the proportionate cost of construction of said line per lot for each lot capable of being served by said line, said costs to be determined according to the proportionate number of square feet in each of said lots. Corner lots already served by existing sewer main shall be exempted from the calculation. 

D. After computation of the proportionate costs attributable to each lot by the public works director, the public works director shall file with the city recorder a statement showing the costs of construction attributable to each lot. The finance and human resource director shall then maintain a certified list of the costs attributable to each lot owner who did not share in the cost of construction of the sewer main in the first instance. 

E. Any person or persons owning a lot who did not share in the initial cost of construction of the sewer main line who desires to connect to the sewer main line shall first pay to the finance and human resource director the proportionate amount as computed by the public works director to be the cost per lot before said person or persons shall be allowed to connect to the sewer main line or before a building permit for construction of said lot shall be issued by the city. Upon receipt of the same, the finance and human resource director shall file a statement, duly certified, showing that payment of sewer main line construction charges attributable to said lot have been paid. 

F. Upon receipt of the proportionate share of moneys attributable to that lot desiring to connect to the constructed sewer main line, the finance and human resource director shall place said funds in a trust fund for the benefit of the person or persons who initially constructed the sewer main line or their successors in interest. As said moneys are paid into the trust fund, the finance and human resource director shall apportion the same to the person or persons originally paying for the sewer main line in the amounts to which said person or persons are respectively entitled; provided however, that in the event said person or persons originally paying for the sewer main line shall have transferred said property to a third party, the finance and human resource director shall pay such proportionate share to the owner of record at the time such payment is made; and provided further, that the finance and human resource director shall pay such proportionate share to a purchaser under contract of sale, if in such contract of sale the seller authorizes such payment to be made to the purchaser. Said trust fund shall continue for a period of 10 years, after which time the finance and human resource director shall cause the trust fund to be closed and any proceeds remaining in the fund to be transferred to the person or persons constructing the sewer main line or their successors in interest. After the period of 10 years has expired, the city shall no longer require any person or persons desiring to connect to said sewer main line to pay the proportionate costs of construction as set forth in this section, nor shall the city be responsible for collection of the same. [Ord. 14-O-725 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IV § 18.] 

Article V. Use of the Public Sewers 


13.10.290 Discharges – Waters.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 1.] 


13.10.300 Discharges – Storm sewer use.

Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged only into such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Department of Environmental Quality. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 2.] 


13.10.310 Discharges – Prohibited substances.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 

A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;

B. Any waters or wastes containing hazardous, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanide in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;

C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or above 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, humans or animals and personnel of the sewage works;

D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage disposal works by way of example, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, clay, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 3.] 


13.10.320 Discharges – Harmful substances.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving waters, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming their opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to design capacities and measured flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 

A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius);

B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius);

C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city;

D. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;

E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable, hazardous or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials;

F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;

G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life of concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state, federal or city regulations;

H. Materials which exert or cause:

1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);

2. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);

3. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;

4. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes. 

I. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 4.] 


13.10.330 City actions.

If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in BMC 13.10.320, and which in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 

A. Reject the wastes; 

B. Require removal of the wastes by the producer; 

C. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 

D. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 

E. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges including the costs of investigations and measurements as required under the provisions of BMC 13.10.380. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 5.] 


13.10.340 Pretreatment equipment approval.

If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be prepared and submitted by a registered professional engineer, shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and DEQ, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 6.] 


13.10.350 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.

Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, clay, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 7.] 


13.10.360 Pretreatment devices – Installation and maintenance.

Where preliminary treatment, interceptors or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be installed and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. All grease, oil and sand interceptors, pretreatment devices, control manholes, and other related apparatus shall be inspected to verify correct function upon installation and at least annually thereafter. Annual inspections shall be performed by a city of Brookings approved vendor and shall comply with all state, county, and city requirements. A copy of the annual inspection report shall be provided to the city of Brookings public works director. [Ord. 16-O-765 § 2; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 8.] 


13.10.370 Control manholes.

When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a sewer carrying wastes other than residential shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 9.] 


13.10.380 Flow measuring and monitoring.

When the loading or flows of wastes is sufficient to warrant more accurate measurement the city may require the installation of flow measuring or monitoring and measuring devices which continually record the condition and volume of wastes entering the public sewer system. Such instruments and devices shall be installed, maintained and operated by the city and all costs therefor shall be billed to and be paid by the producer of such wastes. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 10.] 


13.10.390 Test methods.

All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no specific manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage disposal works and to determine the existence of hazards to health, safety and property. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 11.] 


13.10.400 Sewer line modifications – Plans approval.

All designs, plans and specifications for line extensions, additions, or modification to the sewage disposal works shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to any construction work and, wherever required, shall also be submitted and approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. V § 12.] 

Article VI. Admission of Industrial Wastes into Public Sewers


13.10.410 Approval required.

Review and written approval of the city shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having any of the following: 

A. A five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 300 parts per million;

B. A suspended solids content in excess of 25 pounds per day;

C. A monthly discharge in excess of 50,000 gallons per day. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VI § 1.] 


13.10.420 Industrial user designation.

The city shall determine when a user is an industrial user with the use of sampling equipment. When the user is declared to be an industrial user by the city, such user shall be directed by the city to furnish its own sampling equipment at the user’s expense, all test results from the user’s equipment shall be copied and a copy submitted to the city for the city’s use. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VI § 2.] 


13.10.430 Pretreatment.

Where required, in the opinion of the city, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes, or operation of the wastewater treatment works, the person shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be necessary to render his wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VI § 3.] 


13.10.440 Submission of information.

Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city and DEQ prior to the start of their construction, if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VI § 4.] 


13.10.450 Special agreements.

No statement contained in Articles V, VI and VII of this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater treatment works, either before or after pretreatment; provided, that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment works by reason of the admission of such wastes, and that all costs are paid in full by the industrial concern without recompense by the city. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VI § 5.]

Article VII. Infiltration and Inflow


13.10.460 Problem contributors identified.

All property owners identified by the office of the city manager as contributors to excessive or improper infiltration or inflow into the treatment works and those identified by the engineering report known as “City of Brookings Infiltration and Inflow Study” dated March, 1979, shall be advised of their infiltration and inflow problems. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VII § 1.] 


13.10.470 Grace period.

All such situated properties shall be provided a 60-day grace period in which to correct the infiltration and inflow problems as identified, said 60-day grace period to extend from the date of notification. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VII § 2.] 


13.10.480 Corrective actions required.

By the end of the 60-day grace period, each property shall notify the city administrative offices that corrective actions have been taken or are in progress, which actions shall be specified in the notification to the city. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VII § 3.] 


13.10.490 Service termination.

A property owner failing to notify the city of Brookings of corrective action prior to the end of the 60-day grace period shall be subject to termination of service, without further notice and water service, if provided by the city, shall be immediately discontinued and shut off until the violation shall have been corrected in accordance with federal, state and city regulations. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VII § 4.] 


13.10.500 Nuisance declaration.

In the event any instance of excessive or improper infiltration or inflow into the treatment works of the city of Brookings shall continue beyond the 60-day grace period, it is hereby declared that such continuing infiltration or inflow is a public nuisance and the city of Brookings shall have the right to abate such public nuisance, and to enter upon any private property within the city of Brookings for such purpose, and shall assess the cost of such abatement as a lien against the property upon which such continuing infiltration and inflow occurs and shall assess the cost of such abatement to the property upon or from which infiltration and inflow occurs. Such assessment shall be levied by the filing of a statement of such costs together with the description of the property or properties to be assessed, together with the names of the owner(s) thereof with the city recorder, whereupon the city recorder shall forthwith enter such assessment as a lien against such property in the city lien docket of the city of Brookings. An administration fee of $50.00 or 15 percent of the cost, whichever is greater, shall be charged and collected by the city in addition to all costs of abatement. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VII § 5.]

Article VIII. Private Sewage Disposal 


13.10.510 Authorized.

Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of BMC 13.10.020, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 1.] 


13.10.520 City approval required.

Before commencement of construction of any private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written approval from the city stating that because of topography, distance or other special factors, a public sewer cannot be supplied at the time and the city has no objection to the installation of a subsurface disposal system. The letter or a copy thereof will be presented to the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality or its authorized agent when applying for a subsurface disposal permit. The installation of a private sewage disposal system shall neither commence nor proceed without such Department of Environmental Quality permit. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 2.] 


13.10.530 Participation in future public improvements.

No person shall commence or proceed with the installation of a private sewage disposal system within the city without having first executed an agreement to participate in future public sewage system improvements for the property to be served by such private sewage disposal system according to a schedule to be determined by the city. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 3.] 


13.10.540 State permitting authority.

The Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality or its authorized agent has the sole authority for the issuance of subsurface disposal permits. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 4.] 


13.10.550 Standards.

The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality with all work to be performed by either the owner or a licensed sewage disposal service business. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 5.] 


13.10.560 Public sewer connection required.

At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned in compliance with the requirements of DEQ. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 6.] 


13.10.570 Operation – City expense.

The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 7.] 


13.10.580 Additional state requirements.

No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Department of Environmental Quality or its representative. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 8.] 


13.10.590 Discontinuance of use.

When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said public sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt, or removed. When the public sewer becomes available after the initial construction, the building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer within one year. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. VIII § 9.]

Article IX. Private Building Sewers and Connection 


13.10.600 Connection options.

Where a building or structure is being served by an existing private sewer system, the property owner or his agent shall select one of the following options: 

A. Connect to the existing building sewer line at a point five feet from the building line of the building or structure. 

B. Connect to the existing building sewer line at any point between five feet from the building line and the private sewage disposal system; provided, the existing building sewer is exposed to determine its conformance to the State Plumbing Code; and provided, the portion of existing building sewer which is retained is tested for leakage in conformance with this chapter. All deficiencies of the existing building sewer shall be corrected and made to conform to the State Plumbing Code and to this chapter. 

C. Extend the building sewer to a point five feet from the building line and install new building sewer plumbing into from the building, thereby not using the existing building sewer line. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IX § 1.] 


13.10.610 Mobile home parks, trailer parks, campgrounds, etc.

Within mobile home parks, overnight travel trailer parks, campgrounds, etc., the permit for a building sewer shall extend from the street or sewer easement right-of-way line to the point of connection to the on-site, private sewer system. The private sewer system beyond the point of connection shall be under the control of the State Plumbing Code. Prior to final connections and before the building sewer is placed into use, the property owner or his agent shall provide the city with written documented evidence that the public works director and the plumbing inspector have inspected and approved the on-site private sewer system beyond the point of connection. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IX § 2.] 


13.10.620 Testing.

The building sewer, and any applicable portion of an existing building sewer, shall be given a leakage test in accordance with the specifications included in the State Plumbing Code. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IX § 3.] 


13.10.630 Costs, expenses.

All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer on private property, including the connection at the right-of-way line, shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation and use of the building sewer. All construction shall be performed by the property owner or by a licensed qualified plumbing contractor. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. IX § 4.] 

Article X. Powers and Authority of Inspectors 


13.10.640 Authorized officials.

The public works director, the building inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The public works director or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the quantity, content and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. X § 1.] 


13.10.650 Owner liability.

While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in BMC 13.10.640, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except such as may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required in this section. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. X § 2.] 


13.10.660 Easement work.

The public works director, the building inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties receiving sewer service from the public sewer system and properties through which the city holds a dedicated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, operation and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the dedicated easement. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. X § 3.]

Article XI. Penalties 


13.10.670 Violation notice – Termination.

Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing within 15 days of the date of such written notice for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. In the event the violation shall continue beyond the 15-day notice period without correction, sewer service shall be terminated and water service, if provided by the city, shall be immediately discontinued and shut off. All occupancy or use of the premises shall be terminated and they shall remain vacant until all violations have been corrected. [Ord. 88-O-430 Art. XI § 1.] 


13.10.680 Penalties.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-590 § 5; Ord. 88-O-430 Art. XI § 2.] 


Chapter 13.15 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES

Sections: 

13.15.010    Purpose.

13.15.020    Companion provisions.

13.15.030    Definitions.

13.15.040    Application – Terms.

13.15.050    Contract – Effective date.

13.15.060    Contract – Refusal right.

13.15.070    Charges levied.

13.15.080    Financial self-sufficiency.

13.15.090    Sewer use charges.

13.15.100    Sewer user defined.

13.15.110    Customer classes defined.

13.15.120    Rate structure.

13.15.130    Equivalent dwelling unit rate.

13.15.140    Unspecified rates.

13.15.150    Review and revision of rates.

13.15.160    Notification.

13.15.170    Appeals.

13.15.180    Payment of charges.

13.15.190    Liability for payment.

13.15.200    Collection of charges – Liens.

13.15.210    Discontinuance of service.

13.15.220    Sewer service account fee.

13.15.230    Abutting property.

13.15.240    Payments and collections.

13.15.250    Right of entry.

13.15.260    Violations.

13.15.270    Recovery of damages.

13.15.280    Penalties.


13.15.010 Purpose.

Pursuant to the general laws of the state of Oregon, and the powers granted in the Charter of the city of Brookings, Oregon, the council of said city hereby declares its intention to acquire, own, construct, equip, operate, and maintain within and without the corporate limits of the city of Brookings a sewage disposal plant or plants, sewers, equipment, and appurtenances necessary, useful, or convenient for a complete sewer system and disposal plant, and also including the reconstruction of such sewers as may necessarily or conveniently be deemed proper by the council. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 1.] 


13.15.020 Companion provisions.

This chapter is a companion to Chapter 13.10 BMC providing for sewer system use and discharge of wastes, and the development code of the city. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 1; Ord. 88-O-431 § 2.] 


13.15.030 Definitions.

The definitions of terms used in this chapter are the same as defined in Chapter 13.10 BMC, which terms are adopted by reference and by such reference are applicable as if set out herein. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 4.] 


13.15.040 Application – Terms. 

A. Every person desiring sewer service from the city shall make application to the city on a standard form which shall become a contract on the part of the person making the same to pay for the sewer service applied for at the rate adopted and resolved by the city to be the rate schedule, and in the manner and for the time specified in such contract, and shall reserve to the city the right to charge and collect the rates provided for and to change said rates at any time; to discontinue the service at any time without notice to the consumer; to install meter or meters; to register the service consumed or the maximum load or both, and shall specify that said contract is subject to all the provisions of this code.

B. The contract shall further provide that the city shall not be held responsible for any damage by stoppage or flooding or other cause resulting from plumbing installed by the owner or occupant on premises supplied with sewer service and that the fact that the agents of the city have inspected the plumbing and appliances shall not be pleaded as a basis for recovery in any case of damages to premises from defective plumbing or appliances installed by the owner or occupant of such premises, and shall provide that in case the sewer service is interrupted or fails by reason of accident or any other cause whatsoever. 

C. Further, the city shall not be liable for damages for such interruption, nor shall failure or interruption for any reasonable period of time be held to constitute a breach of contract on the part of the city or in any way to relieve the consumer from performing the obligations of his contract. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 2; Ord. 88-O-431 § 5.] 


13.15.050 Contract – Effective date.

All contracts shall take effect from the day they are signed, and rates will be charged and bills rendered from the day the premises are connected with the city providing sewer service. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 6.] 


13.15.060 Contract – Refusal right.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the city or the city manager to enter into any contract or to furnish sewer service to any person applying therefor. The city manager is authorized and empowered to refuse to enter into any such contract to furnish such sewer service, subject to the appeal procedure set forth in BMC 13.15.170. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 3; Ord. 88-O-431 § 7.] 


13.15.070 Charges levied.

There are hereby levied and imposed upon all property owners and users having a connection with the sewer system of the city of Brookings, Oregon, whether directly or by contract through a third party, both within and without the corporate limits of said city, and upon all subsequent users, whether served directly or by a contracting third party, just and equitable charges for debt service, service, maintenance, operation and replacement of the treatment works, which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(A).]


13.15.080 Financial self-sufficiency.

The just and equitable charges shall be fixed at such amounts so as to assure the financial self-sufficiency of the treatment works, and thereafter shall be reviewed annually and amended as necessary by resolution of the city council to maintain such self-sufficiency. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(B).]


13.15.090 Sewer use charges.

The sewer use charges for sewer service are hereby levied and imposed upon: 

A. All property and sewer users served by the city of Brookings sewerage system, whether directly or by contract through a third party both within and without the corporate limits of the city; and 

B. Upon other property served by the city of Brookings sewerage system requiring sewage disposal on which there is a dwelling or other building to which sewer service is readily available. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(C).]


13.15.100 Sewer user defined.

A “sewer user” means a person, corporation, firm, association, or partnership being the owner or agent to the owner of the property described in BMC 13.15.090(A) which uses and receives the benefits of the city of Brookings treatment works. 

A. The property owner or the sewer service contracting agent, defined in this section as sewer user, shall be billed monthly for the use of the city’s sewer system unless written notice is received by the city from the property owner stating to whom it is desired the monthly billing be sent. 

B. The property owner or sewer service contracting agent, herein called the sewer user, shall be responsible for the sewer use charges levied in accordance with this chapter and such charge shall attach to the property served. 

C. Owner or agent to the owner of the property described in BMC 13.15.090(B) which enjoys the availability of the city of Brookings sewerage system. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(D).]


13.15.110 Customer classes defined.

For the purpose of determining rates and assigning service charges, users shall be grouped into one of the following customer classifications: 

A. Residential: all single-family residential services, and multifamily residential services which have individual water meters or are billed separately for each dwelling unit;

B. Multifamily residential or standard discharge strength: all multifamily dwellings, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks in which a single water meter provides service to more than one dwelling unit;

C. Restaurants or food service establishments: all restaurants or other food service establishments or users with discharge strengths (BOD or SS) in excess of 240 mg/liter;

D. Other commercial: establishments discharging commercial wastewater, as defined in this chapter. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 4; Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(E).]


13.15.120 Rate structure.

Sewer service rates for each of the respective customer classifications enumerated in BMC 13.15.110 shall be derived and calculated in accordance with the following standards and fixed by resolution of the city council: 

A. Residential: a monthly flat fee based on average residential sewage discharge;

B. Multifamily residential: a monthly flat fee based on average multifamily residential sewage discharge;

C. Restaurants or food service establishments: a base monthly charge plus a rate per 100 cubic feet of water used, which rate is calculated to reflect the estimated cost of wastewater treatment; 

D. Other commercial: a base monthly charge plus a rate per 100 cubic feet of water used calculated for commercial users. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 5; Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(F).]


13.15.130 Equivalent dwelling unit rate.

The monthly sewer usage rate for each user shall be established by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(G).]


13.15.140 Unspecified rates.

Rates or proportional parts thereof which are not specified in BMC 13.15.130 shall be calculated and determined by the city manager with consideration given for similarity of conditions, equity and reasonableness in the collection of such charges. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(H).]


13.15.150 Review and revision of rates.

The sewer service rates established in BMC 13.15.070 shall, as a minimum, be reviewed annually and revised periodically by resolution of the city council to reflect actual costs of design, construction, operation, maintenance, and replacement of the treatment works and to maintain the equitability of the user charges with respect to proportional distribution of those costs in relation to the total wastewater loading of the treatment works. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 6; Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(I).]


13.15.160 Notification.

Every user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to sewage services. In addition, on or before July 1st of each year, the city manager shall post for public review at City Hall a listing of the sewage parameters and corresponding categories of all classes of customers which serve as the basis for derivation of regular and extra-strength fees for users. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 7; Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(J).]


13.15.170 Appeals.

Any sewer user, regardless of customer classification, who believes the sewer user charge as applied to his or her premises is not within the intent of the foregoing provisions, may make written application to the city manager within 10 days after having paid the account balance in full, requesting a review of the user charge. The written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated flow of the user’s wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. Review of the request shall be made by the city manager who shall respond within 10 days of the receipt of the appeal. If the sewer user desires to appeal further, he or she shall request in writing within seven days of the date of the finding of the city manager, that the city place the appeal on the next regular city council meeting. The decision of the city council shall be final. If the city council determines that the user’s charges should be recomputed, based on approved, revised flow and/or strength data, the new charges thus recomputed may be applied retroactively for a period not exceeding six months. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 8(K).] 


13.15.180 Payment of charges.

The monthly sewer use charges outlined above shall be due and payable on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month in which billings are mailed. A late payment fee may be established by resolution of the city council for bills which are not paid by the twenty-fifth day of the month in which billings are mailed. Interest may be charged and collected on any sewer use charges not so paid, at the rate of one and one-half percent per month until paid. A fee shall be charged for payment by check which is not honored by the customer’s bank, as determined by resolution of the city council. Discounts may be made for timely payment in full. [Ord. 88-O-437 § 8; Ord. 88-O-431 § 9.] 


13.15.190 Liability for payment.

All bills for sewage service shall be charged against the applicant for sewage service. The applicant shall be held liable for the payment of such service, together with such fines and penalties as may accrue against the same by reason of any of the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 02-O-431.A § 2; Ord. 89-O-431 § 10.] 


13.15.200 Collection of charges – Liens. 

A. Collection of Charges. Such sewer use charges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be a debt due the city. If this debt is not paid within 30 days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent and may be recovered by civil action at law against the sewer user. All sewer use charges accruing, accrued or delinquent accounts may be enforced in any lawful manner and also pursuant to provisions of ORS 224.010 through 224.120 and 454.225. Administrative costs for collecting said sewer use charges and administering this chapter shall be payable in addition to the said sewer use charges. 

B. Liens. In the event any of the fees or charges provided by this chapter are not paid promptly when due, the city recorder is authorized to enter the amount of such charges immediately in the docket of city liens as a lien against the real property described in the application for the sanitary sewer connection. Payment made by a check which is not honored by the customer’s bank constitutes a continuing delinquency from the posted past-due date. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 11.] 


13.15.210 Discontinuance of service. 

A. In the event of failure to pay sewer use charges or assessments after they become delinquent, or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or failure to have flow or sampling devices in proper operating condition for more than 10 days, the city shall serve the sewer user with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit not to exceed 30 days for satisfactory correction thereof. If the sewer user shall continue the violation beyond the time limit stated, the city shall have the right to discontinue, remove or close sewer connections and to terminate and cut off water service if provided by the city and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purposes. 

B. The expense of discontinuance, removal or closing as well as the expense of restoring service, shall be a debt due to the city and may be recovered by civil action against the sewer user and also pursuant to provisions of ORS 454.225. 

C. Restoration of Service. Water or sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including the expense of removal, closing, and restoration have been paid. 

D. Ownership and Occupancy. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties. 

E. Any sewer user wishing to obtain a discontinuance of billing for a period of time due to “non-use” for any reason shall be required to physically disconnect the service lateral from the public main and properly cap the stub-out as directed by the city and with inspection by the public works director or his duly authorized representative. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 12.] 


13.15.220 Sewer service account fee.

Any new application for a sewer service account shall be charged a nonrefundable fee at the time of application that is included in the new water account fee. [Ord. 12-O-697 § 3; Ord. 88-O-431 § 13.] 


13.15.230 Abutting property.

When charges are made in those instances where sewer service is not in fact furnished, but the service is available or abutting the property charged (as referred to in BMC 13.15.100(C)), said charges may but are not required to be waived by the city. Application for such a waiver shall be made by the property owner to the city manager stating fully the grounds for the application. Before a waiver of the sewer charge may be granted, the city shall first determine: 

A. That the property cannot be developed or used except through the installation of private sewer service facilities;

B. That the owner(s) agree that at such time as future access to public sewer service facilities becomes available they will connect to such facilities and pay any costs required to obtain access to public sewer service facilities;

C. That the waiver of the sewer service complies with the spirit of these regulations and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other persons or properties in the vicinity;

D. The applicant must bear the burden of proof that the property can and will be provided with adequate sewer service through nonpublic facilities which will be properly operated and maintained in compliance with Article VIII of Chapter 13.10 BMC, as determined by a registered professional engineer. 

E. Any person aggrieved by failure to obtain approval for private sewer service shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager for denial of the application to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within 10 days after receipt of notice and shall be made by depositing the amount of all the estimated costs of the service and by submitting written request to the city council that the aggrieved person appeals the denial of the application and stating the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall act upon the appeal at the next regular scheduled city council meeting after receipt of said notice of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. [Ord. 89-O-437 § 9; Ord. 88-O-431 § 14.] 


13.15.240 Payments and collections.

All payments and collections under this chapter shall be paid into the “sanitary sewer maintenance and operation fund” established by this chapter, and shall be used exclusively for the operation, maintenance, replacement, construction and reconstruction of a sewage disposal plant, equipment, and appurtenances necessary, useful, or convenient for said plant, and also for the operation and maintenance of the city sewer system, and for the construction, reconstruction, and installation of sewer lines in the city sewer system. The money may also be used for the purpose of paying reasonable administration costs and expenses of the collection of the charges imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 15.] 


13.15.250 Right of entry.

The public works director or his representative shall have free access at reasonable hours to all parts of buildings and premises to which sewer service is provided by the city for the purpose of inspecting and testing the pipes, wastewater fixtures and the manner in which sewer service is being provided and used. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 16.] 


13.15.260 Violations.

When any condition becomes known which constitutes a violation of the sewer ordinances of the city, the public works director shall provide notice to the customer to correct the violation. If correction is not made within the time limit stated in the notice, then sewer service and water service, if provided by the city, shall be immediately terminated and cut off until the violation shall have been rectified in accordance with federal, state and city regulations. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 17.] 


13.15.270 Recovery of damages.

Any person or persons who, as the result of violating any of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise causes any expense, loss, or damage to the city of Brookings, shall immediately become liable to the city for the full sum of such expense, loss or damage. The council may, at its discretion, instruct the city attorney to proceed against any such person or persons, in any court of competent jurisdiction, in a civil action to be brought in the name of the city of Brookings, Oregon, for the recovery of the full sum of any such expense, loss or damage sustained by the city. [Ord. 88-O-431 § 18.] 


13.15.280 Penalties.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-590 § 6; Ord. 88-O-431 § 19.] 


Chapter 13.20  SYSTEMS REPLACEMENT CHARGES

Sections: 

13.20.010    Creation of utility systems replacement fund.

13.20.020    Monthly charges.

13.20.030    Depositing of moneys received.

13.20.035    Future revisions to systems replacement charges.

13.20.040    Responsibility for payment.

13.20.050    Payment and nonpayment of bills, contracts.

13.20.060    Fees and charges consolidated – Liens.

13.20.070    Violations – Penalties.

13.20.080    Construction.


13.20.010 Creation of utility systems replacement fund.

There is hereby created a utility systems replacement fund within the reserve fund of the city as provided by Chapter 3.05 BMC, to receive funds to be collected under BMC 13.20.020. The purpose of the fund shall be to finance the capital replacement, noncapacity increasing extension and noncapacity increasing expansion of municipal utility facilities, including the acquisition of land or rights-of-way thereto. [Ord. 06-O-574 § 2; Ord. 87-O-419 § 1.] 


13.20.020 Monthly charges.

As of the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following monthly charges are to be collected from all persons, firms or corporations receiving utility service or services from the city of Brookings or its contractors for each service provided or used for the capital replacement of each utility:

A. Water system replacement charge: $2.50 per month;

B. Sewer system replacement charge: $2.50 per month;

C. Street system replacement charge: $2.50 per month. [Ord. 87-O-419 § 2.] 


13.20.030 Depositing of moneys received.

All moneys collected from the charges established herein shall be received by the city recorder and shall be deposited into the appropriate accounts within the utility systems replacement fund according to the purpose for which collected and shall not be otherwise appropriated or expended by the city. [Ord. 87-O-419 § 3.]


13.20.035 Future revisions to systems replacement charges.*

All future revisions to the systems replacement charges as presented in BMC 13.20.020 shall be by resolution of the council. [Ord. 06-O-574 § 3.]

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 06-O-574 § 3 adds this section as BMC 13.20.030. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication in numbering.


13.20.040 Responsibility for payment.

The utility systems replacement charge shall be entered upon the monthly bills of all customers of the city or of its contractors for each service received whether or not such customers shall be residents of the city. Every dwelling unit, commercial, industrial, manufacturing, agricultural or other unit receiving and paying a bill for service shall be responsible for paying the monthly utility system replacement charge whether service is provided directly or by contract through a third party. [Ord. 87-O-419 § 4.] 


13.20.050 Payment and nonpayment of bills, contracts. 

A. At the end of each month the city shall mail or deliver bills to all consumers for utility systems replacement fund charges accruing to such consumers during the month, together with the regular utility service billing. All such bills are payable to the city on the date of such mailing or delivering and become delinquent 10 days thereafter, except in cases where specific contracts in writing specify the monthly payment date. 

B. The city shall discontinue utilities services to all consumers whose bills for utility systems replacement fund charges become delinquent. Such service shall not be again furnished at the same premises or to the same consumer, or to any member of his household, at any other premises, until all of said charges to such consumer shall be paid in full, and in such case each applicant for water service shall pay, in advance, a turn-on charge of $10.00. 

C. The city reserves the right to make special contracts, the provisions and conditions of which are different from or have exceptions to the regular published schedules. Special contracts shall be in writing and signed by the proper customer and the mayor, after a resolution authorizing such contract shall have been passed by a majority vote of the city council; provided however, that temporary contracts may be entered into by the city subject to the approval of the city council at its next council meeting. 

D. Except for special contracts which specify the length of time to which the contract rate shall be extended, all rates, rules and regulations are subject to change or modification by the city without notice. [Ord. 87-O-419 § 5.] 


13.20.060 Fees and charges consolidated – Liens. 

A. The city manager and the city recorder are authorized and directed to consolidate all fees and charges for all utilities and/or city services into one account against each property or person served, or for which property or person such services are made and kept available. 

B. All fees and service charges of any kind and character, and for whatsoever purpose the same may be levied, shall constitute a perpetual lien upon any lots, lands, buildings or premises served, or for which the service may be made and kept available. Payment of the charges may be enforced by any remedy or means provided by the statutes of the state of Oregon or by the ordinances of the city of Brookings, in such case made and provided. All such remedies are declared to be cumulative. [Ord. 87-O-419 § 6.] 


13.20.070 Violations – Penalties. 

A. It shall be a violation of these rules and regulations for any person or persons to make connections with the city water or sewer mains or service lines; or to make alterations in any conduit pipe, meters or other fixtures connected therewith; or to connect pipes when they have been disconnected; or to turn water off or on to any premises without first having paid appropriate systems development charges and obtaining the written consent of the city. 

B. It shall be a violation of these rules and regulations for any person or persons to use or tamper with any valve, curb stop, hydrant, meter or other portion of the municipal water system. 

C. Upon any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any owner or consumer, the water supply and sewer service to any such owner or consumer may be shut off by the city without notice until any and all rates, fees and charges for all utility services due and owing to the city shall have been paid for. 

D. Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-590 § 7; Ord. 87-O-419 § 7.] 


13.20.080 Construction.

The rules of statutory construction provided in ORS 174.010 through 174.110 are adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. [Ord. 87-O-419 § 8.] 


Chapter 13.25 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections: 

13.25.010    Purpose.

13.25.020    Scope.

13.25.030    Definitions.

13.25.040    Established.

13.25.050    Methodology.

13.25.060    Authorized expenditures.

13.25.070    Expenditure restrictions.

13.25.080    Improvement plan.

13.25.090    Collection charge.

13.25.100    Delinquent charges – Hearing.

13.25.110    Installment payment.

13.25.120    Exemptions.

13.25.130    Credits.

13.25.140    Segregation and use of revenue.

13.25.150    Appeal.

13.25.160    Prohibited connection.

13.25.170    Penalty.

13.25.180    Construction.


13.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to adopt systems development charges which impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater drainage and treatment, streets, flood control and parks upon those developments that create a need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 1.] 


13.25.020 Scope.

The systems development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 2.] 


13.25.030 Definitions.

For purpose of this chapter:

A. “Capital improvements” means facilities or assets used for:

1. Water supply, treatment and distribution; 

2. Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

3. Drainage and flood control; 

4. Transportation, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bike lanes and paths, street lights, traffic signs and signals, street trees, public transportation, vehicle parking and bridges; or

5. Parks and recreation, including but not limited to, neighborhood parks, community parks, public open space and trail systems, buildings, courts, fields and other like facilities. 

B. “Development” means conducting a building operation or making a physical change in the use of a structure or land which increases the usage or demand for usage of any capital improvement or which contributes to the need for additional or enlarged capital improvement(s).

C. “Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to BMC 13.25.040. 

D. “Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose. 

E. “Owner” means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property. 

F. “Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinances. 

G. “Qualified public improvements” means a capital improvement that is:

1. Required as a condition of residential development approval;

2. Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to BMC 13.25.080; and

3. Provides greater capacity than is necessary for the development and is available for other developers or system users for connection and use.

H. “Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to BMC 13.25.040.

I. “Systems development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, or a combination thereof, assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit for a development as defined by this chapter, or a building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. “Systems development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. “Systems development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 3.] 


13.25.040 Established. 

A. Systems development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council. 

B. Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a systems development charge is hereby imposed upon all parcels of land within the city, and upon all lands outside the boundary of the city that connect to or otherwise use the sewer facilities, storm sewers or water facilities of the city. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 4.] 


13.25.050 Methodology. 

A. The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contribution by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities. 

B. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 5.] 


13.25.060 Authorized expenditures. 

A. Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness. 

B. 1. Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by development. 

2. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to BMC 13.25.080. 

C. Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, systems development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of systems development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of systems development charge expenditures. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 6.] 


13.25.070 Expenditure restrictions.

A. Systems development charge revenues shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements. 

B. Systems development charge revenues shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 7.] 


13.25.080 Improvement plan.

The council shall adopt a plan that: 

A. Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues; 

B. Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement; and 

C. Describes the process for modifying the plan. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 8.] 


13.25.090 Collection charge. 

A. The systems development charge is payable upon issuance of:

1. A building permit;

2. A development permit for development not requiring issuance of a building permit;

3. A permit to connect to the water system; or

4. A permit to connect to the sewer system.

B. If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer system without an appropriate permit, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

C. The finance and human resource director or the designee shall collect the applicable systems development charge from the owner of the parcel when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system to the city is made.

D. The building official or the designee shall not issue a permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, until provision for installment payments have been made pursuant to BMC 13.25.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to BMC 13.25.120. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 9.] 


13.25.100 Delinquent charges – Hearing. 

A. When, for any reason, the systems development charge has not been paid, the finance and human resource director shall report to the city council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which the charge was due and unpaid, and the name of the owner.

B. A public hearing shall be scheduled on the matter with notice of the hearing given to each owner together with a copy of the finance and human resource director’s report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both mail and personal service, with date of mailing or personal service at least 10 days before the date of the scheduled hearing, and by posting notice on the parcel at least 10 days before the date of the scheduled hearing.

C. At the hearing, the city council may accept, reject or modify the determination set forth in the report. If the city finds that a systems development charge is unpaid and uncollected, it shall, by motion, direct the finance and human resource director to docket the unpaid and uncollected systems development charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate and for the city’s actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 10.] 


13.25.110 Installment payment. 

A. When a systems development charge is due and collectible, to the extent provided for by resolution of the city council, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the charge may apply for payment in installments, to include interest, in accordance with the provisions of ORS 223.208.

B. The finance and human resource director shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for correction of computational errors.

C. An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to grant the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien. 

D. The finance and human resource director shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time, the city shall have a lien on the property described in the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the highest rate earned by the city on its cash investments at the time of application approval. At the finance and human resource director’s discretion, the interest portion of all installment payments may be paid in advance, upon application approval, and recorded as a loan origination fee. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 06-O-477B; Ord. 91-O-477 § 11.] 


13.25.120 Exemptions. 

A. Structures existing and occupied on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from a systems development charge imposed by this chapter. Conversions of residential use under the cottage industry standards are not included in this exemption.

B. Additions or alterations which do not increase the floor space of a structure, the land area occupied by the structure, are exempt from all portions of the systems development charge.

C. Additions or alterations which increase the floor space of a structure, or the land area occupied by the structure, shall receive a credit for the highest use calculated by the square footage of the existing building, to be applied as an offset to the system development charge calculation in cases where the new use has a lesser impact that the previous use. [Ord. 15-O-750 § 2; Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 08-O-605 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 12.] 


13.25.130 Credits. 

A. A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a residential development. If a qualified public improvement is located partially on and partially off the parcel that is subject to the residential development approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost of the portion of the improvement that provides greater capacity than necessary and is available for other developers or system users for connection and use. The credit provided for by this section shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed and shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee.

B. Credits shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 08-O-605 § 3; Ord. 91-O-477 § 13.] 


13.25.140 Segregation and use of revenue. 

A. All funds derived from a particular type of systems development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. The portion of the systems development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in BMC 13.25.060.

B. The finance and human resource director shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, for systems development charges showing the total amount of systems development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 14.] 


13.25.150 Appeal. 

A. A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made under the provisions of this chapter, who has been denied the privilege of constructing or developing or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing a written request with the city recorder within 15 days of the action appealed from describing with particularity the matter which forms the basis for the appeal.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, an appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. 

C. After an appeal has been filed, the systems development charge review board shall, within 15 days, notify the appellant of the time and place for consideration of the appeal and the appellant shall have the right to be present at the appeal hearing. The board shall schedule the appeal hearing within 35 days of the date of filing the written request for appeal. The board shall give full consideration to the evidence presented relative to the action appealed from and shall render its decision within seven days after the date of the final appeal hearing and shall notify the appellant of its decision, in writing. 

D. Within 10 days following the decision of the board on the appeal, the appellant or city staff may request a final review of the city manager’s decision by the city council. The city council shall determine whether the decision is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of state law and may modify, affirm or overrule the decision of the board and/or staff. In the event that the final decision determines that there has been an improper expenditure of systems development charge revenues, the city council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

E. Any legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the city council pursuant to BMC 13.25.050 shall not be filed later than 60 days after the adoption of the methodology. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 16.] 


13.25.160 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the water, sewage or drainage systems of the city unless the appropriate systems development charges have been paid or the lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 17.] 


13.25.170 Penalty.

Violation of BMC 13.25.160 is punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC, General Penalty. [Ord. 14-O-730 § 2; Ord. 91-O-477 § 18.] 


13.25.180 Construction.

The rules of statutory construction contained in Chapter 174 ORS are adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. [Ord. 91-O-477 § 19.] 


Chapter 13.30 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES AND CHARGES

Sections:

13.30.010    Creation of fees for services and charges.

13.30.020    Future revisions to fees and charges.

13.30.030    Depositing of funds received.


13.30.010 Creation of fees for services and charges. 

The following fees for services and charges are established and will be charged by the city of Brookings:

	Fees for Services and Charges 

	Copies of City Records	– Single-Sided	$0.25

	– Double-Sided	$0.50

	Large copying projects will be charged a $25.00 fee plus a $0.25 or $0.50 charge per sheet, or actual copying and labor costs, with prior notification to, and acknowledgement of, the requestor.

	Tapes or DVDs of Meetings	$32.00

	Liquor License	– New Application	$25.00

	– Renewal	$25.00

	Return Check Charge	$25.00

	Notary	$5.00

	GIS Maps – Regular	$12.00

	GIS Maps – With Ortho Background	$25.00

	GIS Mapping Research/Reports	$475.00

	Police Dept. Charges:

	Driver’s License Sanctions	$15.00

	Fingerprinting	$10.00

	Intoxilizer	$5.00

	Police Report Copies	$10.00

	Video/Audio Recording	$30.00

	Fire Dept. Charges:

	Insurance Company Reports	$100.00

	Roadway Wash Downs	$150.00

	Park Use Fees:	City Resident	Noncity Resident

	Number of People:

	0 – 50	$40.00	$40.00

	51 – 100	$40.00	$50.00

	101 – 200	$40.00	$75.00

	201 – 400	$40.00	$150.00

	401 – 600	$40.00	$300.00

	601 – 1,000	$40.00	$500.00

	Each Additional 100	$40.00	$50.00

	Stage Use Fee	$40.00	$50.00 

	Commercial Film Use:

	1 – 5	$40.00	$100.00

	6 – 30	$40.00	$150.00

	31 – 60	$40.00	$300.00

	61 – 100	$40.00	$400.00

	Each additional 100	$40.00	$50.00

	Pool Use Fees:

	Pool use fees are established annually by the city manager or their designee.

[Ord. 06-O-577 § 2.]


13.30.020 Future revisions to fees and charges.

All future revisions to these fees and charges shall be by resolution of the council. [Ord. 06-O-577 § 2.]


13.30.030 Depositing of funds received.

All funds collected from the fees and charges established herein shall be received by the city finance director and shall be deposited into the appropriate accounts within the general fund. [Ord. 06-O-577 § 2.]


Chapter 13.35 STORM WATER

Sections:

13.35.010    Establishment of storm water system.

13.35.015    Definitions.

13.35.020    System improvements.

13.35.025    System maintenance.

13.35.027    Alteration, change, restriction, blockage or contamination of watercourses, drainage channels, storm drains prohibited – Collection or concentration of surface waters prohibited.

13.35.030    Prohibition of nonconforming storm drainage system.

13.35.035    Prohibition for constructing storm drainage systems without permit.

13.35.040    Procedure to secure permit.

13.35.045    Indemnification of city.

13.35.050    Procedure to require conformance of nonconforming storm drains.

13.35.055    Material specifications.

13.35.060    Reservation of the city’s right to change specifications.

13.35.065    Violations.


13.35.010 Establishment of storm water system.

A. The city of Brookings, for the protection of the public welfare, for the safety of the public, and for the best interest of the city, hereby declares that the city of Brookings, Oregon, possesses, claims, maintains, exerts, and reserves unto the city complete and full jurisdiction over and unto all conforming storm drainage systems now, or hereafter, constructed within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings.

B. This chapter provides for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a storm water system within the city of Brookings including maintenance and extension of the present storm water system. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 2.]


13.35.015 Definitions.

A. “Contaminant” means any substance or material such as, but not limited to, oil, gasoline, antifreeze, animal waste, lawn and yard fertilizers, defoliants, paint, or chemicals intended for insect control, that could cause harm or otherwise have an adverse effect on the city’s storm drainage system.

B. “Culvert” means a transverse pipe made of concrete, steel, HDPE, PVC, terra cotta tile, or wood used for the transport of storm water/drainage.

C. “Debris” means any foreign material such as, but not limited to, trackout, sediment from erosion, landscaping supplies, lawn clippings, leaves, brush, tree trimmings, household trash, litter, and concrete.

D. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

E. “Impervious surfaces” means surface areas which either prevent or retard saturation of water into the land surface and/or cause water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas and graveled, oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impact the natural saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.

F. “Improved premises” means an area which has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than that which could historically have been expected.

G. “Landscaping” means the process of arranging soil, trees, shrubs, grass, irrigation systems, or other commonly used landscaping materials on a piece of property. For this chapter, landscaping does not include routine lawn or yard maintenance such as grass mowing.

H. “Nonconforming storm drainage component” means:

1. Any culvert or ditch that is constructed upon any property or public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings that has been constructed without a written permit issued by the public works department.

2. Any storm drainage component which is not constructed to standards approved by the city, or maintained in such shape or condition or repair as to render the storm drainage component dangerous or unsafe.

3. Any storm drain component that has not been maintained and is in a condition that could fail or obstruct a drainage path.

I. “Open drainage way” means a natural or manmade path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm runoff water from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.

J. “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

K. “Responsible party” or “person responsible” means the owner, occupant or other person entitled to possession of the property.

L. “Runoff control” is any means approved by the city engineer by which the peak rate of storm runoff from development land surfaces is reduced.

M. “Runoff control measures” can be but are not limited to bioswales, storm water recharge systems, pervious surfaces and detention systems.

N. “Storm drainage system” shall mean a natural drainage course or manmade culverting system or ditch that conveys storm water.

O. “Trackout” means the tracking of mud, soil, debris, or contaminant onto any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 3.]


13.35.020 System improvements.

A. The improvement of both public and private storm drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. The improvement shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies and standards.

B. It is the policy of the city of Brookings to participate in improvements to storm drainage facilities when authorized by the city council. To be considered for approval by the council, a facility must:

1. Be a public facility.

2. Be a substantial benefit to the community.

3. Not detrimentally impact downstream facilities or increase runoff to deficient downstream drainage conveyance.

4. Be designed to convey a minimum of a 25-year storm event and overland escape route as approved by the city’s engineer.

5. Be a replacement or rehabilitation of an existing public facility. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 4.]


13.35.025 System maintenance.

A. Public Storm Drainage Facilities.

1. The city shall maintain all public storm drainage facilities located within city-owned land, city rights-of-way and city easements.

2. Public facilities include, but are not limited to:

a. Pipe drainage systems and their related appurtenances which have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city.

b. Roadside drainage ditches along city streets.

c. Flood control facilities that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city.

B. Private Storm Drainage Facilities.

1. Private storm drainage facilities shall be maintained and repaired by the responsible party.

a. Surface drainage channels must be kept free of debris and maintenance activities must comply with local, federal and state law.

b. Storm drain pipes must be maintained to prevent failure or obstruction.

c. A responsible party shall, within 10 days of receiving actual notice that a watercourse, drainage channel, storm drain, or drainage appurtenance on or adjacent to property owned by the responsible party is obstructed or constricted, remove the obstruction or constriction, and in the event the watercourse forms the boundary between properties, it shall be the duty of each adjacent property owner to remove the obstruction or constriction.

2. Private storm drainage facilities include, but are not limited to:

a. Facilities located on private property and not within a city right-of-way, or within a city easement.

b. Private parking lot storm drains.

c. Roofs, footings and area drains.

d. Drains not designed and constructed for use by the general public.

e. Access drive culverts whether or not within the city right-of-way. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 5.]


13.35.027 Alteration, change, restriction, blockage or contamination of watercourses, drainage channels, storm drains prohibited – Collection or concentration of surface waters prohibited.

A. No watercourse, drainage channel, or storm drain shall be altered, changed, restricted, contaminated or blocked in any manner, nor shall diffused surface waters be collected or concentrated in any manner until or unless a drainage plan prepared by an Oregon registered professional engineer has been submitted to and approved by the city manager or his/her designee.

B. Any property owner who causes or allows any type of construction to take place on his or her property will be responsible for the prevention of any debris, contaminant or potential contaminant from entering the city’s storm drainage system, and must adhere to and abide by the guidelines for erosion control and sediment prevention, as described in the City of Brookings Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Infrastructure.

C. The property owner and any other person that has altered or changed a watercourse, or has caused or allowed the restriction, contamination or blockage thereof in any manner whatsoever, or increased the drainage runoff flow so as to cause flooding or damage to other properties, will be liable for damages arising therefrom. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2.]


13.35.030 Prohibition of nonconforming storm drainage system.

From and after the date of passage and the effectiveness of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person shall construct a nonconforming storm drainage system upon any property, public easement or right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 6.]


13.35.035 Prohibition for constructing storm drainage systems without permit.

No owner of property located within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings, or any other person, shall construct a storm drainage system, or excavate any ground for the purpose of construction of a storm drainage component thereon, without first having applied for and received from the city a development permit for such construction and excavation. A development permit from the city will not be granted without submittal of plans and a copy of permits or letter of non-interest from the Department of State Lands and Army Corps of Engineers, if required by law. Exception: gutters, downspouts and internal systems that do not discharge water off of subject property, or internal systems that discharge water to a predesigned and/or preapproved drainage system. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 7.]


13.35.040 Procedure to secure permit.

Any owner of property located within the corporate limits of the city of Brookings, or any other person desiring to construct or excavate for a storm drainage component within the corporate limits, must comply with the following procedure. An application in writing shall first be made to the public works department setting forth the description of the land upon which a storm drainage component is to be constructed and upon which the excavation, if any, is to be made. This application shall also set forth the material to be used in the construction together with a statement as to how the storm drainage component is to be established. This application may require plans drawn by an Oregon licensed civil engineer and must include a minimum easement width of 15 feet. The city will consider the application, and if the provisions of this chapter have been met, a permit will be issued to the applicant to construct and excavate to the extent that such excavation is necessary to accomplish the purpose applied for.

A public works permit is required per Chapter 12.45 BMC for any and all work in a public right-of-way, waterway or drainage course and may be terminated by order of the city for failure by the property owner to properly maintain the improved waterway and drainage appurtenances in a safe and workmanlike manner. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 8.]


13.35.045 Indemnification of city.

This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the issuance of any permit for drainage improvements or development, the installation of any improvements, the collection or concentration of any diffused surface waters or the alteration, change, restriction, blockage, flooding or damages to watercourses or to other properties resulting therefrom, all of the aforesaid being the responsibility of the private property owners of the properties affected or involved. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2.]


13.35.050 Procedure to require conformance of nonconforming storm drains.

If the city manager finds that a nonconforming storm drainage component exists, he may order the storm drainage component to be repaired per the “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications” of the city of Brookings. The procedure as stated in BMC 8.15.090, General abatement procedure, will be followed. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 10.]


13.35.055 Material specifications.

All material used in the construction of any storm drainage system or component must be in compliance with the city of Brookings “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications” document. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 11.]


13.35.060 Reservation of the city’s right to change specifications.

The city reserves the right to revise, change, or require additions or alterations to any stated specifications, when in their judgment the health, safety, and welfare of the community warrant such actions. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 12.]


13.35.065 Violations.

A. It is a violation for any property owner or other responsible party to cause or allow the growth of vegetation or the presence of a blockage or accumulation of debris within any natural or manmade drainage channel within the city to the point that the natural flow of water within that drainage is substantially impeded, diverted or altered from its most efficient course. Violations of this chapter are deemed a nuisance and will be abated pursuant to BMC 8.15.090.

B. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to BMC 1.05.010. [Ord. 13-O-714 § 2; Ord. 08-O-610 § 13.]


Chapter 13.40 STORM WATER FEES

Sections:

13.40.010    Definitions.

13.40.015    Fee imposed.

13.40.020    Rates, fees and charges.

13.40.025    Disposition of funds.

13.40.030    Review and appeal.


13.40.010 Definitions.

A. “Single-family dwelling (SFD)” means that part of a building or structure which contains one or more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family and where the units are sold and deeded as individual units and have individual water meters. A SFD is presumed to have 2,500 square feet of impervious surface area for purposes of this chapter. The term “SFD” shall be inclusive of those units identified as detached single-family residences, unit ownership and condominiums, etc.

B. “Multiple-family dwelling (MFD)” means a building or facility consisting of more than one dwelling unit with each such unit consisting of one or more rooms with bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family and having a common water meter.

C. “Commercial or industrial unit” means any building or facility used other than as a dwelling unit.

D. “Equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)” means an area which is estimated to place approximately equal demand on the city’s storm drainage system as a single-family dwelling unit. One EDU shall be equal to 2,500 square feet of impervious surface.

E. “Manufactured home” and “manufactured home park” are defined as provided in ORS 446.003.

F. “Open drainage way” means a natural or manmade path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm runoff water from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.

G. “Impervious surfaces” are those surface areas which either prevent or retard saturation of water into the land surface and/or cause water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas and graveled, oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impact the natural saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.

H. “Improved premises” means any area which has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than that which could historically have been expected.

I. “Development” shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

J. “Person responsible” means the owner, agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of a construction project on the property.

K. “Runoff control” is any means approved by the city engineer by which the peak rate of storm runoff from development land surfaces is reduced.

L. “Storm drainage system” shall mean any natural drainage course or manmade culverting system or ditch that conveys storm water.

M. “Runoff control measures” can be but are not limited to bioswales, storm water recharge systems, pervious surfaces and detention systems. [Ord. 08-O-619 § 3.]


13.40.015 Fee imposed.

The structure of the storm drainage utility is intended to be a fee for service and not a charge against properties which have been improved within the city of Brookings, just and equitable charges for storm water service and any subsequent service, which includes the maintenance, operations and extension of the storm water system; and to establish a storm water system fund for these same purposes.

A. Except as the fees may be reduced or eliminated under the provisions of this chapter, the city’s storm water system fees arise when a person responsible uses storm drainage services. It is presumed that storm drainage services are used whenever there is an improved premises.

B. The city of Brookings administrative services department is hereby authorized and directed to collect all storm water system user fees herein imposed through the utility billing system on a monthly basis. For this purpose, the city of Brookings may include storm water system user fees as a part of their billings for water services.

C. Unless another person responsible has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the city’s water utility charges shall pay the storm water system user fees set by council resolution. If there is no water service to the property or if water service is discontinued, the storm water system user fees shall be paid by the person(s) having the right to occupy the property.

D. Storm water system user fees imposed under this chapter shall be a debt due to the city of Brookings, and when such debt should become 30 days delinquent, this charge may be collected in a civil action in the name of the city against the owner or occupant of the improved premises using the storm water system. Payment penalties and delinquencies may be imposed in the same manner as is provided for delinquent water service payments.

E. Each owner or occupant of improved premises shall be notified at least annually of the storm water system services fee.

F. Property not used for single-family dwelling purposes is furnished storm water system service in proportion to the amount of the property’s impervious surface. For each 2,500 square feet of impervious surface, the said property is furnished service equivalent to that furnished a single-family unit and at the minimum service charge established for a single-family unit.

G. The council may, by resolution, exempt any class of user when the council determines that the public interest deems it necessary or that the contribution to storm drainage facility use by the class is insignificant. [Ord. 08-O-619 § 4.]


13.40.020 Rates, fees and charges.

The following storm water system rates are hereby established for all properties located within the currently developed areas of the city.

	TYPE	RATE PER MONTH PER EDU TO NEAREST WHOLE NUMBER OF EDUS	NUMBER OF EDUS

	Single-Family Dwelling	$2.60	1

	Multiple-Family Dwelling	$2.60/2,500 sq. ft.	Determine by Measurement

	Commercial and Industrial Unit	$2.60/2,500 sq. ft.	Determine by Measurement

	Improved Premises or Lots	$2.60/2,500 sq. ft.	Determine by Measurement

	Manufactured Home Parks	$2.60/EDU	6 EDUs per Acre for Total Area

The rates established in this section shall be reduced for a property where appropriate runoff control measures have been taken and approved by the city engineer.

Credit will be allowed for runoff control measures. When approved by the city engineer, storm drainage utility fees may be reduced for a property where approved runoff control measures have been taken. A fee reduction shall be on a straight-line basis with conditions existing on the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, being considered as starting or initial conditions. If the person responsible establishes, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that all runoff from a property is disposed of without utilizing public storm drainage facilities either directly or indirectly, there will be no fees charged under the provisions of this chapter.

Fees shall be reviewed annually and adjusted by resolution to the current year’s March Consumer Price Index – Urban (CPI-U), calculated from the past year. [Ord. 08-O-619 § 5.]


13.40.025 Disposition of funds.

All fees collected under the terms of this chapter shall be deposited in an account to be known as the storm water replacement account. The moneys in said account shall be used by the city for the payment of principal and interest of any bonds of said city for the repair, maintenance and operation of the storm water system. The fees collected under the terms of this chapter may also be used for the replacement or reconstruction of any part of the storm water system and for any upgrades that should become necessary, including the construction of new storm water facilities in the future. [Ord. 08-O-619 § 6.]


13.40.030 Review and appeal.

A. Review by City Engineer. Any storm water system user believing the storm water system user fee is unjust and inequitable as applied to his or her particular circumstances or premises may make written application to the city engineer requesting a review of such user fee. The written request shall, where applicable, show the actual estimated average flow of storm water in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including the manner and method in which such measurements were made. The review of the request shall be made by the city engineer, who shall determine if it is substantiated or not, and if the request is determined to be substantiated, the user fees for that user shall be recomputed based on the approved and revised flow and the new charges thus recomputed will be applicable beginning with the date that the written request was received by the city engineer.

B. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city engineer in denying or modifying a request for application for a review of storm water system user fees shall have the right of appeal of such action to the city council by delivering written notice of such appeal to the city manager within 15 days after receiving the written notice of the action of the city engineer, and such notice of appeal shall specify therein all facts through reasons to be relied upon in such appeal. The appeal shall be held before the council at its next regular meeting held not earlier than 10 days after the filing of such notice of appeal. The decision of the council upon such appeal shall be final and conclusive. [Ord. 08-O-619 § 7.]

 


Title 14 (Reserved)

 


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters: 

15.05    Building Codes

15.10    Repealed

15.15    Repealed


Chapter 15.05 BUILDING CODES

Sections:

15.05.010    Adoption of codes.

15.05.020    Violations – Penalties – Remedies.

15.05.030    Authority to impose administrative civil penalty.

15.05.040    Appeals procedures – Administrative.

15.05.045    Appeals – Code interpretation and application.

15.05.050    Unpaid penalties.


15.05.010 Adoption of codes.

From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the construction, alteration, repair, demolition, moving, use or occupancy of a structure within the jurisdiction of the city of Brookings shall comply with the standards and requirements of the following codes, as now exist or as hereafter amended, each of which is hereby adopted by this reference into the ordinances of the city of Brookings. Also by this reference the city adopts those provisions of the Oregon Administrative Rules which implement these codes. The building official shall enforce the regulations and provisions set forth in the codes and the Oregon Administrative Rules as if the same were set forth herein.

A. The currently adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including the appendices adopted by the state of Oregon and specifically adopting Appendix J;

B. The currently adopted Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code;

C. The currently adopted Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code;

D. The currently adopted Oregon Residential Specialty Code; provided, however, that ORS 455.320 shall not be applicable;

E. The currently adopted Oregon Fire Code and referenced NFPA standards;

F. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, published and copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted in its entirety, except as hereinafter specifically modified, to be hereinafter referred to as the Dangerous Building Code.

1. Section 203 is modified to read as follows:

Citations for violations shall be issued in conformance with Brookings Municipal Code Section 8.15.090; General abatement procedure, 8.15.100; Summary abatement and 1.05; Penalties.

2. Section 701.1 is modified by deleting the last sentence of the paragraph.

3. Section 901 is modified by substituting the term “building official” for the term “public services director” and “finance and human services director” for the term “clerk.”

4. Section 902 is modified by substituting the term “finance and human services director” for the term “clerk.”

5. Section 903 is modified by substituting the term “finance and human services director” for the term “clerk.”

6. Section 905 is modified to read as follows:

905. Assessment. After the proceedings described in Section 904 of this code, the Municipal Court Judge may order that the said charge be imposed as a special assessment against the real property involved and cause the same to be entered in the docket of City liens and thereafter the said assessment shall constitute a lien against said property.

7. Sections 906, 908, 909, 910, 911 and 912 to be omitted.

G. The currently adopted Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Standards;

H. The currently adopted State of Oregon Parks and Camps Rules. [Ord. 14-O-733 § 2; Ord. 10-O-656 § 2; Ord. 07-O-588 § 2; Ord. 06-O-575; Ord. 96-O-349.D § 3; Ord. 93-O-349.C §§ 2 – 5; Ord. 90-O-349.B § 1; Ord. 90-O-349.A §§ 2, 3, 4; Ord. 86-O-408 § 2; Ord. 81-0-349 § 1.] 


15.05.020 Violations – Penalties – Remedies. 

A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this code.

B. Violation of a provision of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty not to exceed the amounts shown in the penalty matrix to be adopted by resolution and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code.

C. Each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter exists constitutes a separate violation.

D. In addition to the above penalties, a condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth under law.

E. The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available to the city under any ordinance, statute or law. [Ord. 10-O-656 § 2; Ord. 81-0-349 § 3.] 


15.05.030 Authority to impose administrative civil penalty.

A. Upon a determination by the building official that any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by subsections (A) through (K) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, a responsible person includes the violator, and if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, may include the owner as well.

B. Prior to issuing an order to correct a violation under this section, the building official may pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary correction.

C. Prior to issuing a notice of civil violation and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall issue an order to correct a violation to one or more of the responsible persons. Except where the building official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare, the time for correction shall be 15 days.

D. Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct a violation, the building official shall determine whether such correction has been completed. If the required correction has not been completed by the date or time specified in the order, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty to each responsible person to whom an order to correct was issued.

E. Notwithstanding subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty without having issued an order to correct violation or made attempts to secure voluntary correction where the building official determines that the violation was knowing or intentional or a repeat of a similar violation.

F. In imposing an administrative civil penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall consider:

1. The person’s past history in taking all feasible steps or procedures necessary or appropriate to correct the violation;

2. Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders, and permits;

3. The gravity and magnitude of the violation;

4. Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;

5. Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, negligence, or an intentional act;

6. The violator’s cooperativeness and efforts to correct the violation;

7. Any relevant rule of the building official.

G. Any notice of a civil violation that imposes an administrative civil penalty under this section shall either be served by personal service or shall be sent by registered or certified mail and by first class mail. Any such notice served by mail shall be deemed received for purposes of any time computations hereunder three days after the date mailed if to an address within this state, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside this state. Every notice shall include:

1. Reference to the particular code provision, ordinance number, or rule involved;

2. A statement of the matters asserted or charged;

3. A statement of the amount of the penalty or penalties imposed;

4. The date on which the order to correct was issued and time by which correction was to be made, or if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, a statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; and

5. A statement of the party’s right to appeal the civil penalty to the city manager; a description of the process the party may use to appeal the civil penalty; and the deadline by which such an appeal must be filed.

H. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized that is issued a notice of civil penalty may appeal the penalty to the city manager. The provisions of BMC 15.05.040 shall govern any requested appeal.

I. A civil penalty imposed hereunder shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, unless the responsible person appeals the penalty to the city manager pursuant to, and within the time limits established by, BMC 15.05.040.

J. Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

K. The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to:

1. Assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the city in remediation, cleanup, or abatement; and

2. Any other actions authorized by law; provided, that the city shall not issue a citation to municipal court for a violation of this chapter. [Ord. 10-O-656 § 2; Ord. 07-O-588 § 3; Ord. 81-0-349 § 4.] 


15.05.040 Appeals procedures – Administrative.

A. A person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized aggrieved by an administrative action of the building official taken pursuant to any section of this code that authorizes an appeal under this section may, within 15 days after the date of notice of the action, appeal in writing to the city manager. The written appeal shall be accompanied by a $150.00 appeal fee and shall include:

1. The name and address of the appellant;

2. The nature of the determination being appealed;

3. The reason the determination is incorrect; and

4. What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

If a person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized appeals a civil penalty to the city manager, the penalty shall become final upon issuance of the city manager’s decision affirming the imposition of the administrative civil penalty.

B. If a notice of revocation of a license or permit is the subject of the appeal, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. Notwithstanding this subsection, an emergency suspension shall take effect upon issuance of, or such other time stated in, the notice of suspension.

C. Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the city manager within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant.

D. The city manager shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the city manager deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The burden of proof shall be on the building official. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply.

E. The city manager shall issue a written decision within 10 days of the hearing date. The written decision of the city manager is final.

F. The appeal fee shall only be refunded to the appellant upon a finding by the city manager that the appeal was not frivolous.

G. Failure to pay a penalty imposed hereunder within 10 days after the penalty becomes final as provided in subsection (A) of this section shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The building official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by BMC 15.05.050, other provisions of this code, or state statutes. [Ord. 14-O-733 § 2; Ord. 10-O-656 § 2; Ord. 81-0-349 § 5.]


15.05.045 Appeals – Code interpretation and application.

A. Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the building codes, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of all members of the common council of the city of Brookings. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.

B. Appeal Procedure. Any decision by the building official relating to the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction may be appealed to the board of appeals in conformance with procedures provided herein. [Ord. 14-O-733 § 2.]


15.05.050 Unpaid penalties.

A. Failure to pay an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this code within 10 days after the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The building official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection (B) of this section, other provisions of this code, or state statutes.

B. If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 30 days after such penalty becomes final, the finance and human services director shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien in the docket of city liens. At the time such an assessment is made, the finance and human services director shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the docket of city liens. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as all city liens. Interest shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

C. In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy. [Ord. 14-O-733 § 2; Ord. 10-O-656 § 2.]


Chapter 15.10 BUILDING CODE ENFORCEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. 14-O-733)


Chapter 15.15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

(Repealed by Ord. 15-O-743)


Title 16 (Reserved)


Title 17 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters: 

17.01    General Provisions

17.04    Development Permit Procedures

17.08    Definitions

17.12    Establishment of Zoning Districts and Zoning Map

17.16    Suburban Residential (SR) District

17.20    Single-Family Residential (R-1) District

17.24    Two-Family Residential (R-2) District

17.28    Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) District

17.32    Manufactured Home Residential (R-MH) District

17.36    Professional Office (PO-1) District

17.40    Public Open Space (P/OS) District

17.44    Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) District

17.48    Shopping Center Commercial (C-2) District

17.52    General Commercial (C-3) District

17.56    Tourist Commercial (C-4) District

17.64    Industrial Park (I-P) District

17.68    General Industrial (M-2) District

17.70    Master Plan Development (MPD) District

17.72    Marine Activity (MA) District

17.74    Riparian Protection (RP) Overlay Zone

17.76    Airport Approach (AA) Overlay Zone

17.80    Site Plan Approval

17.84    Public Hearings Notice Procedures

17.88    Sign Regulations

17.92    Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations

17.94    Landscaping

17.98    Flood Damage Prevention

17.100    Hazardous Building Site Protection Hillside Development Standards

17.104    Home Occupations

17.112    Repealed

17.116    Planned Community

17.120    Nonconforming Uses

17.124    Specific Standards Applying to Conditional Uses

17.126    Special Setback Provisions on Certain Streets

17.128    Interpretations and Exceptions

17.132    Variances

17.136    Conditional Use Permits

17.140    Legislative Text Amendments and Quasi-Judicial Comprehensive Plan Map and/or Zone Changes

17.144    Annexations

17.148    Repealed

17.152    Appeal to City Council

17.156    Appeal to Planning Commission

17.160    Enforcement and Penalties

17.164    Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

17.168    Public Facilities Improvement Standards and Criteria for Utilities

17.170    Street Standards

17.171    Neighborhood Circulation Plans

17.172    Land Divisions

17.180    Workforce Housing


Chapter 17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections: 

17.01.010    Title.

17.01.020    Purpose.

17.01.030    Enactment and effect.

17.01.040    Compliance with code provisions.


17.01.010 Title.

This document and its provisions shall be known as the “Land Development Code of the City of Brookings.” [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.01.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this code is to classify, designate and regulate the location, placement and use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, commercial, industrial or other uses in appropriate places and for said purpose to divide the city of Brookings into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement; to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air and prevention of fires; to prevent undue concentrations of population; to lessen congestion of streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities such as transportation, water, sewer, schools, parks and other public requirements; and in general to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and visitors of Brookings; all of which are in accordance with and in implementation of the comprehensive plan of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.01.030 Enactment and effect.

This code is enacted and placed into effect as a result of its adoption by the city council of Brookings on the tenth day of April, 1989. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.01.040 Compliance with code provisions.

No buildings or other structures shall be constructed, improved, or altered, enlarged or moved, nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the city be commenced or changed, nor shall any condition of or upon real property be caused or maintained, after the effective date of this code except in conformity with conditions prescribed for each of the several zones established hereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge or use, or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this code contrary to the provisions of this code. Where this code imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this code shall control. This code shall apply to all actions which have not reached the following steps: 

A. Site review: final approval by city staff or the planning commission;

B. Partitioning and subdivision: approval of preliminary (tentative) plat;

C. Planned unit developments: final approval by the planning commission;

D. Signs: final permit approval; 

E. Variances and conditional use permits: approval by the planning commission;

F. Zone change: ordinance enactment. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.04 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES1

Sections: 

17.04.010    Purpose.

17.04.020    Development permit required.

17.04.030    Burden of proof.

17.04.040    Limitation on new applications.

17.04.050    Permit issuance, appeals of a city decision, and effective date of approval.

17.04.060    Lands in violation.

17.04.070    Exemptions from requirement to do improvements to public infrastructure.

17.04.080    Preapplication conference.

17.04.090    Process and decision.


17.04.010 Purpose.

Development permits are issued to authorize the use and development of land consistent with the provisions of this code. [Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2.]


17.04.020 Development permit required.

No person shall engage in or cause the development of land for which a development permit has not been issued. Development permits shall be in a form prescribed by the city. Development permits are required for:

A. Building permits; and/or

B. Land use decisions; and/or

C. Development on a hazardous building site as found in Chapter 17.100 BMC; and/or

D. Other development requiring written authorization in this code.

Making an application for a development permit is described in BMC 17.80.030, site plan approval, or for hazardous building sites, Chapter 17.100 BMC. [Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2.]


17.04.030 Burden of proof.

In any land use decision, the burden of producing substantial evidence to demonstrate compliance with the applicable criteria is upon the applicant. If adequate evidence is not provided, the application must be denied. [Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2.]


17.04.040 Limitation on new applications.

If a land use decision application is denied, said application shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one year from the date of said denial. In order to resubmit an application which has been denied within one year of the initial submittal, a new application affecting the same property must be, in the opinion of the planning director, substantially different from the application denied, or circumstances must have changed to an extent that further consideration is warranted. [Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2.]


17.04.050 Permit issuance, appeals of a city decision, and effective date of approval.

Development permits shall be issued by the city manager or their designee according to the provisions of this code. Neither the city building official nor any other state or local official shall issue a permit for use, development or occupation of a structure which has not been approved according to this code. 

An appeal of an administrative decision or a planning commission decision may be filed with the planning department no later than 15 days following the date of mailing (postmark date) of the notice of the final order, or 15 days following notification of the administrative decision.

The effective date of approval in any land use decision under this code is the date upon which the decision is no longer appealable. [Ord. 10-O-661 § 2; Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2. Formerly 17.04.030.]


17.04.060 Lands in violation.

The city manager or their designee shall not issue a development permit for the partitioning, subdivision, development, or use of land that has been previously divided in violation of state or local codes then in effect, or divided in violation of this code subsequent to its adoption, or otherwise developed or used in violation of this code, regardless of whether the permit applicant created the violation, unless the violation can be rectified as part of the proposed development in a manner provided by this code. [Ord. 10-O-661 § 2; Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2. Formerly 17.04.040.]


17.04.070 Exemptions from requirement to do improvements to public infrastructure.

The developments and activities listed below are exempt from the requirements to do improvements to public infrastructure, but are nevertheless subject to the provisions of this code: 

A. Remodel, addition, alteration, repair, or replacement of an existing residence for residential use, or siting of an accessory structure;

B. Remodel, alteration or repair to a commercial structure resulting in no greater impacts or intensity of use. [Ord. 10-O-661 § 2; Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2. Formerly 17.04.050]


17.04.080 Preapplication conference.

A. An applicant or the applicant’s authorized representative shall request the city manager or their designee to arrange a preapplication conference, unless the applicant and director agree that the conference is not needed. Such preapplication conference will be conducted by the site plan committee or, in the case of a subdivision, utilize the process found in BMC 17.172.070. 

B. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of this code, to provide for an exchange of information regarding applicable elements of the comprehensive plan and development code requirements, and to otherwise identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed development. 

C. Any multiple-family project involving more than four dwelling units, a planned unit development, dwelling group, or rear lot development requires a rough sketch conceptual plan to be reviewed in the preapplication conference. 

D. The applicant shall be provided with a written summary of the conference, including confirmation of the procedures to be used to process the application, a list of materials to be submitted, and the criteria and standards which may apply to the approval of the application. [Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2. Formerly 17.04.060.]


17.04.090 Process and decision.

The determination of completeness of an application shall comply with ORS 227.178. Specific regulations for completeness are found in various locations within this title, such as BMC 17.172.070 for subdivisions, Chapter 17.100 BMC for hazardous building sites, and BMC 17.80.050 through 17.80.070 for other applications. The final decision shall be rendered in compliance with the time limits stated in ORS 227.178. [Ord. 10-O-654 § 2; Ord. 09-O-632 § 2; Ord. 08-O-600 § 2. Formerly 17.04.070.]1

Prior legislation: Ords. 89-O-446, 90-O-446.A, 92-O-446.K and 96-O-446.BB. 


Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections: 

17.08.001    Definitions – Generally.

17.08.010    A terms.

17.08.020    B terms.

17.08.030    C terms.

17.08.040    D terms.

17.08.050    E terms.

17.08.060    F terms.

17.08.070    G terms.

17.08.080    H terms.

17.08.090    I terms.

17.08.100    J terms.

17.08.110    K terms.

17.08.120    L terms.

17.08.130    M terms.

17.08.140    N terms.

17.08.150    O terms.

17.08.160    P terms.

17.08.170    Q terms.

17.08.180    R terms.

17.08.190    S terms.

17.08.200    T terms.

17.08.210    U terms.

17.08.220    V terms.

17.08.230    W terms.

17.08.240    X terms.

17.08.250    Y terms.

17.08.260    Z terms.


17.08.001 Definitions – Generally.

Where words or phrases used in this code have specialized or technical meanings, definitions are provided. The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive. All other words or phrases shall be interpreted as they are commonly defined in everyday usage. Some individual chapters have specific definitions relating to the standards being discussed therein. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.010 A terms.

“Abutting” means having a common boundary line, except where two or more lots or parcels adjoin only at a corner.

“Access” or “accessway” means the place, means or way by which pedestrians and vehicles have ingress and egress to a property or use.

“Accessory structure or use” means a use or structure incidental and subordinate to the main use of the property, and which is located on the same lot with the main one.

“Addition” means a structure that increases size of an existing building or structure on a lot or parcel.

“Adjacent” means to be near, close; for example, a commercial district across the street or highway from a residential district shall be considered as adjacent.

“Adjoining” means the same as “abutting.”

“Agriculture” means the use of the land for farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, silviculture, viticulture, apiaries, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for storing produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be incidental to that of the normal agricultural activities; and provided further, that the above uses shall not include the operation of a feed lot or other commercial feeding of animals.

“Agriculture structures” means structures intended primarily or exclusively for support of agricultural functions and exemplified by, but not restricted to, barns, silos, water towers, windmills, greenhouses, and stables.

“Alley” means a public or private way not more than 30 feet wide affording only secondary means of access to abutting property. 

“Alteration” means any structural change to a building or other structure.

“Altered” means structurally changed.

“Amendment” means a change in the wording, context or substance of this code or the comprehensive plan document, or a change in the zone boundaries or area district boundaries upon the zoning map or designations upon the comprehensive plan map.

“Animal hospital” means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use.

“Antenna” means a device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish, for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radiation and is typically mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast or building.

“Apartment” means a dwelling unit in a multiple-family building or mixed-use structure.

“Architectural projections/features” means decorative extensions or other portions of a building that add no floor space or key structural value.

“Assessor” means the county assessor of Curry County. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.F § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.020 B terms.

“Basement” means a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half of its height, measured from its floor to its ceiling, below the average adjoining finished grade; if the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above finished grade at any point, such space shall be considered a story.

“Bed and breakfast” means the rental of one or more rooms in an owner-occupied, single-family residence where a breakfast meal is served during the a.m. hours only.

“Building” means any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

“Building, main” means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot or parcel, as provided in this code. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.SS; Ord. 91-O-446.F § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.030 C terms.

“City” means the city of Brookings, Oregon, as represented by the city manager or designated representative.

“City engineer” means the city engineer of the city of Brookings, Oregon.

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Brookings, Oregon.

“Clinic” means a place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients.

“Club” means an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not groups organized primarily to render a service carried as a business for profit.

“Code” means the city of Brookings land development code.

“Collocation” means the placement of two or more antenna systems or platforms by separate FCC license holders (“providers”) on a structure such as a tower, building, water tank or utility pole.

“Commercial service drive” means an accessway for a shopping center containing four or more businesses having common parking areas. 

“Commission” or “planning commission” means the planning commission of the city of Brookings, Oregon.

“Comprehensive plan” means the comprehensive plan of the city of Brookings, Oregon.

“Condominiums” means a type of residential, commercial or industrial development offering individual ownership of units and common ownership of open spaces and other amenities and facilities, and regulated, in part, by state law (ORS 94.004 through 94.480).

“Construct” means to build, form, or erect by fitting parts together systematically. For the purposes of this code, “construct” shall also include the preparation of a site for building by the clearing of brush and grading of land for roads, driveways, utilities and foundations.

“Contiguous” means the same as “abutting.”

“Cottage industry” means a small-scale commercial operation conducted at a residence that is more intense than allowed in Chapter 17.104 BMC, Home Occupations, requiring a conditional use permit.

“Council, city” or “common council” means the city council of the city of Brookings, Oregon.

“Courtyard” means an open, unoccupied space of one lot or parcel on which a group of dwelling units face or front.

“Cul-de-sac” means a short street which has one end open to traffic and is terminated by a vehicular turn-around. [Ord. 14-O-722 § 2; Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 06-O-572 § 1; Ord. 94-O-446.V § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.040 D terms.

“Day care or nursery” means a school or child care center housing 17 or more children for no more than 12 hours a day, with or without compensation, including for board, supervision, and/or training provided at premises not the normal residence of the child.

“Dedicate” means to place in public ownership by the recording of a plat or by other conveyance. 

“Density” means the total site area, minus the area dedicated to streets, divided by the total number of dwelling units.

“Development” means the alteration of improved or unimproved land, land use approvals, building permits activities regulated in Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Site Protection Hillside Development Standards, and other activities requiring written authorization in this code.

“Development permit” means a permit issued for a development which is in compliance with this code and the comprehensive plan.

“District” means a zoning district.

“Drainageway” means a natural or manmade watercourse which has the specific function of collecting natural stream water or storm runoff water from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation and which conveys concentrations of water over the surface of the land.

“Dwelling group” means the integrated site design of a group of two or more dwelling units located on a lot or parcel in one ownership and having a yard or courtyard in common.

“Dwelling, multifamily” means a structure that contains three or more dwelling units.

“Dwelling, single-family” means a detached structure that contains one dwelling unit.

“Dwelling, two-family” or “duplex” means a structure that contains two dwelling units.

“Dwelling unit” means two or more rooms, used by one or more persons for living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation purposes, and having not more than one kitchen. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.050 E terms.

“Easement” means an interest in land owned by another that entitles its holder to a specific limited use or enjoyment.

“Enlargement of use” means to increase the physical area for, or the intensity of, the existing use and/or placing an additional use on a lot or parcel. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.F § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.060 F terms.

“Fence, sight-obscuring” means a fence, wall or nondeciduous planting arranged in such a way as to obstruct vision.

“Findings” means written statements of fact, conclusions and determinations based on evidence presented in relation to the decision approval criteria and accepted by the review body in support of a decision.

“Flag lot” means the same as “rear lot.”

“Floodplain, 100-year” means the land within the city subject to a one percent chance of flooding in any given year.

“Floodway” means that portion of a floodplain and river channel that is necessary to conduct the waters of the base flood without cumulatively raising the water level more than one foot.

“Floor area” means the area included in the surrounding walls of a building, or portion thereof, exclusive of cantilevered bay windows and courts.

Frontage. See definition for “Street, frontage.” [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.070 G terms.

“Garage” or “carport” means a permanently constructed building with covered roof available for the parking of a motor vehicle.

“Grade (ground level)” means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the building. In case a wall is parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.

“Guest house” means an accessory building no greater in size than 500 square feet and containing no kitchen or kitchen facilities that is designed, constructed, and used to provide temporary living accommodations for guests or for members of the same family as that occupying the main structure. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.080 H terms.

Height. See definition for “Structure, height of.”

“Home occupation” means a lawful occupation carried on within a dwelling or in an accessory building to a dwelling by members of the family occupying the dwelling, and which complies with the conditions of Chapter 17.104 BMC. 

“Hotel/motel” means any building or portion thereof designed and used for temporary occupancy of individuals lodged with or without meals. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.090 I terms.

“Irregularly shaped parcel” means a lot or parcel that due to shape or frontage has property lines that do not fit the definition of front, side and rear lot lines making the lot depth and width difficult to determine. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2.]


17.08.100 J terms.

Reserved. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2.]


17.08.110 K terms.

“Kennel” means any premises where four or more dogs, cats or other small animals are boarded or bred, excluding those kenneled for medical or grooming purposes. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.120 L terms.

“Land division” means partitioning or subdividing a subject property.

“Livestock” means any domestic farm animal kept for sale or use. Keeping of livestock within the city requires a conditional use permit.

“Lot” means a single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.

“Lot area” means the total amount of land within the property lines bounding a lot or parcel.

“Lot, corner” means any lot having at least two contiguous sides abutting on one or more streets; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.

“Lot coverage” means that percentage of the total lot area covered by structures.

“Lot depth” means the average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For irregular-shaped parcels see definition for “irregularly shaped parcel.” 

“Lot, interior” means a lot that is not a corner lot.

“Lot line” means any property line bounding a lot or parcel.

“Lot line adjustment” means the relocation of a common boundary, where an additional lot or parcel is not created. 

“Lot line, front” means, in the case of an interior lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the street other than an alley. In the case of a corner lot, “front lot line” means the frontage from which the lot is accessed and addressed. 

“Lot line, rear” means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For an irregular-shaped lot, see definition for “irregularly shaped parcel.” 

“Lot line, side” means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

“Lot, through” means an interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.

“Lot width” means the average horizontal distance between the side lot or the distance between the side lot lines within the buildable area (area of the lot less required setbacks). In the case of a corner lot, “lot width” shall mean the horizontal distance between the lot line adjacent to a street that does not provide access and the opposite lot line. For an irregular-shaped lot, see definition for “irregularly shaped parcel.” [Ord. 09-O-638 § 2; Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.130 M terms.

“Maintain” means to keep in good order and repair at all times so that the structure, improvement, or required condition of approval does not constitute any danger or hazard to public safety or a visual blight, and carries out the purpose for which it was installed, constructed or required.

“Manufactured home” means a transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy conforming to the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code (also referred to as the HUD code).

“Manufactured home park” means a defined area under single ownership or control in which manufactured homes are used for human habitation, or in which spaces are improved, designed or offered for such purposes.

“Minor change” means a change to the design and/or conditions of approval of a planned unit development, conditional use permit, partition, or subdivision that does not significantly change the nature of the project or subdivision. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.J § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.140 N terms.

“Nonconforming structure or use” means a use of land or structure which lawfully existed at the time of the adoption of this code, or of any amendment thereto, but which presently does not conform with the regulations imposed by this code. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.08.150 O terms.

Reserved. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2.]


17.08.160 P terms.

“Parcel” means a single unit of land that is created by the partitioning process.

“Parcel, discrete” means a unit of land created by partitioning of the subject property as defined in ORS 92.010 and in compliance with all regulations in this code; or by deed or sales contract, if there were no applicable planning, zoning, or partitioning ordinances or regulations in effect at the time the parcel was created.

“Parking area, public” means an open area, other than a street or other public way, used for parking and available to the public whether for a fee, free, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.

“Parking space” means a permanently surfaced and marked area conforming to Chapter 17.92 BMC excluding paved area necessary for access. 

“Partition” means creation of three or fewer parcels from the subject property, within the calendar year, and without the creation of a street.

“Permittee” means the person who is proposing to use or who is using the land pursuant to any permit.

“Person” means an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the federal or state government, town, county, district or any other group or combination acting as an entity.

“Pets” means dogs, cats, rabbits, domesticated miniature species, or 10 or less poultry. Pets are allowed as an accessory permitted use in any zone.

“Planned community” (previously “planned unit development”) means a development that receives approval to allow a greater variety in relationships between buildings and open space. The standards for planned communities can be found in Chapter 17.116 BMC. The terms “planned community” and “planned unit development” are synonymous as used in this title.

“Plat” means the map or drawing on which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is presented and which is submitted for approval and intended to be recorded in its approved final form. [Ord. 10-O-666 § 2; Ord. 09-O-638 § 2; Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.F § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.170 Q terms.

Reserved. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2.]


17.08.180 R terms.

“Rear lot” means a “flag” shaped lot or parcel with its buildable area set back some distance from a road and having a narrow strip of land on which the driveway provides access to a road.

“Reasonable hours of operation” means daylight hours all days of the week.

“Recreational vehicle” or “travel trailer” means a self-propelled or towable mobile unit used for temporary dwelling purposes by travelers.

“Recreational vehicle park” means a commercially developed lot upon which two or more recreational vehicles occupied for living or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether a fee is paid for such service or accommodations.

“Rent” means the consideration charged for the occupancy of space in a hotel/motel or short-term rental as defined in BMC 17.08.190, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 95-O-446.Y § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.190 S terms.

“School, private” means an educational facility meeting federal, state, and local requirements and funded by means other than public monies. It does not include business colleges, nursery schools, dance schools, riding academies, or specialized trade or vocational schools.

“School, public” means an educational facility meeting federal, state, and local requirements and funded by public monies. 

“Setback” means the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a street right-of-way or property line, to the nearest vertical wall or other element of a building or structure as defined herein. 

“Shopping center” means a group of four or more stores planned and designed for the site on which it is built, functioning as an integrated unit, with off-street parking and landscaped areas. 

“Short-term rental” means a residential structure, either single-family, duplex, apartment or condominium, that is rented for lodging purposes for a period of less than 30 days.

“Sign” means any notice, advertisement, or communication, including the supporting structure, used as an outdoor display. 

“Sign area” means the total amount of the square footage within the outside dimensions of the sign face. Size calculations for double-sided signs consider only the outside dimensions of one side. 

“Site plan” means a plot plan, prepared to scale, showing accurate and complete dimensions of all of the existing and proposed structures, etc., as listed in BMC 17.80.030 for a specific parcel of land or development site.

“Site plan committee” means the committee as defined in BMC 17.80.020.

“Stealth characteristics” means the use of camouflage techniques to disguise or minimize the visual impact of a tower or antennas (i.e., located in conjunction with a church, steeple, stadium lighting, made to look like a tree or flagpole, etc.).

“Street, arterial” means a major street accommodating intra-community through traffic and trips of moderate length. Highway 101 is the only street identified as an arterial street in the City of Brookings Transportation System Plan (TSP).

“Street, collector” means a major street which transports traffic from local streets and neighborhoods to the arterial street system and is identified as such in the City of Brookings Transportation System Plan (TSP).

“Street, frontage” means a street that abuts a front lot line and from which the lot or parcel is accessed and addressed. 

“Street, private” means a street that has not been dedicated to the city public purposes.

“Street, public” means a thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, lane, drive, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare.

“Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joist, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles or retaining walls or similar components. 

“Structure” means anything constructed or built, or any piece of work deliberately built up or composed of parts adjoining in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming pools and covered patios, excepting outdoor areas such as paved areas, walks, tennis courts and similar recreation areas.

“Structure, height of” means the average of the vertical distance measured from the highest ridgeline of the roof to the finished grade at the center of all four sides of the structure. 

“Subdivision” means a division of land creating four or more lots from the subject property, or creating three or fewer lots and the creation of a street. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.200 T terms.

“Tax lot” means a single unit of land shown on the Curry County assessor’s parcel map which is identified by a tax lot number and which may or may not be a discrete parcel.

“Townhouse” means a type of residential, commercial or industrial development offering individual ownership of units including a minimum of the land under the unit and common ownership of open spaces and other amenities and facilities, and regulated, in part, by state law (ORS 94.004 through 94.480). [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.210 U terms.

“Use” means the purpose for which land and/or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.220 V terms.

“Vision obstruction” means objects limiting visibility for motorists, pedestrians, or bicyclists as defined in BMC 17.128.040. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.230 W terms.

“Water-dependent (WD)” means a use or activity which can be carried out only on, in or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for waterborne transportation, recreation, energy production or source of water. 

“Water-related (WR)” means uses which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent land or waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public loss of quality in the goods or services offered. 

“Wholesale” means the business of selling goods or merchandise to retailers or jobbers for resale to the ultimate consumer.

“Wireless telecommunication facility” means unmanned structures and equipment for the transmission and reception of radio frequency (RF) signals; usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment, a support structure (tower), antennas or other transmission and reception devices.

“Wireless telecommunication provider” means a person or company in the business of offering telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

“Wireless telecommunication tower” means a structure more than 10 feet tall, built primarily to support one or more telecommunication antennas.

“Wrecking yard” means an area used for the dismantling and/or wrecking of used motor vehicles, machinery, or trailers; or the storage or sale of dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked motor vehicles, machinery, or trailers or their parts; or the storage of inoperable vehicles. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.240 X terms.

Reserved. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2.]


17.08.250 Y terms.

“Yard” means the area defined by required setbacks.

“Yard, front” means an open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this code.

“Yard, rear” means an open space extending the full width of the lot or parcel between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this code.

“Yard, side” means an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a structure and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this code. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.08.260 Z terms.

Reserved. [Ord. 08-O-606 § 2.]


Chapter 17.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP 

Sections: 

17.12.010    Classification of zoning districts.

17.12.020    Application of regulations to districts generally.

17.12.030    Zoning map.

17.12.040    Interpretation of district boundaries.


17.12.010 Classification of zoning districts.

For the purposes of this code, the city of Brookings is divided into zoning districts designated as follows:

	Zoning Districts	Map Symbol and Abbreviated Designation

	Suburban Residential	SR 

	Single-Family Residential	R-1 

	Two-Family Residential	R-2 

	Multiple-Family Residential	R-3 

	Mobile Home Residential	R-MH 

	Professional Office	PO-1 

	Public Open Space	P/OS 

	Neighborhood Commercial	C-1 

	Shopping Center Commercial	C-2 

	General Commercial	C-3 

	Tourist Commercial	C-4 

	Industrial Park	I-P 

	General Industrial	M-2 

	Master Plan Development	MPD

	Marine Activities	MA 

	Airport Approach Overlay	AA

[Ord. 09-O-649 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.12.020 Application of regulations to districts generally. 

No structure shall be erected or altered, nor shall any use be allowed, in violation of the requirements of the district in which it is located, unless specifically provided for elsewhere in the code. [Ord. 09-O-649 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.12.030 Zoning map. 

A. The location and the boundaries of the districts designated in BMC 17.12.010 are hereby established as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Brookings,” and hereafter referred to as the “zoning map.”

B. A copy of this map shall be maintained on file in the planning department and is hereby made a part of this code. Any revisions of said map, when an ordinance is duly entered, signed and filed with the city recorder as authorized by subsection (C) of this section, are a part of this code.

C. When the zoning of any area is changed by the city council in the manner prescribed by this code, the official zoning map shall be so revised that it accurately portrays said change and dated with the effective date of the adopting ordinance. [Ord. 09-O-649 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.12.040 Interpretation of district boundaries.

In making a determination where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on said zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following right-of-way line of streets, alleys or highways, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.

B. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated in the manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of the former right-of-way and all of the area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.

C. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. If a district boundary divides a lot into two or more districts, the entire lot shall be placed in the district that accounts for the greater area of the lot by the adjustment of the district boundary; provided, that the boundary adjustment is for a distance of less than 20 feet. If an adjustment of more than 20 feet is required, the change in the district boundary shall be treated as an amendment. [Ord. 09-O-649 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


Chapter 17.16 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL (SR) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.16.010    Purpose.

17.16.020    Permitted uses.

17.16.030    Accessory uses.

17.16.040    Conditional uses.

17.16.050    Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

17.16.060    Lot width and yard requirements. 

17.16.070    Maximum structure height.

17.16.080    Maximum lot coverage.

17.16.090    Signs.

17.16.100    Parking.

17.16.110    Manufactured housing siting requirements.

17.16.120    Other required conditions.


17.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the SR district is to stabilize and protect the suburban residential qualities of areas which, because of topography, level of service or other natural or developmental factors, are best suited to large lot sizes. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Single-family dwellings. Dwellings must have a garage or carport constructed of like materials;

B. Subject to the siting requirements of BMC 17.16.110, a manufactured home as defined by ORS 446.003. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted: 

A. Guest houses, containing no kitchen or kitchen facilities and limited to no greater than 500 square feet in size. Guest houses may not be rented or otherwise conducted as a business.

B. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use.

C. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC.

D. Boats, trailers, pick-up campers, motor homes and similar equipment may be stored, but not occupied, except as provided for temporary sleeping purposes in BMC 8.15.087, on a lot in an “R” district; provided, that:

1. Parking and storage shall be at least five feet from the front property line and at least three     feet from a street and interior side or rear lot line; except, however, no storage shall be allowed within 20 feet of the corner along both property lines at a street corner;

2. All areas used for storage of such vehicle/equipment shall be paved or a graveled hard surface. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Recreation uses and facilities, including country clubs, golf courses, and swimming clubs, but not including such intensive commercial recreation uses as a golf driving range, race track or amusement park;

B. Churches, subject to BMC 17.124.100; 

C. Hospitals, and rest, nursing and convalescent homes, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

D. Public or private schools but not including a business, dancing, trade, technical or similar school, subject to BMC 17.124.011;

E. Nursery schools and day care facilities, subject to BMC 17.124.010;

F. Governmental structures or uses including parks and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, and museums, but not including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses; 

G. Riding academies and public stables, subject to BMC 17.124.070;

H. Cemeteries, mortuaries, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums, subject to BMC 17.124.090;

I. Excavation and removal of sand, gravel, stone, soil or other earth products, subject to BMC 17.124.020 (commercial excavations);

J. Public and quasi-public halls, lodges and clubs, subject to BMC 17.124.120; 

K. The keeping of horses, cattle, sheep and other livestock, subject to BMC 17.124.190;

L. Planned unit developments, including duplex or multifamily development, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.116 BMC; 

M. Dwelling groups, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.180;

N. Utility substations or pumping stations, subject to BMC 17.124.030;

O. Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.140;

P. Signs appurtenant to any conditional use and which do not comply with BMC 17.16.090; 

Q. Agriculture;

R.  Short-term rentals, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

S. Poultry farms and eggeries, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.040;

T. Temporary living quarters for caretakers, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.200;

U. Cottage industries, subject to BMC 17.124.220;

V. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 14-O-722 § 3; Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 3; Ord. 95-O-446.X § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.L § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.050 Minimum lot area and dwelling density. 

Minimum lot area in the SR zone may be 20,000 or 40,000 square feet, depending on the topographic nature, service availability, surrounding land uses and other relevant characteristics of the area. One dwelling unit may be sited on each lot or parcel. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.060 Lot width and yard requirements. 

	Zone	Lot Width	Front Yard	 Side Yard	Rear Yard

	SR 20,000	80'	20'	10'	20'

	SR 40,000	100'	20'	10'	20'

Rear lots (flag lots), created pursuant to BMC 17.172.061, have setback requirements of 10 feet from all property lines. Any irregularly shaped parcel with minimal street frontage is also subject to the 10-foot setback from all property lines. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.070 Maximum structure height.

No structure shall be over 30 feet in height, except as provided in BMC 17.124.030 or 17.128.020. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.080 Maximum lot coverage.

Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 percent of the total lot area. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.090 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.100 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.110 Manufactured housing siting requirements. 

A. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. 

B. The manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation that complies with the State of Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Parks Specialty Code, Section 3-8.3, and skirted with masonry block or poured concrete.

C. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet in height for each 12 feet in width. 

D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit approval authority. 

E. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. [Ord. 11-O-677 § 2; Ord. 10-O-655 § 2; Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.16.120 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. No residential structure shall be located within the ocean coastal shorelands boundary nor the Chetco Estuary shorelands boundary as defined in the comprehensive plan.

C. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation. [Ord. 08-O-609 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.X § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.16.130.] 


Chapter 17.20 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Permitted uses.

17.20.030    Accessory uses.

17.20.040    Conditional uses.

17.20.050    Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

17.20.060    Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements. 

17.20.070    Maximum building structure height.

17.20.080    Signs.

17.20.090    Parking.

17.20.100    Manufactured housing siting requirements.

17.20.110    Other required conditions.


17.20.010 Purpose.

To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family living and to protect and stabilize the residential characteristics of the district, the R-1 district is intended to provide for single-family residential homes at urban standards. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Single-family dwellings. Dwellings must have a garage or carport constructed of like materials;

B. Subject to the requirements of BMC 17.20.100, a manufactured home as defined by ORS 446.003. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.030 Accessory uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Guest houses containing no kitchen or kitchen facilities and limited to no greater than 500 square feet in size. Guest houses may not be rented or otherwise conducted as a business;

B. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC; 

C. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use;

D. Boats, trailers, pick-up campers, motor homes and similar equipment may be stored, but not occupied, except as provided for temporary sleeping purposes in BMC 8.15.087, on a lot in an “R” district; provided, that:

1. Parking and storage shall be at least five feet from the front property line and at least three feet from a street and interior side or rear lot line; except, however, no storage shall be allowed within 20 feet of the corner along both property lines at a street corner;

2. All areas used for storage of such vehicle/equipment shall be paved or a graveled hard surface. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Recreation uses and facilities, including country clubs, golf courses, and swimming clubs, but not including such intensive commercial recreation uses as a golf driving range, race track or amusement park;

B. Churches, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

C. Hospitals, rest, nursing and convalescent homes, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

D. Public or private schools, but not including a business, dancing, trade, technical or similar school, and subject to BMC 17.124.011;

E. Nursery schools and day care facilities, subject to BMC 17.124.010; 

F. Governmental structures or uses including parks and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, and museums, but not including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses; 

G. Riding academies and public stables, subject to BMC 17.124.070; 

H. Cemeteries, mortuaries, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums, subject to BMC 17.124.090; 

I. Excavation and removal of sand, gravel, stone, soil or other earth products, subject to BMC 17.124.020 (commercial excavations);

J. Public and quasi-public halls, lodges and clubs, subject to BMC 17.124.120;

K. The keeping of horses, cattle, sheep and other livestock, subject to BMC 17.124.190;

L. Planned unit developments, including duplex or multifamily development, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.116 BMC;

M. Utility substations or pumping stations, subject to BMC 17.124.030;

N. Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.140;

O. Dwelling groups, subject to BMC 17.124.180;

P. Signs appurtenant to any conditional use and which do not comply with BMC 17.20.080;

Q. Short-term rentals pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

R. Poultry farms and eggeries, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.040;

S. Temporary living quarters for caretakers, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.200;

T. Cottage industries, subject to BMC 17.124.220;

U. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 14-O-722 § 3; Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 4; Ord. 95-O-446.Y § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.X § 3; Ord. 93-O-446.L § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.D § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.050 Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

Minimum lot areas in the R-1 zone may be 6,000, 8,000, 10,000 or 12,000 square feet, depending upon site, public service and neighborhood characteristics. One dwelling unit may be sited on each lot or parcel. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.060 Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements. 

	Zone	Lot Width	Front Yard	 Side Yard	Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage

	R-1-6	60'	20'	5'*	15'	40%

	R-1-8	70'	20'	5'*	15'	40%

	R-1-10	80'	20'	5'*	15'	40%

	R-1-12	90'	20'	5'*	15'	40%

*    Provided, that the nonstreet side yards shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the average building height exceeds 15 feet.

*    Provided, that on an existing structure, proposed additional stories must meet the setbacks for the height of the structure.

Provided, however, that side yards abutting a street shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width. 

Rear lots (flag lots) created pursuant to BMC 17.172.061 have setback requirements of 10 feet from all property lines. Any irregularly shaped parcel with minimal street frontage is also subject to the 10-foot setback from all property lines. [Ord. 10-O-659 § 2; Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.SS; Ord. 90-O-446.B § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.070 Maximum building structure height.

No structure shall be over 30 feet in height, except as provided in BMC 17.124.030 or 17.128.020. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.100 Manufactured housing siting requirements. 

A. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet.

B. The manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation that complies with the State of Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Parks Specialty Code, Section 3-8.3, and skirted with masonry block or poured concrete.

C. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet in height for each 12 feet in width. 

D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit approval authority.

E. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. [Ord. 11-O-677 § 2; Ord. 10-O-655 § 2; Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.20.110 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. No residential structure shall be located within the ocean coastal shorelands boundary nor the Chetco Estuary shorelands boundary as defined in the comprehensive plan. 

C. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation. [Ord. 08-O-612 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.20.120.] 


Chapter 17.24 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.24.010    Purpose.

17.24.020    Permitted uses.

17.24.030    Accessory uses.

17.24.040    Conditional uses.

17.24.050    Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

17.24.060    Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements.

17.24.070    Maximum structure height.

17.24.080    Signs.

17.24.090    Parking.

17.24.100    Manufactured housing siting requirements.

17.24.110    Other required conditions.


17.24.010 Purpose.

Promote and encourage a suitable environment for family living and to protect and stabilize the residential characteristics of R-2 and other neighborhoods by providing suitable areas for two-family dwellings. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Single-family dwellings. Dwellings must have a garage or carport constructed of like materials;

B. Duplex or two-family dwellings. Dwellings must have a garage or carport for each dwelling unit constructed of like materials; 

C. Subject to the requirements of BMC 17.24.100, a manufactured home as defined by ORS 446.003. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 4; Ord. 91-O-446.E § 1; Ord. 91-O-446.D § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted: 

A. Guest houses containing no kitchen or kitchen facilities and limited to no greater than 500 square feet in size. Guest houses may not be rented or otherwise conducted as a business; 

B. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use;

C. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC;

D. Boats, trailers, pick-up campers, motor homes and similar equipment may be stored, but not occupied, except as provided for temporary sleeping purposes in BMC 8.15.087, on a lot in an “R” district; provided, that:

1. Parking and storage shall be at least five feet from the front property line and at least three feet from a street and interior side or rear lot line; except, however, no storage shall be allowed within 20 feet of the corner along both property lines at a street corner;

2. All areas used for storage of such vehicle/equipment shall be paved or a graveled hard surface. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Triplexes or three-family dwellings, provided the lot or parcel is a minimum of 7,500 square feet or more, subject to BMC 17.124.210;

B. Churches, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

C. Hospitals, and rest, nursing and convalescent homes, subject to BMC 17.124.100; 

D. Public or private schools, but not including a business, dancing, trade, technical or similar school, subject to BMC 17.124.011; 

E. Nursery schools and day care facilities, subject to BMC 17.124.010;

F. Governmental structures or uses including parks and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, and museums, but not including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses; 

G. Riding academies and public stables, subject to BMC 17.124.070;

H. Cemeteries, mortuaries, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums, subject to BMC 17.124.090;

I. Off-street parking lots when contiguous to a less restrictive zoning district, subject to Chapter 17.92 BMC;

J. Excavation and removal of sand, gravel, stone, soil or other earth products, subject to BMC 17.124.020 (commercial excavation);

K. Public and quasi-public halls, lodges and clubs, subject to BMC 17.124.120;

L. Planned unit developments, including multifamily dwellings, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.116 BMC;

M. Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.140;

N. Utility substations or pumping stations, subject to BMC 17.124.030; 

O. Recreation uses and facilities, including country clubs, golf courses, and swimming clubs, but not including such intensive commercial recreation uses as a golf driving range, race track or amusement park;

P. Signs appurtenant to any conditional use and which do not comply with BMC 17.24.080;

Q. Dwelling groups, subject to BMC 17.124.180;

R. Short-term rentals pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

S.  Poultry farms and eggeries, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.040;

T. Temporary living quarters for caretakers, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.200;

U. Cottage industries, subject to BMC 17.124.220;

V. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 14-O-722 § 3; Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 95-O-446.Y § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.X § 4; Ord. 93-O-446.L § 3; Ord. 91-O-446.D § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.050 Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet. One duplex may be sited on each separate lot or parcel. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.060 Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements. 

	Lot Width	Front Yard	 Side Yard	Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage

	60'	20'	5'*	5'*	45%

*    Provided, that the side yards and rear yards shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the average building height exceeds 15 feet. 

*    Provided, that on an existing structure, proposed additional stories must meet the setbacks for the height of the structure.

Provided, however, that side yards abutting a street shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width.

Rear lots (flag lots), created pursuant to BMC 17.172.061, have setback requirements of 10 feet from all property lines. Any irregularly shaped parcel with a minimal street frontage is also subject to the 10-foot setback from all property lines. [Ord. 10-O-659 § 2; Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.SS; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.070 Maximum structure height.

No structure shall be over 30 feet in height, except as provided in BMC 17.124.030 or 17.128.020. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.100 Manufactured housing siting requirements. 

A. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. 

B. The manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation that complies with the State of Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Parks Specialty Code, Section 3-8.3, and skirted with masonry block or poured concrete.

C. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet in height for each 12 feet in width. 

D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit approval authority. 

E. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. [Ord. 11-O-677 § 2; Ord. 10-O-655 § 2; Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.E § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.24.110 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. No residential structure shall be located within the ocean coastal shorelands boundary nor the Chetco Estuary shorelands boundary as defined in the comprehensive plan. 

C. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation. [Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.E § 1; Ord. 91-O-446.D § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.24.120.]


Chapter 17.28 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) DISTRICT

Sections: 

17.28.010    Purpose.

17.28.020    Permitted uses.

17.28.030    Accessory uses.

17.28.040    Conditional uses.

17.28.050    Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

17.28.060    Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements.

17.28.070    Maximum building height.

17.28.080    Signs.

17.28.090    Parking.

17.28.100    Manufactured housing siting requirements.

17.28.110    Other required conditions.


17.28.010 Purpose.

This district is designed to provide an environment suitable for higher density urban residential uses. The R-3 district is intended for residential uses, community services and appropriate professional business and service offices. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 08-O-613 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Two-family dwellings or duplexes. Dwelling must have a garage or carport for each dwelling unit constructed of like materials;

B. Multiple-family dwellings and apartment houses;

C. Single-family dwellings, provided the building permit applicant or the applicant’s spouse, parent, child or sibling purchased the property prior to August 13, 1998. Dwelling must have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. A single-family dwelling may include a manufactured home as defined by ORS 446.003, and subject to BMC 17.28.100;

D. Existing single-family dwellings. [Ord. 09-O-633 § 2; Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.CC § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted: 

A. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC;

B. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use;

C. Boats, trailers, pick-up campers, motor homes and similar equipment may be stored, but not occupied, except as provided for temporary sleeping purposes in BMC 8.15.087, on a lot in an “R” district; provided, that:

1. Parking and storage shall be at least five feet from the front property line and at least three feet from a street and interior side or rear lot line; except, however, no storage shall be allowed within 20 feet of the corner along both property lines at a street corner;

2. All areas used for storage of such vehicle/equipment shall be paved or a graveled hard surface. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Recreation uses and facilities, including country clubs, golf courses, and swimming clubs, but not including such intensive commercial recreation uses as a golf driving range, race track or amusement park;

B. Churches, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

C. Off-street parking lots when contiguous to a less restrictive zoning district, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.92 BMC;

D. Hospitals, and rest, nursing and convalescent homes, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

E. Public and private schools but not including a business, dancing, trade, technical or similar school, subject to BMC 17.124.011;

F. Nursery schools and day care facilities, subject to BMC 17.124.010;

G. Governmental structures or uses including parks and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, museums, but not including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;

H. Cemeteries, mortuaries, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums, subject to BMC 17.124.090;

I. Riding academies and public stables, subject to BMC 17.124.070;

J. Excavation and removal of sand, gravel, stone, soil or other earth products, subject to BMC 17.124.020 (commercial excavation);

K. Public and quasi-public halls, lodges and clubs, subject to BMC 17.124.120;

L. Planned unit developments, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.116 BMC;

M. Utility substations or pumping stations, subject to BMC 17.124.030;

N. Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.140;

O. Professional business and service offices;

P. Signs appurtenant to any conditional use and which do not comply with BMC 17.28.080;

Q. Poultry farms and eggeries, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.040;

R. Short-term rentals pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

S. Temporary living quarters for caretakers, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.200;

T. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 95-O-446.Y § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.L § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.050 Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet for the first two dwelling units and for each additional dwelling unit, the lot area shall be increased by 1,500 square feet. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.060 Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements. 

	Lot Width	Front Yard	 Side Yard	Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage

	60'	10'	5'*	5'*	45%

*    Provided, that the side yards and rear yards shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the average building height exceeds 15 feet. 

*    Provided, that on an existing structure, proposed additional stories must meet the setbacks for the height of the structure.

Provided, however, that side yards abutting a street shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width; and

A. Rear lots (flag lots) created pursuant to BMC 17.172.061 have setback requirements of 10 feet from all property lines. Any irregularly shaped parcel with minimal street frontage is also subject to the 10-foot setback from all property lines.

B. Special yards and distances between buildings shall be provided as follows: 

1. An inner courtyard providing access to double-row dwelling units shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width; 

2. Except for single-family dwellings on one lot, the minimum distance between residential buildings shall be twice the minimum side yard setback that would be required for the tallest building on the lot; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than 10 feet. [Ord. 10-O-659 § 2; Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.SS; Ord. 95-O-446.X § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.070 Maximum building height.

No structure shall be over 40 feet in height, except as provided in BMC 17.124.030 or 17.128.020. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 6; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.100 Manufactured housing siting requirements. 

A. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. 

B. The manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation that complies with the State of Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Parks Specialty Code, Section 3-8.3, and skirted with masonry block or poured concrete.

C. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.

D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit approval authority.

E. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. [Ord. 11-O-677 § 2; Ord. 10-O-655 § 2; Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.T § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.28.110 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. No residential structure shall be located within the ocean coastal shorelands boundary nor the Chetco Estuary shorelands boundary as defined in the comprehensive plan.

C. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation.

D. For multifamily dwellings, an area equal to at least 15 percent of the site area, inclusive of required setback yards, shall be devoted to usable open space recreation areas. This area must be cleared of brush or obstructions and not used for temporary or regular parking or vehicles. 

E. If commercial dumpsters are to be used, they shall be appropriately screened. [Ord. 08-O-614 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.32 MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL (R-MH) DISTRICT

Sections: 

17.32.010    Purpose.

17.32.020    Permitted uses.

17.32.030    Accessory uses.

17.32.040    Conditional uses.

17.32.050    Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

17.32.060    Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements.

17.32.070    Maximum structure height.

17.32.080    Signs.

17.32.090    Parking.

17.32.100    Manufactured housing siting requirements.

17.32.110    Other required conditions.


17.32.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the R-MH district is to recognize and provide for residential areas where manufactured homes built to state and federal construction and safety standards may locate in a suitable environment for family living, and to protect and stabilize the residential characteristics of the district. The intent of these district regulations is to encourage provision of alternative modest income housing opportunities in certain residential areas by permitting the use of certain manufactured homes therein, and to further recognize the trend toward homes of other than conventional construction. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.020 Permitted uses. 

A. Single-family dwellings. Dwelling must have a garage or carport for each dwelling unit constructed of like materials;

B. Single-family manufactured or modular unit on an individual lot, subject to BMC 17.32.100. Dwelling must have a garage or carport for each dwelling unit constructed of like materials. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.030 Accessory uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Guest houses containing no kitchen or kitchen facilities and limited to no greater than 500 square feet in size. Guest houses may not be rented or otherwise conducted as a business;

B. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC;

C. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use;

D. Boats, trailers, pick-up campers, motor homes and similar equipment may be stored, but not occupied, except as provided for temporary sleeping purposes in BMC 8.15.087, on a lot in an “R” district; provided, that:

1. Parking and storage shall be at least five feet from the front property line and at least three feet from a street and interior side or rear lot line, except however, no storage shall be allowed within 20 feet of the corner along both property lines at a street corner;

2. All areas used for storage of such vehicle/equipment shall be paved or a graveled hard surface. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted: 

A. Recreation uses and facilities, including country clubs, golf courses, and swimming clubs, but not including such intensive commercial recreation uses as a golf driving range, race track or amusement park;

B. Churches, subject to BMC 17.124.100; 

C. Hospitals, and rest, nursing and convalescent homes, subject to BMC 17.124.100; 

D. Public or private schools, but not including a business, dancing, trade, technical or similar school, subject to BMC 17.124.011;

E. Nursery schools and day care facilities, subject to BMC 17.124.010;

F. Governmental structures or uses including parks and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, museums, but not including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;

G. Riding academies and public stables, subject to BMC 17.124.070;

H. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums, subject to BMC 17.124.090;

I. Excavation and removal of sand, gravel, stone, soil or other earth products, subject to BMC 17.124.020 (commercial excavations);

J. Public and quasi-public halls, lodges and clubs, subject to BMC 17.124.120;

K. The keeping of horses, cattle, sheep and other livestock, subject to BMC 17.124.190;

L. Planned unit developments, including duplex or multifamily development, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.116 BMC;

M. Dwelling groups, subject to BMC 17.124.180;

N. Utility substations or pumping stations, subject to BMC 17.124.030;

O. Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.140;

P. Signs appurtenant to any conditional use and which do not comply with BMC 17.32.080;

Q. Manufactured home parks, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.160;

R. Short-term rentals pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

S. Poultry farms and eggeries, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.040;

T. Temporary living quarters for caretakers, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.200;

U. Cottage industries, subject to BMC 17.124.220;

V. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 14-O-722 § 3; Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 7; Ord. 95-O-446.Y § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.X § 6; Ord. 93-O-446.L § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.050 Minimum lot area and dwelling density.

Minimum lot areas in the R-MH zone may be 6,000, 8,000, 10,000 or 12,000 square feet depending upon site, public service and neighborhood characteristics. One dwelling unit may be sited on each lot or parcel. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.060 Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements.

	Zone	Lot Width	Front Yard	 Side Yard	Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage

	R-MH-6	60'	20'	5'*	5'*	40%

	R-MH-8	70'	20'	5'*	5'*	40%

	R-MH-10	80'	20'	5'*	5'*	40%

	R-MH-12	90'	20'	5'*	5'*	40%

*    Provided, that the nonstreet side yards and rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet.

*    Provided, that on an existing structure, proposed additional stories must meet the setbacks for the height of the structure.

Provided, however, that side yards abutting a street shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width; and 

Rear lots (flag lots) created pursuant to BMC 17.172.061 have setback requirements of 10 feet from all property lines. Any irregularly shaped parcel with minimal street frontage is also subject to the 10-foot setback from all property lines. [Ord. 10-O-659 § 2; Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.SS; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.070 Maximum structure height.

No structure shall be over 30 feet in height, except as provided in BMC 17.124.030 or 17.128.020. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 7; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.32.100 Manufactured housing siting requirements.

A. The unit shall be a double-wide and not less than 24 feet in width; similar site-built building or structure connected or joined to the unit will be permitted. 

B. The unit shall have a wood-shake or composition roof with a minimum roof slope of three inches in 12 inches with not less than 12-inch eaves. 

C. The unit shall have skirting which is commonly allowed under the Uniform Building Code (Oregon State Structural Specialty Code). [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2.]


17.32.110 Other required conditions. 

A. No residential structure shall be located within the ocean coastal shorelands boundary nor the Chetco Estuary shorelands boundary as defined in the comprehensive plan. 

B. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

C. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation. [Ord. 08-O-615 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.32.100.] 


Chapter 17.36 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (PO-1) DISTRICT 

Sections:

17.36.010    Purpose.

17.36.020    Permitted uses.

17.36.030    Accessory uses.

17.36.040    Conditional uses.

17.36.050    Minimum lot area.

17.36.060    Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements.

17.36.070    Maximum building height.

17.36.080    Signs.

17.36.090    Parking.

17.36.100    Other required conditions.


17.36.010 Purpose.

This district is for the purpose of providing professional and business office uses in areas between residential and more intense commercial districts. This is considered a transition area and development in this district will be residential in character. Only ancillary retail sales are allowed in this district. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.020 Permitted uses.

A. Dwelling units, not on a ground floor.

B. Professional and business office uses, such as but not limited to: 

1. Architect or designer;

2. Accountant;

3. Attorney;

4. Computer services;

5. Day care, nursery schools and kindergartens, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.010;

6. Dentist;

7. Engineer;

8. Insurance agent or adjustor;

9. Investment or management counselor;

10. Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories;

11. Nursing and convalescent homes;

12. Photographic studio, excluding retail sales of cameras, equipment, film or supplies;

13. Real estate office;

14. Surveyor;

15. Title and escrow offices;

16. Travel agencies;

17. Wholesale lumber broker office;

18. Bank or financial institute. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted: 

A. Offices incidental and necessary to the conduct of a permitted use;

B. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC;

C. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Recreation uses and facilities, including country clubs, golf courses, swimming clubs, but not including such intensive commercial recreation uses as a golf driving range, race track or amusement park;

B. Churches, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

C. Off-street parking lots, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.92 BMC;

D. Hospitals, subject to BMC 17.124.100;

E. Public and private schools, but not including a business, dance, trade, technical or similar school, subject to BMC 17.124.011;

F. Governmental structures or uses including parks and recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, museums, but not including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;

G. Mortuaries and crematories in conjunction with a mortuary, subject to BMC 17.124.090;

H. Public and quasi-public halls, lodges and clubs, subject to BMC 17.124.120;

I. Planned community, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.116 BMC;

J. Utility substations or pumping stations, subject to BMC 17.124.030;

K. Signs appurtenant to any conditional use and which do not comply with BMC 17.36.080;

L. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.050 Minimum lot area.

The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.060 Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements. 

A. The minimum lot width shall be at least 60 feet. 

B. The minimum front yard shall be 10 feet. 

C. The minimum side and rear yard shall be at least five feet except that the street side yard shall be a minimum of 10 feet. The side or rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet; provided, that on an existing structure, proposed additional stories must meet the setbacks for the height of the structure. [Ord. 10-O-665 § 2; Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.070 Maximum building height.

Maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except as provided in BMC 17.128.020. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 8; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.36.100 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. All business shall be conducted from a structure placed on a permanent foundation unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this or other city ordinances.

C. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation.

D. Provide for the improvement of an existing dedicated alleyway which is intended to be used for egress and ingress, or backup space of off-street parking for the development.

E. Screen from view all roof-, wall- or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and devices, in addition to propane tanks.

F. Refuse receptacles or dumpsters shall be appropriately positioned, colored or screened to minimize visibility to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. [Ord. 10-O-657 § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.JJ § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.40 PUBLIC OPEN SPACE (P/OS) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.40.010    Purpose.

17.40.020    Permitted uses.

17.40.030    Accessory uses.

17.40.040    Conditional uses.

17.40.050    Yard and height requirements.

17.40.060    Signs.

17.40.070    Parking.

17.40.080    Other required conditions.


17.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this district is to recognize, preserve and enhance publicly owned recreation, open space, educational and cultural areas, facilities and services, to protect the natural and scenic resources, and to ensure adequate provision for open spaces consistent with the policies of the city. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Government structures including offices, fire stations, police stations;

B. Publicly owned parks and/or recreation facilities, including recreational parks, swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, campgrounds, and picnic areas;

C. Community centers;

D. Public schools;

E. Public golf courses;

F. Public museums, art galleries, libraries and information centers;

G. Water-dependent or water-related uses only to be located within shorelands boundary;

H. Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to Chapter 17.164 BMC, in conjunction with an existing tower operated by a public entity;

I. Existing airport facilities including expansion and accessory uses intended for the convenience of airport customers such as restaurants, car rentals, or retail shops subject to Chapter 17.76 BMC, Airport Approach (AA) Overlay Zone. [Ord. 13-O-707 § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.EE § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses and facilities incidental and customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, including renovation, rehabilitation, replacement, repair, improvement and other similar construction and/or reconstruction activities of existing or new buildings and structures. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Utilities and services, including storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses totally enclosed within a building or contained within a minimum eight-foot-high, sight-obscuring fence;

B. Caretaker, night watchman or park host residence;

C. The use of a recreational vehicle (RV) for a caretaker, night watchman or park host residence in compliance with criteria below:

1. RV must be parked on a dust-free, asphaltic or concrete surface or other materials approved by the site plan committee;

2. Adequacy of sewer, water, and storm drainage must be reviewed and approved by the city;

3. RV must be sited in compliance with property line setbacks pursuant to BMC 17.40.050;

4. All storage must be entirely within an enclosed accessory structure except for items such as outdoor furniture;

5. Applicant shall subscribe to a scheduled waste collection service and provide garbage receptacles on the property;

6. Caretaker residences shall be limited to one per discrete parcel, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission;

D. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 14-O-731 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.LL § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.EE § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.P § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.050 Yard and height requirements. 

A. The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet. 

B. The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet. 

C. The minimum street side yard shall be 15 feet. 

D. The minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet. 

E. Maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except as provided in BMC 17.128.030. [Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 9; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.40.080 Other required conditions.

Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.44 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.44.010    Purpose.

17.44.020    Permitted uses.

17.44.030    Accessory uses.

17.44.040    Conditional uses.

17.44.050    Yard, height and lot coverage requirements.

17.44.060    Signs.

17.44.070    Parking.

17.44.080    Other required conditions.


17.44.010 Purpose.

This district is intended to provide for the location of small businesses and services in residential areas of the city. The businesses are intended to be limited in size and to hours of operation to serve the convenience retail needs of the neighborhood residents and to fit into the residential patterns of development without creating land use, architectural or traffic conflicts. New C-1 districts shall be so located to serve approximately 1,000 families within a one-half-mile radius where analysis of residential population demonstrates that such facilities are or will be required and shall be situated along a collector street. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Existing residential uses, without any increases in density;

B. Grocery stores, including garden supplies;

C. Barber and/or beauty shop. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.030 Accessory uses.

Any uses, buildings or structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage facilities are permitted. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Residential dwelling units not on the ground floor of a building;

B. Conversion of an existing dwelling unit to a permitted use;

C. Restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises, but not including dancing or entertainment;

D. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.050 Yard, height and lot coverage requirements. 

A. The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet, and said yard area shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. 

B. The minimum side and rear yard shall be 10 feet when abutting an “R” district and such side or rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot the building height exceeds 20 feet. Said yard area shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. 

C. Maximum building height shall be 30 feet, except as provided in BMC 17.128.030. 

D. The maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 percent of the total lot area. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.44.080 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. Except for off-street parking and loading facilities, all uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 

C. Items produced or wares and merchandise handled shall be limited to those sold at retail on the premises. 

D. All businesses shall be conducted from a structure placed on a permanent foundation unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this or other city ordinances. [Ord. 00-O-446.JJ § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.48 SHOPPING CENTER COMMERCIAL (C-2) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.48.010    Purpose.

17.48.020    Permitted uses.

17.48.030    Accessory uses.

17.48.040    Conditional uses.

17.48.050    Yard, height and lot coverage requirements.

17.48.060    Signs.

17.48.070    Parking.

17.48.080    Other required conditions.


17.48.010 Purpose.

This district is intended to make provision within the city for larger concentrations of retailing and service commercial activities in the form of unified shopping centers planned and developed as an integrated unit. New C-2 districts shall have a minimum area of five acres, shall be situated along a major street and shall be so located where analysis of population demonstrates that such facilities are or will be required. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Any permitted use in the C-1 district, except residential uses;

B. Appliance sales (household), including minor repairs;

C. Art galleries, libraries, and reading rooms;

D. Artist supplies and picture framing;

E. Auto parts sales (new);

F. Banks and financial institutions;

G. Book or stationery stores;

H. Bicycle shops;

I. Clothes cleaning agencies;

J. Confectionery or delicatessens;

K. Dancing or music schools;

L. Drug stores;

M. Dry goods stores, millinery shops, dress shops;

N. Department stores;

O. Florist shops;

P. Food stores;

Q. Furniture stores;

R. Garden supply stores;

S. Gift shops, notion or variety stores;

T. Hardware stores or paint stores;

U. Health food stores;

V. Hobby shops;

W. Home furnishings;

X. Jewelry stores;

Y. Laundry pick-up agencies, self-service laundries;

Z. Leather goods and luggage;

AA. Medical and dental clinics and offices;

BB. Musical instruments;

CC. Pet shops;

DD. Photographic supplies and studios;

EE. Professional and business offices;

FF. Radio and television broadcasting studios and facilities;

GG. Shoe stores, shoe repair shops;

HH. Sporting goods;

II. Toy stores;

JJ. Variety stores. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.030 Accessory uses.

Any uses, buildings or structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage facilities, are permitted. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Conversion of an existing dwelling unit to a permitted use;

B. Public buildings and public utility buildings and structures as may be appropriate to the C-2 district;

C. Commercial off-street parking lots or structures subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.92 BMC;

D. Buildings over 40 feet in height;

E. Restaurants, bars, cocktail lounges, including entertainment;

F. Dwelling units not on the ground floor of a building;

G. Hotels and motels;

H. Motion picture theaters, other than drive-in theaters;

I. Car washes and other automobile services;

J. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.050 Yard, height and lot coverage requirements. 

A. The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet, and said yard area shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. 

B. The minimum side or rear yard shall be 10 feet when abutting an “R” district and such side or rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot the building height exceeds 20 feet. Said yard area shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained. 

C. No structures shall be over 40 feet in height except as allowed as a conditional use, and as provided in BMC 17.128.030. 

D. The maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 percent of the total lot area. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.48.080 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. Except for off-street parking and loading facilities, outdoor dining areas, gardens and nurseries, Christmas tree sales lots, all uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 

C. Items produced or wares and merchandise handled shall be limited to those sold at retail on the premises. 

D. All business shall be conducted from a structure placed on a permanent foundation unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this or other city ordinances. [Ord. 00-O-446.JJ § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


Chapter 17.52  GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-3) DISTRICT 

Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose.

17.52.020    Permitted uses.

17.52.030    Accessory uses.

17.52.040    Conditional uses.

17.52.050    Maximum building height.

17.52.060    Signs.

17.52.070    Parking.

17.52.080    Other required conditions.


17.52.010 Purpose.

This district is designed to stabilize, improve and protect the commercial characteristics of the general commercial area. The district is limited to commercial uses of less intensity than are found in an industrial zone. A pedestrian-friendly mixture of commercial and residential uses are to be promoted by the provisions found in this district. [Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Existing residential uses, including additions, without any increase in the number of dwelling units;

B. One or more dwellings not on a ground floor;

C. Retail business and offices;

D. Business and technical schools, such as photography, art, music, theater, and dance schools and studios;

E. Restaurants, cafes, cocktail lounges, bars, and taverns, with or without entertainment;

F. Commercial recreational uses, such as bowling lanes, dance halls, pool halls, skating rinks, or theaters, not including drive-in theaters;

G. Printing, publishing and newspaper offices;

H. Light service shops, such as beauty salons, barbershops, pet grooming with no overnight boarding of animals, upholsterers, picture framing, tailoring, and appliance repair;

I. Places for public assembly, such as places of worship, meeting halls, auditoriums, community centers, lodges, clubs and fraternal organizations;

J. Public buildings, structures and uses as may be appropriate to the C-3 district including transportation terminals and facilities;

K. Commercial parking lots for passenger vehicles, subject to Chapter 17.92 BMC;

L. Museums, art galleries or similar facilities;

M. Hospitals and outpatient medical clinics; 

N. Motels and hotels;

O. Automobile, boat, truck, or trailer sales, service or repair with display areas more than 20,000 square feet and less than 100,000 square feet; provided, that all repair shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

P. Light manufacturing and fabricating of products without retail sales shall not be conducted on a ground floor facing the public street but may be conducted in a basement or on an upper floor. Light manufacturing and fabricating of products that are related to tourism, such as but not limited to micro-brewery, coffee roasting, cheese making/creamery, or glass blowing, is permitted on the ground floor facing the public street when conducted in conjunction with the retail sales of the product. All light manufacturing and fabricating of products shall not create noise above 45 dB, or create excessive odor, and all processing shall be completely contained in a closed system or vented into a filtering system to remove odor. [Ord. 14-O-727 § 2; Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.NN; Ord. 93-O-446.L § 6; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.030 Accessory uses.

A. Any uses, buildings or structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage facilities, are permitted.

B. Accessory Uses for Dwelling Units.

1. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC.

2. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. [Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.P § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Automobile, boat, truck, or trailer sales, service or repair with display areas of 100,000 square feet or more; provided, that all repair shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

B. Implement, machinery, and heavy equipment sales, service or repair; provided, that all repair shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

C. Automobile service station, including automobile maintenance and repair, which shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

D. Lumber or building materials sales and storage;

E. Contractors’ storage;

F. Veterinarians and animal hospitals, provided all business, service and kennels are entirely within an enclosed building subject to BMC 17.124.080;

G. Buildings over 40 feet in height;

H. Rental storage units, provided they are used exclusively for storage purposes;

I. Day care and nursery schools pursuant to BMC 17.124.010;

J. Short-term rentals pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

K. Mortuaries and crematories in conjunction with a mortuary and subject to BMC 17.124.090;

L. On-duty personnel living quarters, either conventional or manufactured dwelling unit, only in conjunction with ambulance services and/or fire departments;

M. Utility substations or pumping stations subject to BMC 17.124.030;

N. Light manufacturing and fabricating of products that is not related to tourism or tourism related products without sales is permitted on the ground floor facing the public street. The activity shall not create noise above 45 dB, or create excessive odor, and all processing shall be completely contained in a closed system or vented into a filtering system to remove odor;

O. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 14-O-727 § 3; Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM; Ord. 00-O-446.II § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.H § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.050 Maximum building height.

No structures shall be over 40 feet in height except as allowed as a conditional use, and as provided in BMC 17.128.030. [Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC, except for the area described in BMC 17.92.030(A). [Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.52.080 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. All businesses, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for conditional uses, outdoor dining areas, nurseries and garden shops, seasonal sales lots, outdoor equipment, outdoor furniture, dispensers, vehicle and boat sales, and bus stations. When outside storage is allowed as a conditional use, it must be enclosed within a six-foot high sight-obscuring fence. In addition, temporary sales of products allowed either as an outright permitted or a conditionally permitted use, for no more than seven consecutive days, may be conducted outside on private property. These sales may occur no more than four times during a calendar year. The seller must have a current city business license and required parking spaces must remain available for use by vehicles. 

C. In any C-3 district directly across a street from or abutting any lot in a residential district, the parking and loading area shall be set back at least 10 feet from the street right-of-way or lot line and said area shall be appropriately landscaped to protect the character of said adjacent residential properties. Such landscaping shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H).

D. All business shall be conducted from a structure placed on a permanent foundation unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this or other city ordinances.

E. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation.

F. An accessway to a new proposed off-street parking area shall be improved from the public roadway to the parking area to a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic. If the accessway is a one-way in or one-way out, it shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and have appropriate signage.

G. Provide for the improvement of an existing dedicated alleyway which is intended to be used for egress and ingress, or backup space of off-street parking for the development.

H. Screen from view all roof-, wall-, or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and devices, in addition to propane tanks.

I. Refuse receptacles or dumpsters shall be appropriately positioned, colored or screened to minimize visibility to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 

J. Automobile, boat, truck, or trailer sales;

1. Dealerships must have an on-site office.

2. Primary dealerships with an on-site office located in the downtown core area, as defined in BMC 17.92.030(A), may have one or more secondary sales/storage locations, without an on-site office, outside the downtown core area within the C-3 zone. [Ord. 08-O-622 § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.JJ § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.56 TOURIST COMMERCIAL (C-4) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.56.010    Purpose.

17.56.020    Permitted uses.

17.56.030    Accessory uses.

17.56.040    Conditional uses.

17.56.050    Maximum building height.

17.56.060    Signs.

17.56.070    Parking.

17.56.080    Other required conditions.


17.56.010 Purpose.

This district is intended to make provision for tourist commercial uses which serve the traveling public and which are appropriate to major thoroughfare or highway locations. The appearance of developments in this district will have a significant visual impact on the traveling public concerning community values and these regulations are intended to protect and enhance the appearance of these vital areas of the community to the benefit and success of the entire community as a major tourist center. [Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Existing residential uses, including additions, without any increase in the number of dwelling units;

B. One or more dwellings not on a ground floor;

C. Automobile car wash;

D. Automobile service station, including automobile maintenance and repair which shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

E. Commercial recreational uses such as bowling lanes, theaters, dance halls, pool halls, skating rinks;

F. Gift or souvenir shops;

G. Motels, hotels and convention centers;

H. Restaurants, cafes, cocktail lounges, bars, taverns with or without entertainment;

I. Barber and beauty shops;

J. Bus station, taxi stand;

K. Places for public assembly such as community centers, clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations and auditoriums;

L. Drug stores;

M. Laundromats;

N. Museums, art galleries, or similar facilities;

O. Professional or business offices;

P. Commercial off-street parking lots or structures subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.92 BMC;

Q. Banks and financial institutions;

R. Marinas or launching facilities;

S. Piers, docks and bulkheads;

T. Boat storage, maintenance and service;

U. Aquaculture and accessory facilities;

V. Light manufacturing and fabricating of products that is related to tourism, such as but not limited to micro-brewery, coffee roasting, cheese making/creamery, or glass blowing, is permitted when conducted in conjunction with the retail sales of the product. All light manufacturing and fabricating of products shall not create noise above 45 dB, or create excessive odor, and all processing shall be completely contained in a closed system or vented into a filtering system to remove odor. [Ord. 14-O-727 § 2; Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.OO; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.030 Accessory uses.

A. Any uses, buildings or structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage facilities and the like, are permitted.

B. Accessory uses for dwelling units.

1. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC.

2. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. [Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit:

A. Recreational vehicle park subject to BMC 17.124.150;

B. Convenience market, limited to 1,000 square feet of retail area;

C. Golf driving range, golf course, miniature golf course;

D. Public buildings and public utility buildings, structures and uses;

E. Rental storage units, provided they are used exclusively for storage purposes;

F. Buildings over 40 feet in height;

G. Utility substations or pumping stations subject to BMC 17.124.030;

H. Drive-in theater subject to BMC 17.124.130;

I. Short-term rentals pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.124.170;

J. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.II § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.050 Maximum building height.

No structures shall be over 40 feet in height except as provided in BMC 17.56.040(F) and 17.128.020. [Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.56.080 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC.

B. In any C-4 district directly across a street from, or abutting any lot in a residential district, the parking and loading area shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line and said area shall be landscaped in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H).

C. All businesses shall be conducted from a structure placed on a permanent foundation unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this or other city ordinances.

D. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation.

E. An accessway to a new proposed off-street parking area shall be improved from the public roadway to the parking area to a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic. If the accessway is a one-way in or one-way out, it shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and have appropriate signage.

F. All businesses and services shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for conditional uses, outdoor dining areas, seasonal sales lots, outdoor equipment, outdoor furniture, dispensers, boat storage and maintenance/service, and bus stations. In addition, temporary sales of products allowed either as an outright permitted or a conditionally permitted use, for not more than seven consecutive days, may be conducted outside on private property. These sales may occur no more than four times during a calendar year. The seller must have a current business license and required parking spaces must remain available for use by vehicles.

G. Screen from view all roof-, wall-, or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and devices, in addition to propane tanks.

H. Refuse receptacles or dumpsters shall be appropriately positioned, colored or screened to minimize visibility to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. [Ord. 10-O-651 § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.JJ § 6; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.64 INDUSTRIAL PARK (I-P) DISTRICT

Sections:

17.64.010    Purpose.

17.64.020    Permitted uses.

17.64.030    Accessory uses.

17.64.040    Conditional uses.

17.64.050    Yard, height and lot coverage requirements.

17.64.060    Signs.

17.64.070    Parking.

17.64.080    Other required conditions.


17.64.010 Purpose.

This district is designed to provide for a combination of wholesale, heavy commercial and light industrial uses in a manner that will have minimal impact on surrounding areas in relation to noise, odor, vibration, or visual nuisance, and to provide a suitable and stable environment for such uses. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Any use listed as a conditional use in the C-3 district, with the exception of BMC 17.52.040(A), (G), (I) and (J);

B. Implement sales, service, repair and rental;

C. Wholesale businesses, storage, warehousing transfer companies and trucking companies;

D. Automobile, boat, truck, or trailer sales, service and repair with display areas more than 20,000 square feet and less than 100,000 square feet;

E. Public and quasi-public utility buildings and service yards;

F. Contractors’ offices and equipment storage yard or storage and rental of equipment commonly used by contractors;

G. Carpenter, electrical, plumbing, sheet metal, welding, electroplating, heating, sign shops, auto and furniture upholstery shops, printing, publishing and lithographing shops, painting and sandblasting;

H. Cold storage plants;

I. Bakery, creamery, soft drink bottling plant, laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing or rug cleaning;

J. Feed, seed and fuel stores;

K. Commercial parking lots, subject to Chapter 17.92 BMC;

L. Administrative, educational and other related activities and facilities in conjunction with a permitted use;

M. Light manufacturing, assembly, fabricating or packaging of products from previously prepared materials such as cloth, plastic, wood (not including saw, planing or lumber mills or molding plants), paper, cotton, precious or semi-precious metals or stone;

N. Manufacture of electric, electronic or optical instruments and devices;

O. Manufacture of food products, pharmaceutical and similar items, but not including the production of materials having significant potential for odor or the rendering of fats or oils;

P. Retail sale of items offered for wholesale, retail sale of items produced by any permitted manufacturing use, lumber yards (including sales of ancillary hardware), and sales of heavy equipment and other similar heavy bulk items;

Q. Printing, publishing and book binding;

R. Rental storage units and similar type storage areas, provided they are used exclusively for storage purposes;

S. Day care facilities when associated with any permitted or conditional uses;

T. Existing residential uses, including additions, without any increase in the number of dwelling units. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.II § 4; Ord. 94-O-446.R § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.030 Accessory uses.

A. Any uses, buildings or structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage facilities.

B. Accessory Uses for Dwelling Units.

1. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC.

2. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses, customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.040 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Service commercial uses such as banks, offices, restaurants, food services, bars, taverns or other convenience establishments designed to serve developed permitted uses;

B. Kennels and other animal boarding facilities, not abutting any residential district and subject to BMC 17.124.070;

C. Buildings over 40 feet in height;

D. Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to BMC 17.124.030 and Chapter 17.164 BMC;

E. Utility substations or pumping stations subject to BMC 17.124.030;

F. Short-term rentals in existing dwellings subject to BMC 17.124.170;

G. Automobile, boat, truck, or trailer sales, service or repair with display areas of 100,000 square feet or more;

H.  Retail businesses;

I. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 3; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.050 Yard, height and lot coverage requirements. 

A. The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet, and said area shall be landscaped in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H). 

B. The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be 10 feet when directly across the street or abutting a residential district and such side or rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot the building height exceeds 20 feet. 

C. Maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except as allowed as a conditional use, and as provided in BMC 17.124.030. 

D. The maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.64.080 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC. 

B. All uses in this district shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building, except for conditional uses, outdoor equipment, outdoor furniture, dispensers, vehicle and boat sales, and bus stations; provided, that outdoor storage may be permitted when enclosed by a six-foot-high, sight-obscuring fence, wall or landscaping. If the fence will be located in the front yard landscaped setback area, it must be set back at least 10 feet from the front property line. 

C. In addition, temporary sales of products allowed either as a permitted or a conditionally permitted use, for no more than seven consecutive days, may be conducted outside on private property. These sales may occur no more than four times during a calendar year. The seller must have a current city business license and required parking spaces must remain available for use by vehicles. 

D. Any use or portion thereof causing noise, vibration, or producing intense heat or glare shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard on adjacent property. 

E. There shall be no emission of odorous, toxic, noxious matter, or dust in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along or outside property lines so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard. 

F. Access points from a public road to properties in an I-P district shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid directing traffic onto local access streets of a primarily residential character. 

G. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other conditions such as to have adverse effects on property in the residential district. 

H. All side or rear yards directly across the street from or abutting a lot in a residential district shall be landscaped in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H). 

I. All businesses shall be conducted from a structure anchored to a permanent foundation unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this title or other city ordinances.

J. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation.

K. An accessway to a new proposed off-street parking area shall be improved from the public roadway to the parking area to a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic. If the accessway is a one-way in or one-way out, it shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and have appropriate signage. 

L. Provide for the improvement of an existing dedicated alleyway which is intended to be used for egress and ingress, or backup space of off-street parking for the development.

M. Screen from view all roof-, wall-, or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and devices, in addition to propane tanks. 

N. Refuse receptacles or dumpsters shall be appropriately positioned, colored or screened to minimize visibility to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. [Ord. 09-O-627 § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.JJ § 7; Ord. 93-O-446.M § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.68 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (M-2) DISTRICT 

Sections:

17.68.010    Purpose.

17.68.020    Permitted uses.

17.68.030    Accessory uses.

17.68.040    Conditional uses.

17.68.050    Maximum building height.

17.68.060    Signs.

17.68.070    Parking.

17.68.080    Other required conditions.


17.68.010 Purpose.

This district is intended to provide for the establishment of heavier commercial and industrial uses essential to the development of a balanced economic base, while minimizing conflicts with residential and light commercial uses. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Any use permitted outright in the I-P district;

B. Any manufacturing, processing, repairing, research, assembling, wholesale or storage uses, excepting the manufacturing of explosives and the slaughtering of animals;

C. All types of automobile, motorcycle, truck and equipment sales, service, repair and rental;

D. Boat building, sales, service, repair and rental;

E. Dwelling for a caretaker or watchman employed on the premises. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.030 Accessory uses.

A. Any uses, buildings or structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage facilities and the like.

B. Accessory Uses for Dwelling Units.

1. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC.

2. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures, such as noncommercial greenhouses. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.040 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit:

A. Junk yards or wrecking yards;

B. Buildings over 40 feet in height;

C. Service commercial uses such as banks, offices, restaurants, cafes, refreshment stands, bars, taverns or other convenience establishments designed to serve developed permitted uses;

D. Commercial excavation and removal of sand, gravel, stone, loam, dirt or other earth products, subject to BMC 17.124.020;

E. Abattoir (slaughterhouse);

F. Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to BMC 17.124.030 and Chapter 17.164 BMC;

G. Amateur radio facilities, accessory to a dwelling, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.124.230. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 3; Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.050 Maximum building height.

No structure shall be over 40 feet in height, except as allowed as a conditional use, and as provided in BMC 17.128.030. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.68.080 Other required conditions. 

A. Site plan approval required as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC.

B. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property abutting or across the street from a lot in a residential district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the residential district by means of a six-foot-high sight-obscuring fence, wall or landscaping, which shall be maintained.

C. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other conditions such as to have adverse effects on property in the residential district.

D. In any M-2 district directly across a street from or abutting any lot in a residential district, the parking and loading area and outdoor display or storage areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from the street right-of-way or property line and said area shall be landscaped in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H). 

E. Access points from a public road to properties in an M-2 district shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid directing traffic onto local access streets.

F. Any use or portion thereof causing noise, vibration, or producing intense heat or glare shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard on adjacent property.

G. There shall be no emission of odorous, toxic, noxious matter, or dust in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along or outside property lines so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard.

H. Prior to any development activity on the property, the applicant must comply with BMC 17.100.030, General mitigation. 

I. An accessway to a new proposed off-street parking area shall be improved from the public roadway to the parking area to a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic. If the accessway is a one-way in or one-way out, it shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and have appropriate signage. 

J. Provide for the improvement of an existing dedicated alleyway which is intended to be used for egress and ingress, or backup space of off-street parking for the development. 

K. Screen from view all roof-, wall-, or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and devices, in addition to propane tanks, when adjacent to or across the street from a residential district. 

L. Refuse receptacles or dumpsters shall be appropriately positioned, colored or screened to minimize visibility to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. [Ord. 09-O-628 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.70 MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENT (MPD) DISTRICT1

Sections:

17.70.010    Purpose.

17.70.020    General provisions.

17.70.030    Allowed uses.

17.70.040    Master plan of development (MPoD) review procedures.

17.70.050    Acceptance of application.

17.70.060    Staff evaluation.

17.70.070    Review criteria.

17.70.080    Action by planning commission.

17.70.090    Action by the city council.

17.70.100    Notice of decision.

17.70.110    Effective date and assurance.

17.70.120    Effective period of master plan of development (MPoD) approval.

17.70.130    Modification of a master plan of development (MPoD).

17.70.140    Detailed development plan (DDP) review procedures.

17.70.150    Acceptance of application.

17.70.160    Staff evaluation.

17.70.170    Review criteria for determining compliance with master plan of development (MPoD).

17.70.180    Action by the planning commission.

17.70.190    Effective date.

17.70.200    Effective period of detailed development plan (DDP) approval.

17.70.210    Modification(s) of a detailed development plan (DDP).

17.70.220    Determining compliance.


17.70.010 Purpose.

The master planned development (MPD) zone is a land use district. The MPD zone may be applied on sites that are 50 acres or greater in size. The MPD zone shall implement the MP comprehensive plan designation, which shall be placed on all land requiring a “master plan of development” in the Urban Growth Joint Management Agreement (JMA) adopted by the city and the county. Upon or subject to annexation into the city, the MPD comprehensive plan designation shall be applied to all land that is required to adopt a master plan of development (MPoD) in the urban growth boundary. In addition, the city may apply the MPD designation to other lands within the city.

The MPD zone is to be implemented through the approval of a MPoD that describes in detail, as outlined in this chapter, how the development of the property will occur and how the development will implement applicable goals and policies of the city’s comprehensive plan, and applicable provisions of the land development code. The MPoD will assess and minimize, to an acceptable level, the impacts of the development on the city’s services, infrastructure, transportation systems and neighboring properties. Best engineering practices for low impact development which preserve existing vegetation, topography, and natural drainage are encouraged. As the MPD zone is implemented through an approved MPoD, no development shall be allowed until applicable requirements of this chapter are met. Compliance with applicable plan goals and policies is deferred until the MPoD review.

Master planned development review procedures are established in this chapter for the following purposes:

A. Promote flexibility in design and permit diversification in location of structures;

B. Promote efficient use of land and energy and facilitate a more economical arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses, and utilities;

C. Preserve to the greatest extent possible existing landscape features and amenities, and utilize such features in a harmonious fashion. Retention of existing mature trees and other vegetation is encouraged;

D. Provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and other public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures;

E. Combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and building relationships within the planned development;

F. Provide the applicant with reasonable assurance of ultimate approval before expenditure of complete design moneys, while providing the city with assurances that the project will retain the character envisioned at the time of approval;

G. Promote and encourage energy conservation; and

H. Provide greater compatibility with surrounding land uses than what may occur with a conventional project. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.020 General provisions.

Development within a master planned development (MPD) zone is governed by the approval of a MPoD which can be developed in a single phase or in multiple phases. Prior to development a MPoD must be approved and prior to construction of any phase a detailed development plan (DDP) must be approved. On sites where a MPD designation exists on the city’s official zoning map the provisions of this chapter shall apply. The following procedure allows for planning commission review of a MPoD and DDP. An application to apply the MPD zone to specific properties may be submitted and reviewed concurrent with MPoD approval. The applicant may either select to process the development proposal under a DDP concurrent with approval of the MPoD or may request only approval of a MPoD in accordance with BMC 17.70.050 and later apply for a DDP for an individual phase or phases of the project. However, prior to issuing any building permits a DDP must be approved by the planning commission.

An applicant for MPoD approval may propose one or more alternative development standards for all or any specific areas within the plan boundaries, which supersede corresponding development regulations or standards otherwise applicable to the project area through existing regulations. Such alternative standards shall be clearly and specifically identified within the plan submittals, and shall include an explanation and/or drawings, which demonstrates that such alternative standards equally or better meet the purpose of the existing regulations.

Changes to zoning ordinances, policies, and standards adopted after the date of approval of the plan shall not apply to the development during the duration of the plan. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.030 Allowed uses.

The following uses are allowed outright when they are included in an approved MPoD:

A. All uses allowed outright and conditionally in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones;

B. All uses allowed outright and conditionally in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 zones.

C. All uses allowed outright in the I-P and M-2 districts. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.040 Master plan of development (MPoD) review procedures.

An application filed for a MPoD shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedures:

A. Application Requirements. Applications shall be made by the owner, or authorized representative, on forms provided by the city. If the MPoD is to include land in more than one ownership, the application must be submitted jointly by all of the owners or persons having an interest in each of the separately owned properties to be included.

1. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

a. A narrative description of the project addressing the items listed in subsection (C) of this section;

b. Four sets of scaled black line drawings of the MPoD graphic(s), with sheet size not to exceed 30 inches by 42 inches. Where necessary, an overall plan with additional detail sheets may be submitted; and

c. One set of the graphics shall be reduced to fit on eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch sheets of paper. Graphics and related names/numbers must be legible on this sheet size.

B. Graphic Requirements. A MPoD shall include the following information where applicable:

1. Existing land use map (typically a topographic map that extends at least 300 feet beyond the site. The map includes existing building footprints and makes a distinction between single-family, multifamily, commercial and industrial uses, as well as other significant features such as roads, drainageways, parks, and schools);

2. Site plan(s) and other graphics drawn to scale and containing a sheet title, date, north arrow, and legend, placed in the same location on each sheet and containing the following:

a. Existing site conditions including contours at intervals not greater than five feet, watercourses, flood plains, and any unique natural features prepared by an engineer or surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon;

b. A geologic hazard report for any area containing or adjacent to a fault zone, sinkhole, unstable soils, steep slopes of 15 percent or greater, high water table, or other geologic hazard, as required in Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Sites;

c. Exterior boundary of the proposed MPoD and any interior lots/parcels related to proposed development phases or land divisions;

d. Land use areas designated for residential use within the MPoD shall be identified as such and indicate the type of residential use, the number of units within the area and resulting density;

e. General location and size of areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common open spaces, such as public parks, recreational areas, school sites, or others;

f. Existing and proposed general vehicle and pedestrian circulation system including bikeways, sidewalks, off-street parking areas, street standards, and major points of access to public rights-of-way. Notations of proposed ownership (public or private) should be included where appropriate;

g. Existing and proposed preliminary utility systems including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainageways, water, electricity, and other non-municipal utilities, where appropriate. Staff will provide written information concerning existing infrastructure and adequacy to serve proposed development;

h. Show adjoining land areas within 150 feet of the subject property to indicate their relationships with the proposed development including land uses, lot lines, circulation systems, public facilities, and unique natural features of the landscape;

i. Location of natural resources, historic and cultural resources as identified on adopted city and county inventories.

C. Narrative Requirements. A written statement shall include the following information:

1. Statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the project. This statement should indicate a description of the character of the proposed development, and a discussion indicating how the application meets the review criteria in BMC 17.70.070.

2. Statement addressing how the project is in compliance with the applicable goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.

3. Quantitative data for the total concept development plan for the following where appropriate:

a. Total number and type of dwelling units;

b. Parcel size;

c. Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures where known;

d. Gross densities per acre;

e. Approximate allocation and amount of open space (lands not designated for buildings or vehicle parking and maneuvering areas);

f. General type and location of land committed to nonresidential construction uses. The applicant may specify a list of allowable uses within the master plan area which may not include all uses allowed in the underlying zone.

4. General statement of intentions concerning timing, responsibilities, and assurances for all public and nonpublic improvements, such as irrigation, private roads and drives, landscape, and maintenance.

5. Statement describing project phasing, if proposed. Phases shall be:

a. Substantially and functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with regard to access, parking, utilities, open spaces, and similar physical features; capable of substantial occupancy, operation, and maintenance upon completion of construction and development;

b. Properly related to other services of the community as a whole and to those facilities and services yet to be provided; and

c. Provided with such temporary or permanent transitional features, buffers, or protective areas as may be required to prevent damage or detriment to any completed phases and to adjoining properties not in the MPoD.

d. Phasing plan including timing for construction and provision of dwelling units, parcel sizes and open space by phase.

6. Traffic impact study consistent with phasing plan. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.050 Acceptance of application.

A. The city planner shall review the application in accordance with BMC 17.80.050, Site plan approval.

B. After an application is deemed complete, the city planner shall schedule a public hearing to be held by the planning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.84 BMC, Public Hearings Notice Procedures. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.060 Staff evaluation.

The city planner shall prepare a report that evaluates whether the MPoD complies with the review criteria. The report shall also include a recommendation for approval or denial and a list of conditions for the planning commission to consider if an approval is granted. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.070 Review criteria.

The planning commission shall approve an application for MPoD upon finding that the following approval criteria are met:

A. The proposed MPoD is consistent with the purposes identified in BMC 17.70.010 and the intent of the MPD zone;

B. If phases (stages) are proposed, the applicant must submit a timeline to the planning commission for their consideration. The applicant must then comply with the approved phasing timeline (BMC 17.70.120 describes the effective period of approval);

C. The proposed MPoD will demonstrate that adequate utilities and infrastructure are available or can reasonably be made available at each phase. The proposed MPoD will further demonstrate that existing utility services and water supplies for adjacent properties will not be negatively affected at each phase;

D. The proposed MPoD will demonstrate that the plan respects the physical characteristics of the site;

E. The applicant demonstrates that all deviations from the development standards are warranted and that such alternative standards equally or better meet the purpose of the existing regulations;

F. The circulation plan proposed in the MPoD will demonstrate that adequate transportation facilities are available, and the plan promotes the most economic, safe and efficient movement of traffic;

G. The proposed MPoD meets the applicable requirements of the urban growth boundary joint management agreement. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.080 Action by planning commission.

The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with BMC 17.84.040. Following the close of the hearing the planning commission shall recommend the approval, conditional approval or denial of the MPoD. The recommendation shall be reported to the city council in a council agenda report which includes findings that specify how the application has or has not complied with the above review criteria. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.090 Action by the city council.

A. A public hearing will be scheduled before the city council.

B. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may grant approval of the MPoD, approval of the MPoD with conditions, or may, by motion, deny the granting of the MPoD. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.100 Notice of decision.

The city planner shall provide the applicant with a notice of decision and final order in accordance with applicable legal requirements, that includes a written statement of the city council decision, a reference to findings leading to it, any conditions of approval, and appeal period deadline. A notice of decision shall also be mailed to persons who presented testimony orally or in writing at the public hearing. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.110 Effective date and assurance.

The decision of the city council shall become effective 15 days from the postmark date on the mailing of the final order. Approval of the MPoD shall assure the applicant the right to proceed with the development in substantial conformity with the plan and approval of the DDP, subject to such modifications as may be authorized. Changes to zoning ordinances, policies and standards adopted after the date of approval of the plan shall not apply to the development during the duration of the plan. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.120 Effective period of master plan of development (MPoD) approval.

If the applicant has not submitted a DDP for the planned development or the first phase within four years from the date of approval, the MPoD shall expire. The applicant has the opportunity to apply for an extension of time prior to the expiration of the approval. The planning commission may grant an extension if the applicant demonstrates there have been delays beyond his/her control such as:

A. Difficulty obtaining financing due to economic or market conditions;

B. Delays in obtaining required agency permits;

C. Lack of available contractors to perform needed work; or

D. Similar circumstances.

The commission may, at its discretion, extend the period for two additional years per extension, subject to applicable hearing and notice requirements. If, after the approval of the first DDP, substantial construction has not been started or at any time construction has lapsed for a period of three years, the MPoD will expire. Substantial construction in this case means obtaining all necessary permits required by governmental agencies to commence construction of any structures or needed infrastructure. BMC 17.70.200 describes the approval period for a DDP and requests for an extension of time. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.130 Modification of a master plan of development (MPoD).

A modification to an approved MPoD is required when a proposed DDP does not meet the standards stated in BMC 17.70.170. An applicant may request a modification of an approved MPoD by submitting an application, appropriate fee, and supporting materials. The planning commission will conduct a public hearing to consider the modification. A modification may request a change to the plot plan/plat or to the conditions of approval. The request must be accompanied by:

A. A revised plot plan or plat showing the proposed changes and how they compare to the originally approved project; or

B. If the modification does not change the physical site plan of the project, a text explaining the desired change must be submitted.

C. The applicant must provide findings for the following criteria:

1. Address how the requested modification relates to the approved project and any impacts that will result.

2. Address any impacts to adjoining properties.

3. Address the effect on city services and facilities.

The planning commission will review the proposed modification based on the criteria in subsection (C) of this section.

In all modifications, review shall be limited to the area proposed for modification and the impacts attributed to the proposed change. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.140 Detailed development plan (DDP) review procedures.

The applicant can request that each phase or a portion of a phase be reviewed in accordance with the DDP review procedures, so long as each detailed development plan is in substantial conformance with the MPoD. An application filed for a DDP shall address the applicable requirements specified in the approved MPoD for the subject property and include the following additional information.

A. Graphic Requirements. Must demonstrate the DDP is in substantial conformance with the approved graphic depiction of the MPoD for the subject property completed to a scale sufficient to clearly show all required data, on paper not to exceed 30 inches by 42 inches and shall include:

1. Topographic contours at two-foot minimum intervals for slopes under 20 percent and at five-foot minimum intervals for slopes at or greater than 20 percent. Where the slope exceeds 15 percent, compliance with the standards established in Chapter 17.100 BMC must be met;

2. For all buildings except single-family and duplex homes, the location of existing and proposed structures and other improvements, including maximum heights, building types, and gross density per acre (for residential developments) and location of fire hydrants, existing overhead lines in the abutting right-of-way, easements and walkways;

3. Typical architectural elevations of buildings and structures (which may be submitted on additional sheets) sufficient to indicate the architectural intent and character of the proposed development for all buildings except single-family and duplex residential;

4. Landscape plan also drawn to scale showing location of landscaped areas and other landscape features including walls and fences, and irrigation systems proposed to maintain plant materials. A list of trees and other plant materials to be used shall be provided. Forty percent of new trees and plants must be drought-resistant. The landscape plan must be in compliance with applicable sections of Chapter 17.94 BMC, Landscaping, and BMC 17.92.100, Development and maintenance standard for off-street parking areas;

5. Utilities plan indicating how sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural drainages, and water systems will function and how negative impacts to existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage and water systems of adjacent properties will be avoided;

6. Circulation plan showing street, driveway, parking area, service area, loading area, pedestrian way, and bikeway improvements and their dimensions;

7. Location and dimensions of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common open spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, or other areas;

8. Exterior lighting plan indicating the location and direction of illumination. Lighting on streets proposed to be dedicated to the city must comply with standards found in the public works document, “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications.”

B. Narrative Requirements. In addition to addressing the applicable conditions of approval in the final order of the approved MPoD for the subject property, the DDP shall include:

1. Proposals for setbacks or approximate building envelopes, lot areas where a concurrent land division is proposed and number of parking spaces to be provided (in ratio to gross floor area or number of units);

2. Updated statement outlining timing, responsibilities, and assurances for all public and nonpublic improvements such as irrigation, private roads and drives, landscape, and maintenance; identify any changes since approval of MPoD;

3. Statement addressing compatibility of proposed development to adjacent land uses relating to such items as architectural character, building type, and height of proposed structures;

4. Statement demonstrating consistency with adopted traffic impact study and the transportation plan.

C. Tentative Plat. If a DDP is to be partitioned or subdivided, a tentative plan or plat shall also be submitted as part of a MPoD or DDP submittal in accordance with Chapter 17.172 BMC, Land Divisions, to permit simultaneous review. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.150 Acceptance of application.

A. The city planner shall review the application in accordance with BMC 17.80.050, Action of the site plan committee.

B. After an application is deemed complete, the city planner shall schedule a public hearing to be held by the planning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.84 BMC, Public Hearing Notice Proceedings. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.160 Staff evaluation.

The city planner shall prepare a report that evaluates whether the DDP complies with the review criteria in BMC 17.70.170. The report should include a recommendation for approval or denial and a list of conditions for the planning commission to consider if an approval is granted. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.170 Review criteria for determining compliance with master plan of development (MPoD).

A. Request for approval of a DDP shall be reviewed to determine whether it is in substantial conformance with the MPoD. The DDP shall be deemed to not be in substantial conformance with the MPoD if it results in any of the following types of changes from the MPoD:

1. Change in development density and/or intensity that results in a peak hour trip generation of greater than 10 percent of the total approved in the MPoD;

2. Reduction of more than 10 percent of the area reserved for common open space and/or usable open space from what was previously specified;

3. Reduction of specific setback requirements by more than 10 percent where previously specified;

4. Reduction of project amenities provided, such as recreational facilities;

5. Reduction of screening, and/or landscaping provisions by more than 10 percent from what was previously specified; and

6. If subdivision or partition, the application does not meet the applicable requirements of Chapter 17.172 BMC.

This list is not all-inclusive. The DDP must generally be in substantial conformance with the MPoD.

B. All deviations within the limits set by the criteria in subsection (A) of this section from those of the approved MPoD shall be justified and explained either in the required graphic or narrative materials.

C. If phases (stages) are proposed, the applicant must submit a timeline to the planning commission for their consideration. The applicant must then comply with the approved phasing timeline. (BMC 17.70.200 describes the effective period of approval.) [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.180 Action by the planning commission.

The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the DDP. The planning commission’s decision shall include findings that specify how the DDP is or is not in substantial conformance with the MPoD. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.190 Effective date.

The decision of the planning commission shall become effective 15 days from the postmark date on the mailing of the final order unless an appeal is filed. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.200 Effective period of detailed development plan (DDP) approval.

A. Approval of a DDP shall be valid for a three-year period from the date of initial approval. If the applicant has not begun construction within this time frame, the approval shall expire. At its discretion and without a public hearing, the commission may extend the approval for a period not to exceed two additional years per extension.

B. If the planning commission has approved implementation of the DDP in phases, the approved timeline will apply. At its discretion and without a public hearing, the commission may extend the approval for a period not to exceed two additional years per extension. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.210 Modification(s) of a detailed development plan (DDP).

A modification to an approved DDP is required when final building and/or construction plans are not in substantial conformance with the adopted DDP. An applicant may request a modification of an approved DDP by submitting an application, appropriate fee, and supporting materials. The planning commission will conduct a public hearing to consider the modification. A modification may request a change to the plot plan/plat or the conditions of approval. The request must be accompanied by:

A. A revised plot plan or plat showing the proposed changes and how they compare to the originally approved project; or

B. If the modification does not change the physical site plan of the project, a text explaining the desired change must be submitted.

C. The applicant must provide findings for the following criteria:

1. Address how the requested modification relates to the approved project and any impacts that will result.

2. Address any impacts to adjoining properties.

3. Address the effect on city services and facilities.

The planning commission will review the proposed modification based on the criteria in subsection (C) of this section.

In a modification, review shall be limited to the area proposed for modification and the impacts attributed to the proposed change. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]


17.70.220 Determining compliance.

A building permit or other site development permit request shall be in substantial compliance with the DDP and all modifications. [Ord. 10-O-652 § 2; Ord. 03-O-446.PP.]1

Prior legislation: Ord. 03-O-557 § 1. 


Chapter 17.72 MARINE ACTIVITY (MA) DISTRICT 

Sections: 

17.72.010    Purpose.

17.72.020    Aquatic development (AD) shallow draft.

17.72.030    Water-dependent (WD) development subarea.

17.72.040    Public recreation (MR).

17.72.050    Priority dredge material disposal sites (DMD).

17.72.060    Shoreland and aquatic development standards – Chetco Estuary.

17.72.070    Additional standards and review procedures for conditional uses in the marine activity zone.

17.72.080    Development review procedure.

17.72.090    Technical findings.


17.72.010 Purpose.

The marine activity zone is to provide areas at the Port of Brookings and along development shorelands of the Chetco River, for commercial, industrial and recreation activities that depend or are benefitted by a waterfront location, and to reserve such areas for those uses and the facilities and accommodations necessary to support the tourist and fishing industries.

Water surface areas will be designated for development, conservation or preservation (AD, AC, AN). Shorelands in the marine activity zone will be divided into subareas (WD, WR, MC, MR, DMD), to assure that a variety of economic activities, tourist facilities and active and passive recreation can occur along the Chetco, within the carrying capacity of existing shoreland and aquatic areas. Reference the maps marked attachments “A,” “B” and “C,” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, being made a part hereof.

Management units, their resource capability purpose, priorities, and permitted uses, within the Brookings city limits, are set out in BMC 17.72.020 through 17.72.060. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.020 Aquatic development (AD) shallow draft. 

A. Purpose of Management Units. To provide a shallow draft navigation system serving sites suitable for shoreland development, and to provide for more intense use or alteration of aquatic areas to serve water-dependent development, as consistent with the purposes of this shallow draft development estuary and goals of this estuary plan. 

B. Priority activities in these areas will include: 

1. Channel and jetty maintenance;

2. Water-dependent commercial;

3. Industrial;

4. Recreation activity at the Port of Brookings;

5. Navigation improvements;

6. Moorage and marinas;

7. Extraction and shipment of gravel. 

C. Aquatic Development (AD). Uses permitted with standards include: 

1. Maintenance dredging and dredge for water-dependent uses;

2. Piling and dolphin installation;

3. Navigational aids;

4. Docks for industrial and commercial transshipment and for commercial and sport basins;

5. Dredged marinas and boat basins;

6. Jetty and dike construction and maintenance;

7. Active and passive restoration;

8. Aggregate extraction under existing permits;

9. Excavation to create new navigable water area;

10. Expansion of moorage areas serving water-dependent development;

11. Water storage areas for water-dependent uses. 

D. Conditional Uses.

1. Fill of estuarine waters for water-dependent activity;

2. New gravel extraction sites. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.030 Water-dependent (WD) development subarea. 

A. Purpose. These subareas are reserved for priority water-dependent development that can make effective use of a waterside location. It is to be assumed that the activities listed here are allowed in WD subareas of the MA zone. Standards will be used to assure that development occurs in a manner consistent with the carrying capacity of the estuary and purposes of the management unit, BMC 17.72.060. 

B. Uses Permitted with Standards. The following uses shall be permitted subject to standards pursuant to BMC 17.72.060: 

1. Barge and other industrial docks, backup land and facilities supporting waterborne commerce;

2. Marineways;

3. Wharves and piers; marine facilities;

4. Seafood and other marine products receiving and processing;

5. Boat moorage, ramp, and launch facilities;

6. Cold storage, repair, and other direct services to water-dependent activity;

7. Dredge material disposal;

8. Navigational aids;

9. Excavation to create new water area;

10. Jetty and dike maintenance;

11. Shoreline stabilization (vegetation, riprap, bulkhead, retaining wall);

12. Fill of shoreland for water-dependent use or that cause no loss of shoreland available to WD use;

13. Utilities to serve water-dependent use or that cause no loss of shoreland available to WD use;

14. Access roads necessary to water-dependent use;

15. Drydock facilities;

16. Temporary parking, boat trailer storage, RV parks that make no structural improvements that would preclude use of the site for WD use. 

C. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted subject to receipt of a conditional use permit and standards listed in BMC 17.72.060:

1. Land transportation facilities not necessary for water-dependent use;

2. Low intensity recreation;

3. Construction of new dikes;

4. Offices providing services to water-dependent activity;

5. Activities not here listed that require water access for transportation, recreation, or as an energy or water source; or provide direct services to a water-dependent use and do not impede the marine industrial activity that is the priority use of these WD shorelands. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.040 Public recreation (MR). 

A. Purpose. The Chetco Estuary and adjacent beaches provide many areas of unique value and benefit as open space, for surf and jetty fishing, beach walking, swimming or just looking at the view. Within the marine activity zone, certain areas have been designated for these passive recreation uses, in areas safe from more intense port activity. 

B. Uses Permitted with Standards. The following uses are permitted subject to standards pursuant to BMC 17.72.060: 

1. Low intensity recreation; 

2. Public parking for open use only, on the landward side of recreation areas; 

3. Restoration (e.g., beach nourishment).

C. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted subject to receipt of a conditional use permit and standards listed in BMC 17.72.060: 

1. Public restroom facilities if not provided in adjacent support area; 

2. Stormwater outfalls, wastewater outfalls. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.050 Priority dredge material disposal sites (DMD). 

A. Purpose. The purpose of DMD subareas in marine activity zones is to protect essential DMD sites from incompatible and preemptive uses that could limit their ultimate use for deposit of dredge material, and thereby limit the Port of Brookings and the Corps of Engineers from maintaining a navigable channel in the Chetco.

B. For subareas designated DMD, the following standards shall apply. 

1. Structural improvements (e.g., construction of buildings) or other alteration of topography that would preempt use os the site for the amount of DMD planned will be prohibited until such time as alternative sites providing equivalent capacity to meet five-year disposal needs (within convenient reach of planned dredging projects) have been identified; and these alternate sites have been protected by plan amendment. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.060 Shoreland and aquatic development standards – Chetco Estuary. 

A. These shoreland and aquatic standards are requirements that apply to all development in marine activity zones along the Chetco River. These standards are intended to establish the conditions under which activities permitted-with-standards and conditional uses are appropriate along the Chetco; to assure that property owners (both the Port of Brookings and private owners) know up-front the conditions under which they can expect development approval and to protect the unique economic, social and environmental values of the Chetco River Estuary. 

B. Dock/Moorage/Port Facility Standards.

1. Moorage areas along the river or dike, as well as floating structures, will be constructed so as to minimize adverse effects on navigation, water currents, erosion, and accretion patterns, flushing characteristics, aquatic habitat and fishery resources. 

2. Piers and floats shall extend no further out into the navigation channel than necessary to serve the activity planned. Size and shape of docks and piers will be limited to that necessary for the intended purpose. 

3. New moorage areas excavated from existing shorelands will be constructed so as to cause a net increase in the water surface area of the river. 

4. Multipurpose use of moorage, parking, cargo handling and storage facilities will be encouraged. 

5. Design and construction measures will be identified that will minimize adverse impacts on adjacent natural and conservation areas to a level consistent with the resource capability and purpose of the affected management unit. 

6. Facilities and locations for public viewing of the waterfront (e.g., walkways, seating, fishing areas) will be provided in areas where this use will not conflict with port or industrial operations. 

7. Applicants proposing new marina facilities will present design and construction plans to minimize adverse impacts on water quality, navigation, sedimentation rates and patterns, aquatic habitat (e.g., intertidal structures or gravel beds that support algae growth), adjacent uses and aquatic areas. 

8. Unless part of an approved fill project, materials extracted from aquatic areas shall be placed above mean higher high water in such a manner that water quality is not deteriorated during fish spawning and migratory seasons, and the floodways and water surface area of the estuary are not decreased. 

9. Other policies in this section will also apply. 

C. Pilings and Dolphins Standards. 

1. Present design and construction plans that minimize adverse impacts on navigation, water circulation and transport, aquatic life, and habitat consistent with maintaining the cost effectiveness of the structure. 

2. Demonstrate that the construction is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose. 

D. Dike Standards. 

1. The outside face of dikes shall be suitably protected to prevent erosion, and to maintain structural surface areas where silt and algae can accumulate during low water months. 

2. New dike alignment and configuration shall not cause an increase in erosion or shoaling in adjacent areas or an appreciable increase in back-water elevation. 

3. New diking of aquatic areas is subject to fill standards in subsection (K) of this section. New dikes for the purpose of flood protection will be placed on shorelands and not in aquatic areas. 

E. Land Transportation and Utility Corridor Standards.

1. Land transportation and utility corridors will be located on WD, WR shoreland and aquatic areas only to serve WD, WR use or where no practical upland alternative exists. 

2. Permanent parking will be located on the landward side of marine activity and developed property. 

3. Roads and pedestrianways in the marine activity zone will assure convenient access to water-dependent uses. 

F. Restoration Standards. 

1. Restoration of shallow gravel bars that accumulate algae, silt, and amphipod populations during the summer season will be encouraged, in areas where such shallow water will not conflict with navigation or approved gravel extraction projects. 

2. Restoration or improvement of the natural river channel to serve sport fishing and recreation will be encouraged, within the conditions outlined in the dredging standards in subsection (I) of this section. 

3. The above active restoration will be allowed only if it will contribute to the long-term environmental, economic, and social value of the estuary or will restore areas of heavy erosion or sedimentation, degraded fish and wildlife habitat, anadromous fish spawning areas, abandoned diked estuarine waters for fish harvest or for human recreation; and the project identifies original conditions to be restored, the cause of the loss or degradation, and the site and actions necessary to respond to the causes and to achieve the restoration objective. 

G. Shoreline Stabilization Standards. 

1. Identified riparian vegetation will be maintained within the shoreland boundary, except the disturbance essential to approved development projects. 

2. All areas along the riverbank disturbed or newly created by construction activity will be revegetated or given structural protection necessary to prevent erosion. Natural materials and vegetation will be preferred, except in cases where the force of river currents or other characteristics make structural materials preferable. 

3. Only clean, durable riprap will be used. All piling and lumber treated with creosote or other protective material will be completely dry before use in or near the waterway. 

H. Gravel Extraction Standards.

1. The operator of a surface mine shall present to the local government one copy each of a state-approved surface mining plan and a reclamation plan before commencing operations. 

2. Applicants for mining and mineral extraction projects shall demonstrate that the activity is sited, and designed, and will be operated and maintained to minimize adverse impacts on the following: 

a. Aquatic life and habitat, including but not limited to the spawning, rearing and passage requirements of anadromous fish; 

b. Bird and wildlife habitat; 

c. Hydraulic characteristics, including but not limited to circulation and the alteration of local currents that may affect adjacent shoreline areas by causing erosion, accretion, or increased flooding; 

d. Water quality. 

3. Unless part of an approved fill project, the materials extracted from aquatic areas shall be placed above mean higher high water in such manner that sediment will not enter or return to the waterway. 

4. Gravel extraction operators will be regulated by other appropriate standards in this title, such as shoreline stabilization, dike restoration. 

5. Gravel extraction will be regulated in accord with the state removal/fill permit and Corps of Engineers permit processes, and except under special circumstances, will avoid the spawning period and upstream migration of import fish species (see inventory).

I. Dredging Standards.

1. Dredging in aquatic areas shall only be permitted if required for: 

a. Navigation or navigational access; 

b. A permitted or conditional use that required an estuarine location; 

c. An approved restoration project; 

d. Mining/gravel extraction; 

e. A permitted or conditionally permitted bridge footing excavation or utility foundation; 

f. Maintenance of dikes, drainage ditches, or tidegates. 

2. The above-mentioned dredging in aquatic areas shall be allowed only: 

a. For the water-dependent uses outlined in the Chetco Estuary plan and this chapter that have been found to be important to the economic, social and environmental goals of the Brookings area;

b. When adverse impacts are minimized as outlined in this chapter;

c. When dredging is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose.

3. Erosion, sedimentation, increased flood hazard, and other undesirable changes in circulation shall be avoided in dredging and in the disposal of dredged materials. Tidal marshes, tidal flats, and other wetlands shall not be adversely affected.

4. The timing of dredging and disposal in aquatic areas shall be coordinated with state and federal resource agencies and/or will avoid the spawning period and upstream migration of important fish species to ensure adequate protection of estuarine resources (fish runs, spawning, benthic productivity, wildlife, etc.), and to minimize interference with commercial and recreational fishing activities.

5. Minor dredging of existing channels and drainageways will be limited to the amount necessary to maintain navigability and flow capacity (18 inches in the authorized channel and that necessary to serve small boat traffic upriver). 

6. Adverse short-term effects of dredging and aquatic disposal such as turbidity, release of nutrients, heavy metals, sulfides, organic material or toxic substances, dissolved oxygen depletion, disruption of the food chain, loss of benthic productivity, and disturbance of fish runs and important localized biological communities shall be minimized on-site and in areas adjacent. 

J. Dredge Material Disposal Standards.

1. Materials dredged from the Chetco are primarily fine silts and gravel for which there is a market demand, or which is valued for foundation material on shoreland development sites, or road construction. Standards listed here will regulate how dredged materials may be handled to maximize their value, and to minimize estuarine damage and public costs. 

2. Priority dredge material disposal sites adequate to handle disposal needs of planned projects have been identified. DMD subareas adequate to handle five-year projected needs, in accord with these standards will be reserved for DMD use. Sites adequate to meet 20-year dredging needs will be identified and made part of long-term disposal plans. 

3. Dredge material disposal will meet the following standards: 

a. Dredging standards in subsection (I) of this section shall apply. 

b. Dredge material shall not be disposed of or in an intertidal marsh or in estuarine waters unless part of an approved fill project. 

c. Ocean disposal of dredge materials shall be allowed, provided interference with sport and commercial fishing is minimized, and disposal is confined to designated disposal sites. 

d. Disposal at approved gravel excavation sites will be allowed, to allow for marketing of dredge materials. 

e. Disposal of dredge material on designated DMD sites and on shoreland development sites will be allowed under the following conditions:

i. Riparian vegetation standards in subsection (G) of this section shall apply.

ii. Disposal causes no limiting of the floodway and the minimum necessary limits on the capacity of the 100-year floodplain.

iii. Floodplain regulations in existence under city ordinances will apply.

iv. Surface runoff from disposal shall be controlled to protect water quality and to prevent sedimentation of adjacent water or wetlands. 

f. Temporary stockpile on shoreland sites not intended for immediate development will be allowed, until such time as WD project is approved. 

g. Disposal allowed by these standards will be stabilized by vegetation or other acceptable means, as necessary to prevent wind and water erosion. 

h. The final height and slope after each use of a DMD site shall be such that:

i. The site does not slough and erode into adjacent areas or into the water.

ii. Interference with capacity of 100-year floodplain is minimized. 

K. Fill Standards. 

1. The water surface area of the Chetco Estuary is limited, and heavy stream flows between November and April may cause flooding conditions. Therefore, fill of estuarine waters will be limited by and permitted only if the following standards are met: 

a. Essential to a water-dependent use that requires an estuarine location; 

b. Essential to a permitted bridge footing or utility foundation; 

c. An approved restoration project; 

d. Navigational structures and improvements; 

e. Approach to low water bridges; 

f. Flood control structures or structural shoreline stabilization; 

g. A public need is demonstrated, as defined by official city, county or state legislation; 

h. No alternative upland locations exist. 

2. A fill shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose. 

3. Where existing public access is reduced, suitable public access as part of a development project shall be provided; however, project fill requirements shall not be expanded in order to provide public access. 

4. Approved fill projects will demonstrate how loss of water surface area will be mitigated by addition to the surface area or floodway, in the vicinity of the fill area, or by creation or restoration of an area of similar biological potential to ensure that the integrity of the estuarine ecosystem is maintained. 

5. Any approved fills of intertidal areas will be subject to mitigation requirements of the Oregon Fill and Removal Law. 

6. Fill activities in the aquatic conservation zone are permitted only as part of maintenance and protection of existing structures, and active restoration. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.070 Additional standards and review procedures for conditional uses in the marine activity zone. 

A. Purpose of the Conditional Use Review and Standards. To evaluate and allow for activities not listed as permitted-with-standards, but that are within the purposes of the management unit and the capacity of estuarine and economic resources, and the development review procedures, shoreland and aquatic development standards, and the public notice procedures shall apply. 

B. Conditional uses shall meet the following additional requirements: 

1. Proposed activity will be evaluated in terms of standards, technical findings, agency recommendations, and permit requirements referenced above, to determine if it is within the purposes of the management unit or zone and subarea where it is located, and within on-site and adjacent resource capabilities. 

2. Proposals in aquatic subareas judged by administrative officials to have major expected impacts may be required to provide findings establishing that the cumulative effects of all phases of the project are within the resource capabilities of estuarine resources. 

3. Federal environmental impact statement or impact assessment may substitute for these requirements if available at the time of development review. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.080 Development review procedure. 

A. Purpose. This section establishes a process for evaluating development proposals against various qualitative performance standards for certain estuarine and coastal shoreland areas. It is intended to increase predictability in the local decision-making process by informing the developer of the type of information to be provided, how the city or county will make the final decision, of third party technical expertise available, and of specific conditions to bring the proposed development into compliance with standards of this chapter. 

B. Preapplication Conference. The applicant may request a preapplication conference that will be held within 10 working days of a request for such conference. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of this chapter and the comprehensive plan, provide for an exchange of information that will be necessary to demonstrate that applicable standards have been met, to arrange such technical and design assistance as will aid the applicant, to indicate necessary state and/or federal permit requirements, and otherwise identify policies and ordinance requirements that create opportunities or pose constraints for the proposed development. 

C. Application for Review. 

1. The property owner or his/her representative may initiate a request for review and approval under this section by filing an application with the city manager. 

2. Upon receipt of the request, the city manager shall prepare and deliver to the applicant within five working days a statement of whether the use or activity can be considered within the zoning district, whether it is permitted-with-standards or a conditional use, and if so, the following: 

a. Specification of the relevant comprehensive plan policies, zoning and other ordinance standards and criteria; 

b. Information to be supplied as listed in BMC 17.72.090; 

c. Relevant state and federal requirements. 

3. A completed application shall be accompanied by the following: 

a. Specific information that has been identified as pertinent to the standards to be met by the project relevant portions of BMC 17.72.090; 

b. A set of findings that demonstrate compliance with the applicable policies and standards (BMC 17.72.060 and 17.72.070); 

c. Maps, photographs, or other descriptive material showing how the siting, design, operation and maintenance chosen by the applicant meets the policies, standards, and requirements. 

D. Public Notice. If a public notice is required by the proposal being reviewed, the following procedure will apply: 

1. After receiving a completed application, the city manager shall mail and shall have published a public notice of intent to make a decision on the application. Notice shall include the following: 

a. Description and location of the proposed development; 

b. That applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance standards are available at the planning department; 

c. That interested parties have 20 days to submit comments and information relevant to the proposed development, giving reasons why the proposed development should not be approved, and preparing modifications necessary for approval; 

d. Notice that only those parties who comment in writing or testify at a public hearing if required, will receive first class mailed notice of the decision on the proposed development; and 

e. Notice of the right of the procedure for appeal. 

2. Public notice shall be sent to the following: 

a. Property owners within 250 feet of the property line of the proposed development; 

b. State and federal resource agencies with mandates and authorities for planning, permit issuance and resource decision-making, including the following:

i. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife;

ii. Oregon Division of State Lands; 

iii. Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development;

iv. Oregon Department of Economic Development; 

v. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;

vi. National Marine Fisheries Service;

vii. Environmental Protection Agency;

viii. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 

c. Any other person who has requested in writing to receive notice of proposed actions under this chapter. 

E. Decision. 

1. Within 60 days of receiving a completed application, the planning commission shall approve, deny, or modify and approve the application. The decision shall be based on the application and the evidence and comments from interested parties. The decision shall provide findings of fact and conclusions that demonstrate that the applicable standards of BMC 17.72.070 have been met. 

2. If the application is denied, the decision of subsection (E)(1) of this section shall also indicate, to the extent the evidence and date in the application will allow, whether or not the proposed development can be made to comply with the policies and standards in question, and what specific changes in the proposed development would be necessary. 

3. The city manager shall notify the applicant and others entitled to notice of the disposition of the application. The notice shall indicate the effective date of the decision and describe the rights and procedures for appeal pursuant to Chapters 17.152 and 17.156 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.72.090 Technical findings.

Following is a list of the technical information that may be requested to describe the nature of the ecosystem and the expected impacts of a proposed development or restoration project. At the time of application for development review, BMC 17.72.080, the city manager will identify specifically which, if any, for the following information will be needed to evaluate the proposal. In most cases, only a portion of this information will be necessary to measure conformance with each standard: 

A. Aquatic life forms and habitat, including information on habitat type and use (e.g., rearing, spawning, feeding/resting area, migration route), species present, seasonal abundance, sediment type and characteristics, vegetation present. Type of alteration, including information detailing the extent of alteration (e.g., area measurement, depths to which alteration will extend, volumes of materials removed and/or placed as fill), impacted species (including threatened or endangered species), life stages and life cycles affected with regard to timing of the proposed alteration. 

B. Shoreland life forms and habitat, including information on habitat type and use (e.g., feeding, resting or watering areas, flyways), species present, seasonal abundance, soil types and characteristics, vegetation present. Type of alteration, including information detailing the extent of alteration (e.g., area measurement, extent of grading and excavation, removal of riparian vegetation), impacted species (including threatened or endangered species), life stages and life cycles affected with regard to timing of the proposed alteration. 

C. Water quality, including information on increases in sedimentation and turbidity, decreases in dissolved oxygen concentration, changes in biological and chemical oxygen demand, contaminated sediments, alteration of salinity regime, disruption of natural-occurring water temperatures, changes due to reduction, diversion of impoundment of water. 

D. Hydraulic characteristics, including information on changes in water circulation patterns, shoaling patterns, potential or erosion or accretion in adjacent areas, changes in the floodplain, decreases in flushing capacity or decreases in rate of water flow from reduction or diversion or impoundment of water sources. 

E. Air quality, including information on quantities or emissions of particulates, expected inorganic and organic airborne pollutants. 

F. If individual single-purpose docks and piers are involved, the feasibility of using community docks and moorage facilities and other alternatives such as mooring buoys, dryland storage and launching ramps. 

G. If a water-dependent or water-related use in a rural area, alternative shoreland as sites in urban and urbanizable areas. 

1. If in a rural area and a use other than water-dependent, water-related, agriculture, forestry or single-family residential on an existing lot, alternative upland locations. 

H. Public need and gain that warrant the proposed action and adverse impacts. 

I. Existing and potential water-dependent use of the site and parcels adjacent to the site. 

J. Potential impacts may include environmental, social and economic impacts resulting from the items listed below. 

1. Direct on-site and off-site, cause and effect impacts resulting from the principal development and occurring off-site. For example, changes in estuarine erosion/sedimentation rates and patterns caused by changes in water currents caused by the addition or removal of piling in the estuary. 

2. The cumulative phases of multiphased development, to include mineral exploration and extraction. 

3. The secondary “spin-off” developments that are customarily associated with and follow the principal development. For example, offshore oil and gas exploration and extraction requires onshore facilities such as platform and other equipment manufacturing, boat repair and moorage and housing. As another example, new residential communities in rural areas may spawn various retail commercial developments and new and upgraded transportation systems. 

K. Methods to minimize impacts described in subsection (J) of this section. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.74 RIPARIAN PROTECTION (RP) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:

17.74.010    Purpose.

17.74.020    Definitions.

17.74.030    Applicability.

17.74.040    Riparian corridors.

17.74.050    Administration.

17.74.060    Activities within the riparian corridor.

17.74.070    Agency review.

17.74.080    Natural resource enhancement.

17.74.090    Variance.

17.74.100    Riparian Protection Overlay Zone Map.


17.74.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect and restore select water bodies in the city of Brookings and their associated riparian areas, thereby protecting and restoring the hydrologic, ecological and water quality functions these areas provide. Specifically, this chapter is intended to protect habitat for fish and other aquatic life, protect habitat for wildlife, protect water quality for human uses and for aquatic life, control erosion and limit sedimentation, and reduce the effects of flooding. This chapter attempts to meet these goals by excluding structures from areas adjacent to significant (fish-bearing) lakes and streams, and by prohibiting vegetation removal or other alterations in those areas. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.020 Definitions.

“Delineation” means an analysis that determines the boundary of natural resource according to an approved methodology.

“Excavation” means removal of organic or inorganic material (e.g., soil, sand, sediment, muck) by human action.

“Fill” means deposition of organic or inorganic material (e.g., soil, sand, sediment, muck, debris) by human action.

“Fish bearing” means inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish species and fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the Federal Endangered Species Act or included on the OSFW Threatened and Endangered Species List. Fish-bearing status is determined through a combination of Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife data and Oregon Department of Forestry Stream Classification maps.

“Impervious surface” means any material which reduces or prevents absorption of storm water.

“Lawn” means grass maintained as a ground cover of less than six inches in height, and managed to restrict the growth of shrubs and trees. For purposes of this chapter, lawn is not considered native vegetation regardless of the species used.

“Mitigation” means compensating for impacts to a riparian corridor including: restoration, creation, or enhancement of riparian functions. Some examples of riparian impact mitigation actions are replanting trees, removal of nuisance plants, and restoring streamside vegetation where it is disturbed or where it has been degraded due to past practices.

“Native vegetation” means plants identified as naturally occurring and historically found within the eco-region.

“Natural resource enhancement” means a modification of a natural resource to improve its quality.

“Net loss” means a permanent loss of riparian functions provided by riparian structure and vegetation that results from a development action despite mitigation measures having been taken.

“Nonconforming” means a structure or use that does not conform to the standards of this chapter but has been in continuous existence from prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter up to the present. Nonconforming uses are not considered violations and are allowed to continue, although expansion, reconstruction, or substantial improvements are regulated.

“Off-site mitigation” means mitigation undertaken on a lot or parcel adjacent to or distant from the lot or parcel affected by a development action.

“On-site mitigation” means mitigation undertaken within the lot or parcel affected by a development action.

“Ordinary high water line (OHWL)” means the line on the bank or shore to which the high water ordinarily rises. The OHWL excludes exceptionally high water levels caused by large flood events (e.g., 100-year events).

“Qualified professional” means an individual who has proven expertise and vocational experience in the delineation of water resources.

“Riparian area” means the area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem.

“Riparian corridor” means a resource that includes the water areas, fish habitat, and riparian areas that serve to protect water quality and the habitat functions of the water body. Corridors are further defined in BMC 17.74.040(C).

“Shrubs” means woody vegetation greater than three feet but less than 20 feet tall, including multi-stemmed, bushy shrubs and small trees and saplings.

“State and Federal Natural Resource Agency” means the Oregon Department of State Lands, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

“Stream” means a channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water, including perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined channels, and excluding manmade irrigation and drainage channels.

“Structure” means a building or other structure that is built, constructed or installed, not including minor improvements, such as fences, utility poles, flagpoles, or irrigation system components, that are not customarily regulated through zoning ordinances.

“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1. Before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

2. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

“Top of bank” means a distinct break in slope between the stream bottom and the surrounding terrain which corresponds with the ordinary high water line of the stream; or the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation.


[IMAGE]


“Trees” means a woody plant five inches or greater in diameter at breast height and 20 feet or taller.

“Water dependent” means a use or activity which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for water-borne transportation, recreation, energy production, or source of water.

“Water related” means uses which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent land or waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public loss of quality in the goods or services offered. Except as necessary for water-dependent or water-related uses or facilities, residences, parking lots, spoil and dump sites, roads and highways, restaurants, businesses, factories, and trailer parks are not generally considered dependent on or related to water location needs. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.030 Applicability.

A. Affected Property. The procedures and requirements of the riparian protection (RP) overlay zone:

1. Apply to any parcel designated as containing any portion of a riparian corridor as mapped in the City of Brookings Riparian Protection Overlay Zone Map;

2. Apply in addition to the standards of the property’s underlying zone.

3. Supersede the property’s underlying zone where the underlying zone does not provide the level of resource protection afforded by the RP overlay zone. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.040 Riparian corridors.

The riparian protection overlay zone identifies fish-bearing streams, lakes, and a riparian area of specified width. The following riparian corridors are to be established:

A. Along all fish-bearing lakes, and fish-bearing streams with average annual stream flow less than 1,000 cfs, the riparian area shall be 50 feet.

1. Lone Ranch Creek.

2. Duley Creek.

3. Ram Creek.

4. Taylor Creek.

5. Macklyn Creek.

6. Shy Creek.

7. Harris Creek.

8. Eiler Creek.

9. Ransom Creek.

10. Ferry Creek.

B. Along all streams with average annual stream flow greater than 1,000 cubic feet per second (cfs) the riparian corridor shall be 75 feet.

1. The Chetco River has an annual stream flow greater than 1,000 cfs.

However, the portion of the Chetco River within the city of Brookings is within the Chetco River Estuary and considered coastal shoreland, subject to the city’s marine activity district (Chapter 17.72 BMC).

C. The measurement of distance to the riparian corridor boundary shall be from the ordinary high water line measured 50 feet along the slope. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.050 Administration.

A. Development submissions identified on the city of Brooking’s permit clearance form as initiating development activities in any areas designated as a riparian corridor must be accompanied by the following:

1. Site plan (in triplicate and drawn to scale) showing:

a. A delineation, prepared by a qualified professional, of the riparian corridor on the site.

b. Existing improvements such as structures, buildings, utility lines, fences, etc., for the whole site.

c. Areas where riparian area has been previously disturbed.

d. Areas where new disturbance in the riparian area is proposed.

e. Outline of trees, shrubs and ground covers.

2. Construction Management Plan. Identify how the management plan conforms to applicable requirements of the Brookings Municipal Code. Identify measures that will be taken during construction or mitigation work to protect the remaining resources at and near the construction site and a description of how the undisturbed areas will be protected. For example, describe how protective fencing will delineate the protection area, how protection zones around remaining trees will be identified and protected, erosion controls, stormwater management, and construction equipment locations and the timing of construction in relation to season.

3. Landscape Plan. In addition to the construction management plan, a landscape plan will be required for newly disturbed areas prior to issuance of permits. The plan shall include the extent of vegetation removal proposed, characteristics of the existing vegetation (types, density), proposed riparian enhancement or restoration measures, proposed alterations of topography or drainage patterns, and existing uses on the property. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.060 Activities within the riparian corridor.

A. The permanent alteration of the riparian corridor by grading or by the placement of structures or impervious surfaces is prohibited, except for the following uses:

1. Streets, roads, and paths. Public or private streets, driveways, or paths may be placed within a riparian corridor to access construction activities if it is shown to the satisfaction of the reviewing authority that no other practicable method of access exists. The following standards shall apply:

a. To achieve minimum intrusion into the riparian corridor, design roads, driveways, and paths to be no wider than 20 feet and otherwise consistent with local standards for road and path construction. Crossing angle shall be no less than 90 percent perpendicular to the riparian corridor;

b. Bridges, arched culverts, or box culverts with a natural bottom shall be used for crossing of a waterway. The lower lip of any culvert must meet the channel bed at or below grade. Access for abutting lots and access through easements for adjacent lots shall be shared to minimize number of channel crossings;

c. Consider site plan elements that could facilitate access to potential new building sites and help reduce the need for subsequent encroachments into the riparian corridor. (A statement by the applicant that such elements have been considered shall satisfy this provision);

d. During construction, no stockpiling of fill materials, parking, or storage of equipment is allowed within the riparian corridor;

e. Erosion control measures, such as mulching, straw waddles, silt fences and bio-filter bags, shall be used to reduce the likelihood of sediment and untreated stormwater entering surface water, consistent with Chapter 17.100 BMC.

2. Drainage facilities, utilities, and irrigation pumps. Public and private utilities or drainage facilities may be placed within a riparian corridor if it is shown to the satisfaction of the reviewing authority that no other practicable alternative exists. If allowed the following standards shall apply:

a. The corridor necessary to construct utilities shall be the minimum width practical to minimize intrusion into the riparian corridor. Removal of trees and native vegetation shall be avoided unless alternative paths are practically impossible. The existing grade of the land shall be restored after construction. The construction corridor shall be replanted with native vegetation;

b. No stockpiling of materials, parking, or storage of equipment is allowed within the riparian corridor.

3. Water-related and water-dependent uses.

4. Replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location that do not disturb additional surface area.

5. Nonconforming uses existing fully or partially within the riparian corridor may be expanded, provided the expansion does not occur within the significant riparian corridor. Substantial improvement of a nonconforming structure in the riparian corridor shall comply with the standards of this chapter.

6. Shoreline stabilization and flood control structures that legally existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be maintained. Any expansion of existing structures or development of new structures shall be evaluated by the public works/development services director (director) and appropriate state natural resource agency staff. Such alteration of the significant riparian corridor shall be approved only if less invasive or nonstructural methods will not adequately meet the stabilization or flood control needs.

B. Removal of vegetation is prohibited, except for:

1. Removal of nonnative vegetation and replacement with native plant species. The replacement vegetation shall cover, at a minimum, the area from which vegetation was removed, and shall maintain or exceed the density of the removed vegetation.

2. Removal of vegetation necessary for the development of approved uses. Vegetation removal shall be kept to the minimum necessary to allow the use.

3. Trees in danger of falling (as determined by a certified arborist) and thereby posing a hazard to life or property may be felled, following the director’s approval of the arborist’s determination.

4. Existing lawn within the significant riparian corridor may be maintained, but not expanded into the resource.

C. Exceptions. The following activities are not required to meet the standards of this section and do not require a riparian development permit:

1. Commercial forest practices regulated by the Oregon Forest Practices Act.

2. Temporary emergency procedures necessary for the safety or protection of property.

3. Normal and accepted farming practices other than the construction of buildings, structures, or paved roads.

4. Vegetation removal consistent with subsection (B) of this section.

Note to planners on herbicide use in riparian areas: Local governments are not allowed to regulate pesticide/herbicide use, but can provide information to improve compliance with state and federal law. See list of pesticides prohibited for use near salmon-bearing streams: http://www.pesticide.org/finalproductslist.pdf

[Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.070 Agency review.

Decisions made by the city of Brookings under this chapter do not supersede the authority of the state or federal agencies which may regulate or have an interest in the activity in question. It is the responsibility of the landowner to ensure that any other necessary state or federal permits or clearances are obtained. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.080 Natural resource enhancement.

Enhancement of natural resources, such as riparian enhancement, in-channel habitat improvements, nonnative plant control, and similar projects which propose to improve or maintain the quality of a riparian resource, is encouraged; however, no enhancement activity requiring the excavation or filling of material in a waterway is allowed unless all applicable state and federal permits have been granted. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.090 Variance.

In cases where the limitations on activities within the significant riparian corridor would result in the loss of reasonable economic use of a lot or parcel legally created before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a property owner may request a variance. Granting of a variance requires findings consistent with the variance criteria outlined in Chapter 17.132 BMC. [Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. C).]


17.74.100 Riparian Protection Overlay Zone Map


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 19-O-776 § 1 (Exh. B).]


Chapter 17.76 AIRPORT APPROACH (AA) OVERLAY ZONE 

Sections: 

17.76.010    Purpose.

17.76.020    Compliance.

17.76.030    Special definitions.

17.76.040    Permitted uses within the airport approach safety zone.

17.76.050    Conditional uses within the airport approach safety zone.

17.76.060    Procedures.

17.76.070    Limitations.


17.76.010 Purpose.

This overlay zone, delineated by airport imaginary surfaces, applies to properties inside the city limits and within the airspace surrounding the Brookings State Airport. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.76.020 Compliance.

In addition to complying with the provisions of the primary zoning district, uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of this overlay zone. In the event of any conflict between any provisions of this overlay zone and the primary zoning district, the more restrictive provision shall apply. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.76.030 Special definitions. 

A. “Airport imaginary surfaces” means those imaginary areas in space which are defined by the airport approach safety zone, transitional zones, horizontal zones, clear zone and conical surface as described in the Brookings State Airport Masterplan 1980-2000 on page 32 of that document and depicted on the plan and profile following page 32 (and as hereinafter may be amended), and in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces is an obstruction. 

B. “Airport approach safety zone” means a fan-shaped area centered on the extended runway centerline and extending 20 feet outward for each foot upward (20:1), 250 feet wide beginning 200 feet beyond the end of and at the same elevation as the runway and extending to horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline to a width of 1,250 feet. 

C. “Transitional zones” extend one foot upward for each seven feet outward (7:1) beginning 125 feet on each side of the runway centerline (primary surface) which point is the same elevation as the runway surface, and from the sides of the approach surfaces thus extending upward to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation (horizontal surface). 

D. “Horizontal zone” means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 

E. “Clear zone” extends 1,000 feet along the extended runway centerline from the end of the primary surface at a slope of 20:1 until it reaches a height of 50 feet above the established airport runway end elevations. 

F. “Conical surface” extends one foot upward for each 20 feet outward (20:1) for 4,000 feet beginning at the edge of the horizontal surface (5,000 feet from the end of the runway at 150 feet above the airport elevation) and upward extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 

G. “Airport hazard” means any structure, tree or use of land which exceeds height limits established by the airport imaginary surfaces. 

H. “Place of public assembly” means a structure or place which the public may enter for such purposes as deliberation, education, worship, shopping, entertainment, amusement, awaiting transportation or similar activity. 

I. “Noise impact” means noise levels which exceed 55 Ldn. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.76.040 Permitted uses within the airport approach safety zone.

The following uses are permitted: 

A. Farm use, excluding the raising and feeding of animals which would be adversely affected by aircraft passing overhead;

B. Landscape nursery, cemetery or recreation areas which do not include buildings or structures;

C. Roadways, parking areas and storage yards located in such a manner that vehicle lights will not make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between landing lights and vehicle lights or result in glare, or in any way impair visibility in the vicinity of the landing approach. Approach surfaces must clear these areas by a minimum of 15 feet;

D. Pipeline;

E. Underground utility wire;

F. Residential uses, and appurtenant accessory uses and structures, when authorized in the underlying zoning district; provided, the land owner signs and records in the deed and mortgage records of Curry County a hold harmless agreement, avigation and hazard easement and noise easement, and submits same to the airport sponsor and city planning department; and also provided, that the area is beyond where the 20:1 approach penetrates the horizontal surface at elevation 608 feet. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.76.050 Conditional uses within the airport approach safety zone.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 

A. Commercial and industrial uses, when authorized in the primary zoning district, provided the use does not result in the following: 

1. Creating electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft;

2. Making it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights or others;

3. Impairing visibility;

4. Creating bird strike hazards;

5. Endangering or interfering with the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport;

6. Attracting large number of people;

B. Buildings and uses of a public works, public service or public utility nature. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.76.060 Procedures.

An applicant seeking a conditional use under BMC 17.76.050 shall follow procedures set forth in the conditional use section of this code. Information accompanying the application shall also include the following: 

A. Property boundary lines as they relate to the airport imaginary surfaces; 

B. Location and height of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, utility lines and roads; and 

C. A statement from the Oregon Aeronautics Division indicating that the proposed use will not interfere with operation of the landing facility. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.76.070 Limitations. 

A. To meet the standards and reporting requirements established in FAA regulations, Part 77, no structure shall penetrate into the airport imaginary surfaces as defined above under BMC 17.76.030. 

B. No place of public assembly shall be permitted in the airport approach safety zone. 

C. No structure or building shall be allowed within the clear zone. 

D. Whenever there is a conflict in height limitations prescribed by this overlay zone and the primary zoning district, the lowest height limitation fixed shall govern; provided, however, that the height limitations here imposed shall not apply to such structures customarily employed for aeronautical purposes. 

E. No glare producing materials shall be used on the exterior of any structure location within the airport approach safety zone. 

F. In noise sensitive areas (within 1,500 feet of an airport or within established noise contour boundaries of 55 Ldn and above for identified airports) where noise levels are a concern, a declaration of anticipated noise levels shall be attached to any building permit or development approval. In areas where the noise level is anticipated to be 55 Ldn and above, prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of noise sensitive land uses (real property normally used for sleeping or normally used as schools, churches, hospitals, or public libraries) the permit applicant shall be required to demonstrate that a noise abatement strategy will be incorporated into the building design which will achieve an indoor noise level equal to or less than 55 Ldn. The planning and building department will review building permits for noise-sensitive developments. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.80 SITE PLAN APPROVAL

Sections: 

17.80.010    Purpose.

17.80.020    Site plan committee.

17.80.030    Application.

17.80.040    Improvement standards.

17.80.050    Action of the site plan committee.

17.80.060    Appeals.

17.80.070    Revisions.

17.80.080    Security and the secured improvement agreement process.

17.80.090    Warranty of public improvements.


17.80.010 Purpose.

The purpose of site plan approval is to establish a review process ensuring that new development is in compliance with the objectives and requirements of the land development code and all other applicable city ordinances. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.020 Site plan committee.

There is hereby created a site plan committee consisting of the city manager, public works director, planners, building official, fire chief or their designees, to carry out the duties set forth in this section. This committee shall have the authority to approve, disapprove or to approve with conditions, the site plans for all proposed new buildings or structures, or the expansion of existing structures. This committee shall also have the authority to review building permits and land use applications for completeness pursuant to the submittal requirements of the pertinent section of the land development code. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.030 Application. 

A. Building Permits. Before any building permit shall be issued, a plot plan for the total parcel or development site shall be prepared and submitted to the city, together with a permit clearance form, two full sets of construction plans, including elevations showing existing and proposed grade, and topographic details.

The plot plan for a building permit shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the following:

1. Property lines with dimensions and a north arrow.

2. Locations of buildings and structures, existing and proposed, including dimensions, the height, front, rear and side yard setbacks of the proposed structures.

3. Location and layout of off-street parking and loading facilities.

4. Existing and proposed driveways and adjacent roads.

5. Location of any streams, drainages or wetlands.

6. Indications of exterior lighting standards and devices, if required.

7. Location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer lines.

8. For commercial structures, the location and size of exterior signs and outdoor advertising.

9. Location of any required landscaping.

10. Any other architectural or engineering data required to permit findings that the provisions of the land development code and other applicable requirements have been met.

B. Land Use Applications. Materials to be submitted, including site plans, for land use applications are found in specific sections:

1. Chapter 17.70, Master Plan Development (MPD) District.

2. Chapter 17.116, Planned Community.

3. Chapter 17.132, Variances.

4. Chapter 17.136, Conditional Use Permits.

5. Chapter 17.144, Annexations.

6. Chapter 17.164, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.

7. Chapter 17.172, Land Divisions. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.040 Improvement standards.

The site plan committee in its review of projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall apply the following standards and requirements in addition to those found in the applicable zoning district, and listed in Chapter 17.172 BMC. Developments and activities that are exempt from these requirements are listed in BMC 17.04.050.

A. For multiple-family residential development, an area equal to at least 15 percent of the site area, inclusive of required setback yards, shall be devoted to usable open space recreation areas. This area must be cleared of brush or obstructions and not used for temporary or regular parking of vehicles.

B. An accessway to a commercial or industrial off-street parking area shall be improved from the public roadway to the parking area to a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic. If the accessway is a one-way in or one-way out, it shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and have appropriate signage.

C. Provide for the improvement of an existing dedicated alleyway which is intended to be used for egress and ingress, or backup space of off-street parking for the development.

D. Make provision for screening the visibility of roof-, wall- or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and devices, in addition to propane tanks in commercial and industrial zones. [Ord. 07-O-593; Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 93-O-446.P § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.050 Action of the site plan committee.

Within 10 working days from the date of submission of an application containing required materials, the building official or city planner or their designee shall present the application to the site plan committee for determination. The site plan committee shall have 10 working days to approve the application and issue the building permit or, in the case of a land use application, forward it to the planning commission. If the application is denied or found to be incomplete, the applicant will be informed in writing. The decision of the committee shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.060 Appeals.

The applicant may appeal a decision of the site plan committee to the planning commission in the form prescribed by the city. Such appeal shall be filed with the city manager or his designee within 15 days of the decision of the site plan committee. The appeal shall be forwarded to the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the site plan and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the plan based upon the considerations listed in BMC 17.80.030, Application. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.070 Revisions.

Revisions made by the applicant to an approved site plan shall be resubmitted for review and approval by the site plan committee. Where required site plan approval has been granted, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the proposed construction, alteration, improvement or use in any manner except in complete compliance with the approved site plan. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.080 Security and the secured improvement agreement process.

The ability to provide security in lieu of immediate installation of required public improvements is available for various development projects. The security guarantees that the required public improvements will be completed. The security provides the funds, as outlined in the secured improvement agreement, for the city to use if the applicant fails to complete installation of the required public improvements. The standards for security protect the public from additional expenditures. In general, security is accepted exclusively on a short-term basis to allow for certain events to occur, such as securing final plat approval of a partition or subdivision, while guaranteeing the work will be completed within an identified time frame.

A. Projects Eligible for Security. The city manager or designee can require the installation of public improvements for the following:

1. Tentative partition plan.

2. Tentative subdivision plan.

3. Conditional use permit.

4. Variance.

5. Master plan of development.

6. Detailed development plan.

7. Planned unit developments.

8. Building permits.

B. General Provisions.

1. Security is accepted for the following public improvements: final asphalt paving, street lights, street signs, and miscellaneous above ground elements that do not impact the overall integrity of the project. Public improvement costs are defined as the total value of all required improvements for a project. The applicant’s engineer determines the cost of the required improvements. The city will review the applicant’s engineer’s estimate of the cost of the improvements and has the right to determine the true value.

2. The applicant must pay the city’s actual processing costs. Actual costs will reflect and include all types of staff time and any consultant fees, including planning, engineering, geologic, archeological, public works, city administration and legal services, in accordance with the city’s adopted fee schedule.

3. The signing of a secured improvement agreement and the posting of a form of security identified in subsection (C) of this section may be accepted for public improvements identified in subsection (B)(1) of this section.

a. The applicant’s engineer shall provide an itemized estimate for review by the city to establish the cost of the required public improvements. An amount equal to 50 percent will be added to the cost for potential liability associated with the improvements.

b. A processing fee, as established by general resolution of the city council, is required and is not refundable.

c. The applicant shall sign a secured improvement agreement. If the applicant fails to install the required public improvements in the time frame indicated in the secured improvement agreement, the city shall use the security to perform the work.

C. The form of security shall be:

1. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon.

2. An irrevocable standby letter of credit.

3. An irrevocable security instrument acceptable to the city.

D. Criteria for Security. Security may be deposited in lieu of the final installation and final acceptance of public improvements identified in subsection (B) of this section, General Provisions. The applicant shall meet all of the following criteria:

1. Has not forfeited a form of security requiring the city to complete a project within the last seven years.

2. The applicant has paid all permit fees, engineering fees, and other required fees which are due and payable for the current project.

3. All other conditions of approval are complete except for those that cannot be completed until the installation of the secured improvements.

E. Issuance of Building Permits.

1. Building permits for the project will not be issued until the final plat has been recorded and received by the city. Any fire access or fire flow requirements must be in place and approved by the city fire chief prior to construction of any structure.

2. For those public improvements for which security has been allowed, construction of all remaining improvements shall be completed within a negotiated time frame not to exceed 12 months after the recording of the final plat. Occupancy of homes, businesses, dwellings, etc., shall not be permitted until all public improvements have been installed, tested, have received final acceptance by the city, a one-year warranty bond is completed, conditions of approval are completed, and final inspection of the homes, businesses, dwellings, private improvements, etc., have occurred.

F. Use of the Security and Secured Improvement Agreement.

1. At the time of installation of the required public improvements, the city shall authorize release to the applicant of any funds remaining after completion of the work. The improvements must be approved and accepted by the city. There will be no partial release of the security. The applicant must make the request for release of the security deposit in writing to the city.

If the applicant fails to install the required public improvements, the city shall use the security to complete the work.

2. Cost above and beyond the amount stated in the SIA will be charged to the applicant.

3. The applicant shall indemnify the city, mayor, council members, officers, boards, commissioners, employees, the city’s engineering consultant firm, and any agents of the city from claims of any nature arising or resulting from the performance of any acts required by the city to be done in accordance with the SIA.

4. The secured improvement agreement may be used to create a local improvement district for properties identified in the agreement.

a. At the time of installation of the deferred public improvements, if the cost is greater than the amount originally deposited plus accrued interest, the city may use the security and secured improvement agreement to create a local improvement district.

b. The formation and function of the local improvement district must comply with Chapter 3.15 BMC. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.80.090 Warranty of public improvements.

A. When all public improvements have been inspected and accepted by the city, the applicant shall provide a one-year warranty bond in the amount equal to 10 percent of the value for the total public improvements for a period of one year. On hillside developments with slopes greater than 15 percent or other hazards as identified in Chapter 17.100 BMC, the warranty bond shall be extended to five years, and the bond shall be 10 percent of the value of all public improvements. The warranty shall be in a form acceptable to the city.

B. The applicant’s engineer shall provide a detailed statement of the value of the completed improvements. The city reserves the right to determine the final value.

C. The form of warranty bond shall be:

1. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon.

2. An irrevocable standby letter of credit.

3. An irrevocable security instrument acceptable to the city. [Ord. 06-O-446.VV]


Chapter 17.84 PUBLIC HEARINGS NOTICE PROCEDURES

Sections: 

17.84.010    Purpose.

17.84.020    Need for a public hearing.

17.84.030    Preparation of the notice of public hearing.

17.84.040    Quasi-judicial hearings.

17.84.050    Legislative hearings.

17.84.060    Other.


17.84.010 Purpose.

Various land use applications described in this code require a public hearing before the planning commission, or both the planning commission and the city council. There are two types of public hearings which may be involved in land use applications or amendments to this code. If the action involves a specific parcel or parcels of land, a quasi-judicial hearing is required. If the action does not involve a specific parcel of land, such as a wording change, the deletion, addition or change in a permitted use or conditional use within a zoning district, the hearing would be a legislative hearing. The notice of public hearing procedure is different for each type of hearing. [Ord. 93-O-446.O § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.84.020 Need for a public hearing.

Land use actions involving a planned unit development, variance, conditional use permit, land development code amendments or comprehensive plan amendments, annexation, street vacations, appeals, partitions, and subdivisions require a public hearing before either the planning commission only or both the planning commission and the city council. The specific sections of this code that provide for these actions, indicate whether one or two public hearings are required. [Ord. 93-O-446.O § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.84.030 Preparation of the notice of public hearing.

Upon the filing of an application for a land use action, land development code amendment or comprehensive plan amendment which requires a public hearing, the city manager or his designee shall prepare and file with the city recorder a notice of public hearing. Said notice shall contain a description of the real property and/or the section of the land development code or comprehensive plan which is the subject of the proposed application. The said description shall be sufficient to reasonably identify as to the property which is the subject of the proposed application. The notice shall specify the application requested, the time and place of the public hearing to be held thereon and indicate whether the public hearing shall be held before the planning commission or city council. [Ord. 93-O-446.O § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.84.040 Quasi-judicial hearings.

The notice of public hearing for quasi-judicial hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Brookings. The notice and a map showing the location of the subject property will also be mailed to all property owners within 250 feet of the subject property. The city manager may specify a greater mailing radius if deemed appropriate. 

A. If the land use application requires approval of the planning commission only, the notice will both appear in the local paper and be mailed at least 20 days prior to the hearing date. 

B. If the application requires approval of both the planning commission and the city council, the notice will both appear in the local paper and be mailed at least 10 days prior to each hearing date. [Ord. 93-O-446.O § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.84.050 Legislative hearings.

Legislative actions affecting this code or the comprehensive plan require a hearing before both the planning commission and the city council. The notice of public hearing for legislative hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Brookings at least 10 days prior to the date of each hearing. [Ord. 93-O-446.O § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.84.060 Other.

In cases where it is not clear whether a quasi-judicial or legislative hearing is required, the quasi-judicial process shall be followed. [Ord. 93-O-446.O § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


Chapter 17.88 SIGN REGULATIONS

Sections: 

17.88.010    Purpose.

17.88.020    Definitions.

17.88.030    Application.

17.88.040    Exempt signs.

17.88.050    Signs expressly prohibited.

17.88.060    Residential districts.

17.88.070    Professional office (PO-1) district.

17.88.080    Public open space (P/OS) district.

17.88.090    Commercial (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4) and industrial (I-P, M-2) districts.

17.88.100    General standards for signs in all zones.

17.88.110    Nonconforming signs.

17.88.120    Termination of signs by abandonment.

17.88.130    Appeals and variances.


17.88.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to integrate the advertising needs of the business community by means of outdoor signage, to provide for safe construction location, erection, and maintenance of signs and minimize adverse safety factors and ensure visibility for travelers on public streets and on private areas open to public travel.

A. Sign criteria and standards can enhance the economic vitality and contribute to the visual quality of the city of Brookings and prevent a proliferation of signs and sign clutter.

B. Well designed and constructed signs attract the eye, complement each other and draw attention to the building containing the businesses for which they are intended to advertise while considering the aesthetics of the community. 

C. This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community.

The Brookings sign code is not intended to, and does not, restrict speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint or message. Any classification of signs in this chapter that permits speech by reason of the type of sign, identity of the sign user or otherwise, shall permit any type of speech on the sign. No part of this chapter shall be construed to favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech. To the extent any provision of this chapter is ambiguous, the term shall be interpreted to not regulate on the basis of speech content, and the interpretation resulting in the least restriction on the content of the sign message shall prevail. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to material and subjects addressed specifically within this chapter. 

“Alter” means any changes excluding content, and including but not limited to size, shape, method of illumination, position, location, materials, construction, or supporting structure of a sign. 

“Awning” means a temporary or movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of nonrigid materials except for the supporting framework. 

“Business” means a commercial or industrial enterprise. 

“Business frontage” means a lineal front footage of a building or portion thereof devoted to a specific business or enterprise, and having an entrance/exit open to the general public. 

“Canopy” means a nonmovable roof-like structure attached to a building. 

“Cloth sign” means sign printed on cloth, which may be authorized if it complies with applicable standards in this chapter and is fastened securely to the structure. 

“Directional signs” are signs located on property to guide traffic.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign erected on a frame, mast or pole and not structurally attached to any building. 

“Illegal sign” means a sign which is erected in violation of this chapter. 

“Marquee” means a nonmovable roof-like structure which is self-draining. 

“Nonconforming sign” means all signs existing on the effective date of this code and not conforming to the provisions of this chapter. 

“Public right-of-way” means travel area dedicated, deeded or under control of a public agency, including but not limited to highways, public streets, bike paths, alleys and sidewalks.

“Public sign” means a sign erected by a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty which shall include, but not be limited to, motorist, informational signs and warning lights, signs on public buildings and/or giving direction to public facilities. A sign erected, constructed, or placed within the public right-of-way or on public property by or with the approval of the governmental agency having authority over, control of, or ownership of the right-of-way or public property. 

“Sandwich board sign” means a portable triangle or A-frame shaped sign that is typically hinged on the top. 

“Sign” means any notice, advertisement, or communication, including the supporting structure, used as an outdoor display for the purpose of advertising the property or establishment, or any type of communication. 

“Sign, area” means the total amount of square footage within the outside dimensions of a sign face. Size calculations for double-faced signs consider only the outside dimensions of one side. 

“Sign, blinking or moving” means signs with messages, symbols, or characters that change at intervals. The message, symbols or characters may not change more frequently than every two seconds. 

“Street frontage” means that portion of a street that abuts a front lot line and from which the lot or parcel is accessed and addressed. 

“Wall graphics” include but are not limited to any mosaic, mural or painting or graphic art technique or combination or grouping of mosaics, murals, or paintings or graphic art techniques, applied, implanted or placed directly onto a wall or fence.

“Window sign” is a permanent sign painted on or attached to the inside of a window and is designed to be viewed principally from outside the business.

“Wind sign or device” means any sign or device in the nature of banners, flags, balloons, or other object fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subject to pressure by wind or breeze. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.030 Application.

A. For all areas of the city, a sign permit must be obtained before any sign, except those specifically exempted, is erected, placed, painted, constructed, carved or otherwise given public exposure. Any alteration of an existing sign must also first obtain a permit (see definition of “alter”). The sign permit application may be filed as a part of a larger application or separately. Applications shall be filed with the city manager or their designee, on an appropriate form in a manner prescribed by the city, accompanied by a sign permit application fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council. A sign permit shall be issued only after a determination by the city manager, or their designee, that the proposed sign is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. All signs visible from Highway 101/Chetco Avenue are required to be reviewed and approved by Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT). Staff will submit these applications to ODOT and advise the applicant of their decision. 

B. The following shall be submitted with each completed application: 

1. Filing fee; 

2. Plot plan, drawn to scale, of the lot, with dimensions, on which the sign is to be placed showing the location of the sign, the structure, with dimensions, and dimensions and locations of other existing signs on the property. If the sign is to be freestanding the plot plan must also show the distance from property lines and easements; 

3. Engineering wind load data for freestanding, roof-mounted, and perpendicularly mounted signs exceeding five square feet in size; 

4. A scale drawing of the sign and its support structure, indicating dimensions;

5. If the proposed sign is lighted or uses electricity for any purpose, evidence that the sign is listed as being approved by a licensed testing facility must be submitted with the application;

6. Proof of a current business license unless exempt;

7. The sign(s) authorized under a sign permit shall be installed within 90 days after the date of permit issuance. A 90-day extension can be requested by submitting a written statement explaining the need for additional time. [Ord. 11-O-683 § 2; Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 5; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.040 Exempt signs.

The following signs and devices shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter: 

A. Memorial tablets, cornerstones or similar plaques not exceeding six square feet; 

B. Temporary signs displaying noncommercial messages for events, including but not limited to elections, public meetings or events of a general city-wide civic or public benefit. These signs shall not be displayed for more than 60 days prior to the beginning of the event and must be removed within seven days following the conclusion of the event; 

C. Temporary, nonilluminated real estate or construction signs; provided, that said signs are removed within 15 days from sale, lease or rental of the property, or the completion of the construction project. The following standards shall apply to signs: 

1. One unlighted temporary sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area shall be permitted for the lease, rental, or sale of property, or for the construction of a structure thereon in residential districts; 

2. One unlighted temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area shall be permitted for the lease, rental, or sale of property, or for the construction of a structure thereon in commercial and industrial districts; 

3. One unlighted temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area shall be permitted advertising a new subdivision on the property; 

4. One unlighted temporary sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area advertising the finance company for a structure;

5. One unlighted temporary sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area advertising the finance company for a subdivision;

6. Additional signage may be requested by submitting an application pursuant to BMC 17.88.030(B) accompanied by the sign permit fee and a statement explaining the need for the additional signage to the site plan committee. The site plan committee decision may be appealed pursuant to BMC 17.80.060;

D. Temporary signs for new businesses, for a period not to exceed 30 days; 

E. Deleted by Ord. 11-O-683; 

F. Small directional signs located on the property to guide traffic;

G. Signs placed by state or federal governments for the purpose of identifying public works projects or publicly funded and/or sponsored projects, designed to fulfill the requirements of state or federal funding agencies; 

H. Deleted by Ord. 11-O-683;

I. Nameplates, provided they do not exceed 72 square inches;

J. Public signs; 

K. Businesses which have more than one freestanding sign existing on the effective date of this code. Each sign must meet the size requirements as stated in the code. Signs which advertise a business no longer conducting or a product no longer sold on the premises where such sign is located shall not be exempted under this chapter;

L. Garage sale signs not to exceed four square feet in area and to be displayed only when the sale is open for a period not to exceed three consecutive days in duration with no more than three sales per calendar year;

M. Decorative banners and flags may be displayed and shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. Decorative banners and flags shall not include the use of text;

N. Local, state, or national flags;

O. Window signs;

P. Wall graphics, except that murals shall be reviewed by the public art committee and conform to general guidelines adopted by city council resolution. In the event the public art committee is unavailable to convene, the site plan committee will perform the needed review;

Q. Any change to the text of an existing sign structure (free standing or applied to the building) does not require a sign permit. This does not apply if the sign structure is altered or the location is changed.

R. Sandwich Board Signs and Flags with or without Text. Sandwich board signs and flags with or without text may be displayed in commercial zones on private property, or within city rights-of-way, or in rights-of-way under the city’s jurisdiction. Only one sandwich board sign or flag shall be permitted for each business provided the following conditions are met:

1. Sandwich Board Sign.

a. The sign shall not exceed two feet in width and four feet in height. Any sign placed within the corner vision area located at the intersection of streets shall not exceed three feet in height. The corner vision area shall consist of a triangular area measured from the corner of the intersection property lines for a distance of 15 feet. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner joining the nonintersecting ends of the other two sides.

b. Each sign must be sufficiently weighted at the bottom to prevent toppling by wind.

c. Placement of sign must leave at least 36 inches of continuous unobstructed sidewalk area to provide accessibility for pedestrians, not be placed in parking spaces or parking areas, and be located outside of vehicular travel lanes.

d. Signs shall be displayed only at such times as the business they are intended to identify is open for business.

2. Flag with or without Text. This is in addition to decorative flags provided for in subsection (M) of this section.

a. The flag shall not exceed 30 inches in width and eight feet in height.

b. The flag shall be securely installed to prevent toppling by wind.

c. Placement of the flag, when it is unfurled, must leave at least 36 inches of continuous, unobstructed sidewalk area to provide accessibility of pedestrians, not be placed in parking spaces or parking areas, be located outside of vehicular travel lanes and not encroach into bicycle lanes.

d. Flags shall be displayed only at such times as the business they are intended to identify is open for business.

e. Flags shall not utilize the holes located in the rights-of-way when the American flags are being displayed for holidays and events.

f. Any flag with or without text placed within a corner vision area of a commercial driveway described and shown in BMC 17.92.100(E) or located at the intersection of streets (diagram below) shall not exceed three feet in height. The corner vision area shall consist of a triangular area measured from the corner of the intersection property lines for a distance of 15 feet. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner joining the nonintersecting ends of the other two sides.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 15-O-747 § 2; Ord. 14-O-721 § 2; Ord. 11-O-683 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 08-O-621 § 2; Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.KK § 2; Ord. 00-O-446.HH, § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.88.050 Signs expressly prohibited.

The following signs and devices are expressly prohibited: 

A. Signs located on undeveloped property, except as provided in BMC 17.88.040.

B. Vehicle signs, except for standard advertising identification markings which are permanently or magnetically attached to or printed on a business or commercial vehicle. 

C. In no case shall any sign: 

1. Be erected in a public easement or right-of-way;

2. Be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door or window, or any other exit way required by the currently adopted edition of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Regulations; 

3. Be attached to any public utility pole, or structure, light pole, lamp, lamp post, tree, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, or other surface located on public property; 

4. Be attached to a standpipe, gutter drain, or fire escape, nor shall any sign be erected so as to impair access to the roof; 

5. Be erected in any location where, by reason of its location, it will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal, or other traffic control device. Nor may any sign, by reason of its shape, position or color, interfere with or be confused with any authorized traffic signal, sign or device. Further, no sign shall be erected in a location where it will obstruct vision of the public right-of-way to the vehicle operator during ingress to, egress from, or while traveling on, said public right-of-way. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.KK § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.060 Residential districts.

Signs shall be permitted as follows: 

A. Neighborhood Identification. One freestanding sign shall be permitted at each entry point of the development. Each neighborhood identification sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be mounted in a planter or landscaped area.

B. Multiple-Family Residential and Conditional Uses. A maximum of two identifying signs, each of which shall not exceed more than 32 square feet, either attached to the building or freestanding, shall be permitted for multiple-family dwellings and conditional uses. If freestanding, the sign(s) shall be mounted in a planter or landscaped area. 

C. See BMC 17.88.100, General standards for signs in all zones. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-454 § 8; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.070 Professional office (PO-1) district.

Signs shall be permitted as follows: 

A. One identifying sign not exceeding 32 square feet for each street on which the building fronts, affixed to the building or freestanding. If freestanding, the sign shall be mounted in a planter or landscaped area.

B. One nonilluminated building directory not exceeding 16 square feet in area for each building containing four or more businesses. 

C. See BMC 17.88.100, General standards for signs in all zones. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.080 Public open space (P/OS) district.

Signs shall be permitted as follows: 

A. Signs on public buildings or property are exempt pursuant to BMC 17.88.040(J).

B. Signs on other than public buildings must comply with BMC 17.88.070. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.090 Commercial (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4) and industrial (I-P, M-2) districts.

A. Shopping center area – an area developed with four or more businesses having common parking area.

1. Freestanding or Roof-Mounted Sign. One for each street on which the buildings front identifying the shopping area and businesses shall be allowed. Each sign shall be limited to a total area of 200 square feet.

2. Attached individual business signs:

a. Shall be placed flat against a building; or

b. Attached to the front or bottom surface of a marquee, awning, or canopy; or

c. Attached to and extending perpendicular from the building; 

d. The total aggregate area of attached signs for each building side shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of business frontage.

B. Non-Shopping Center Areas (as Defined Above).

1. Freestanding or Roof-Mounted Sign. One for each street on which the building fronts, and limited to 75 square feet in total area, plus one square foot of additional sign for each lineal foot of business street frontage exceeding 75 feet, to a maximum sign allowed of 200 square feet.

2. Attached Sign. 

a. Placed flat against a building; or

b. Attached to the front or bottom surface of a marquee, awning or canopy; or

c. Attached to and extending perpendicular from the building.

d. The total aggregate area of attached signs for each building side shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of business frontage.

C. See BMC 17.88.100, General standards for signs in all zones. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 5; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.100 General standards for signs in all zones.

A. Light from all signs shall be directed away from residential areas.

B. No signs as provided in this section shall project into the public right-of-way to a distance closer than two feet from the face of curb or, in the case where no curb exists, no closer than two feet from the edge of pavement, and no such projecting signs shall be installed to a height of less than eight feet clearance from grade or top of sidewalk to the lowest point of said sign. 

C. One permitted sign for each property may contain elements that may change (blinking or moving text, symbols, and/or characters) no more frequently than every two seconds. There is no time limit on changes to text for scrolling or crawling signs. 

D. Signs must comply with the height limit for the zone in which they are located.

E. Each sign shall be maintained in good order and repair at all times so that it does not constitute any danger or hazard to public safety, or a visual blight, and is free of peeling paint, major cracks or loose and dangling materials. [Ord. 14-O-721 § 3; Ord. 08-O-608 § 2.]


17.88.110 Nonconforming signs.

All signs existing on the effective date of this code and not conforming to the provisions of this chapter are hereby deemed lawful, nonconforming signs.

A. No nonconforming sign shall be expanded or altered in any manner which would increase the degree of its nonconformity; 

B. All nonconforming signs existing on the effective date of this code may remain in use under the following conditions:

1. Until the business for which it advertises has been abandoned in accordance with BMC 17.88.120; 

2. The sign remains in good operating condition; 

3. The sign may be repaired and maintained;

4. The sign is not currently, or likely to become, a hazard to traffic, pedestrians or property.

C. Termination of Nonconforming Signs. 

1. Immediate Termination. Nonconforming signs which advertise a business no longer conducted where such sign is located shall be terminated within 60 days. Termination of the nonconformity shall consist of removal of the sign or its alteration to eliminate fully all nonconforming features. 

2. Termination by Destruction. Any nonconforming sign destroyed by any means may only be replaced by a sign conforming to this code.

3. Required Termination of All Nonconforming Signs. Any nonconforming sign not terminated pursuant to any other provision of this code shall be terminated within five years following adoption of this code. 

4. Required Termination Upon Change in Ownership. When property changes ownership any nonconforming sign must be terminated. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.120 Termination of signs by abandonment.

A. Any sign advertising or relating to a business on the premises on which it is located, which business is discontinued for a period of 90 consecutive days, without any intent to resume, shall be presumed to be abandoned and all such signage shall be removed within 90 days. Any period of such noncontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, materials shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the business or user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this subsection. 

B. An extension of time for removal of signage of an abandoned business, not to exceed an additional 90 days, may be granted by the site plan committee upon written request filed by the legal owner of the premises or the person in control of the business. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.88.130 Appeals and variances.

Any applicant who is denied a sign permit because the proposed sign would not be in compliance with all the provisions of this code, or who has an existing sign which would be deemed a nonconforming sign under the provisions of this code, may file for a variance or appeal, pursuant to procedures set forth in Chapters 17.132 and 17.156 BMC. [Ord. 08-O-608 § 2; Ord. 95-O-446.AA § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.92 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS

Sections: 

17.92.010    Generally.

17.92.020    Off-street loading.

17.92.030    Off-street parking.

17.92.040    Number of spaces required.

17.92.050    Location of parking facilities.

17.92.060    Use of parking facilities.

17.92.070    More than one use.

17.92.080    Joint use of facilities.

17.92.090    Parking – Front yard.

17.92.100    Development and maintenance standards for off-street parking areas.

17.92.110    Handicapped parking.

17.92.120    Bicycle parking standards.


17.92.010 Generally.

No development permit shall be issued until plans and evidence are presented to show how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be fulfilled and that property is and will be available for the exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space, except for public and private parking areas that can be temporarily converted to public plazas. The subsequent use of the property for which the permit is issued shall be conditional upon the continuance and availability of the amount of parking and loading space required by this chapter. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.92.020 Off-street loading.

Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building hereafter erected or established having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more shall provide and maintain at least one off-street loading space plus one additional off-street loading space for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. Any use requiring one-half or more of a loading space shall be deemed to require the full space. Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet wide, 25 feet in length and 14 feet of vertical clearance. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.92.030 Off-street parking.

A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as set forth in this chapter for all uses in all zoning districts except that a portion of the central commercial (C-3) district, the downtown core area, is exempt from these regulations. This exempt area is defined as parcels including the first tier of lots on the north side of Highway 101 from Center Street to Oak Street, to the north side of Railroad Street and from Center Street on the west to Oak Street on the east. See Map 17.92.030-1. This exemption also includes the parcels fronting on Chetco Avenue between Pacific Street and Center Street.

B. The city council may enact an in lieu parking space construction fee when it is not possible to provide some or all of the required off-street parking. The funds shall be retained by the city and shall be used exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and developing public off-street parking facilities. The in lieu fee is set by resolution, when enacted. 

C. Off-street parking spaces in areas other than the downtown core area within the city shall be provided at the time: 

1. A new building is erected; or 

2. A building existing on the effective date of this code is enlarged to the extent that parking requirements are increased in terms of units listed in BMC 17.92.040; or

3. The use is changed to another use with greater parking requirements. 

D. When calculating parking requirements: 

1. Any use requiring one-half or more of a parking space shall be deemed to require the full space. 

2. Parking spaces provided to meet the requirements of this chapter shall not be reduced in size or number to an amount less than required by this code for the use occupying the building. The provision and maintenance of off-street parking space is a continuing obligation of the property owner.

3. Bicycle parking may substitute for required motor vehicle parking pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.92.120 if:

a. The minimum required motor vehicle parking is more than 10 spaces; 

b. No more than 10 percent of the required motor vehicle spaces is substituted with bicycle parking; 

c. For every one bicycle parking space provided, the motor vehicle standard is reduced by one space; and 

d. The use is not a new or existing residential use.

Existing motor vehicle parking may be converted to take advantage of this provision.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.92.040 Number of spaces required.

The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be set forth in the following schedule: 

	 	Use	Requirement 

	A. Residential 

	1.	Single- and two-family dwelling	2 spaces per dwelling unit

	2.	Multiple-family dwelling containing 3 or more dwelling units	1-1/2 spaces per studio or 1 bedroom unit; units with more than 1 bedroom need 2 spaces

	3.	Mobile home park	2 spaces per dwelling plus 1 guest space per 5 units

	B. Commercial-Residential 

	1.	Recreational vehicle park	1 space per recreational vehicle space and 3 spaces for manager residence and guest parking

	2.	Hotel or motel	1 space per guest room or suite plus 1 additional space for the owner or manager plus 1 space per 10 rooms

	3.	Club; lodge	Spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses conducted such as hotel, restaurant, auditorium, etc. 

	C. Institutions 

	1.	Welfare or correctional institution, convalescent hospital, nursing home, rest home, home for the aged, sanitarium, residential care facility, or similar institution	1 space per 5 beds for residents, patients or inmates

	2.	Hospital	3 spaces per 2 beds 

	D. Places of Public Assembly 

	1.	Church, auditorium, gymnasium, community center, mortuary, or other place of public assembly	1 space per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench length in the main auditorium or, if no permanent seats are provided, 1 space per 75 square feet of floor area 

	2.	Library, reading room, museum, art gallery	1 space per 400 square feet of customer service area

	E. Schools

	1.	Preschool nursery, day nursery or kindergarten	2 spaces per teacher or adult supervisor 

	2.	Elementary or junior high school	2 spaces per classroom and special instruction area 

	3.	High school	8 spaces per classroom and special instruction area, or the requirement for a place of public assembly, whichever is the greater 

	4.	College	Parking needs based on a parking management plan for all uses contemplated for the entire campus

	F. Commercial Amusement 

	1.	Stadium, arena, theater	1 space per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench length 

	2.	Bowling lanes	6 spaces per lane 

	3.	Dance hall, skating rink, pool hall or similar indoor facility	1 space per 100 square feet of total floor area

	4.	Miniature golf course	1-1/2 spaces per hole

	5.	Swimming pool	1 space per 75 square feet of swimming pool

	6.	Tennis, racquetball courts	2 spaces per court

	7.	Other outdoor recreation facilities	1 space per 500 square feet of land area

	G. Commercial 

	1.	Retail store, except as provided in subsection (G)(2) of this section	1 space per 400 square feet of area

	2.	Retail store exclusively handling bulky merchandise such as furniture and large appliances	1 space per 600 square feet of customer service floor area

	3.	Auto/vehicle/boat dealership	1 per 500 square feet of building

	4.	Vehicle/boat repair	1 space per 250 square feet of service bay area

	5.	Gas stations	1 space per employee

	6.	Service or repair shop, nonvehicle	1 space per 800 square feet of total floor area 

	7.	Bank; office (except medical or dental)	1 space per 400 square feet of total floor area

	8.	Medical or dental clinic	1 space per 200 square feet of customer service area

	9.	Eating or drinking establishment	1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 100 square feet of dining or drinking area, whichever is greater 

	10.	Eating or drinking establishment, with drive-through	1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 100 square feet of dining or drinking area, whichever is greater, and 5 spaces in drive-through queue

	11.	Open air market	1 space per 1,500 square feet of land area 

	H. Industrial 

	1.	Storage warehouse; air, rail or trucking freight terminals	1 space per 1,000 square feet of storage floor area

	2.	Wholesale establishments	1 space per 700 square feet of customer service area 

	3.	Manufacturing facility	1 space per employee and 1 space per company vehicle. Multi-shift uses must have spaces equal to 150 percent of the number of employees on the maximum shift

	4.	Contractor office/storage	1 space per 800 square feet of total floor area

	I.	Other uses not specifically listed above shall furnish parking as required by the site plan committee. In determining the off-street parking requirements for said uses, the committee shall use the above requirements as a general guide, and shall determine the minimum number of parking spaces required to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys

[Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.92.050 Location of parking facilities.

Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel or on another parcel not further than 1,000 feet from the building or use they are intended to serve, measured in all directions from the outside boundaries of the subject parcel. The right to use the off-premises parking spaces must be approved after submittal of items as described in BMC 17.92.080. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.92.080.] 


17.92.060 Use of parking facilities.

Required spaces must be maintained and available for parking. Spaces may not be used for the parking of equipment, storage of goods, inoperable vehicles, or other items. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.92.070.] 


17.92.070 More than one use.

Where more than one use is included within any one building or on any single parcel, the parking requirements shall be the sum total of the requirements of the various uses; provided, however, where the operation of these different uses is such that the hours of operation or uses complement each other insofar as the parking demand is concerned, the site plan committee may authorize a reduction in these requirements. The right to joint use of the parking spaces may be approved after submittal of items as described in BMC 17.92.080. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.92.060.] 


17.92.080 Joint use of facilities.

The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking or loading space used jointly to the extent that it can be shown to the site plan committee by the owners or operators of the use, structures or parcels that their operations and parking needs do not overlap in point of time. The applicant(s) must submit the following in writing as part of a building permit or land use permit review:

A. The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking;

B. The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;

C. The parking area must be within 1,000 feet of the use that it serves (that distance is measured in all directions from the outside boundary of the subject property);

D. An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of all uses;

E. The right to joint use of the parking area must be described in a deed, lease, contract or other appropriate written document to establish the joint use for parking purposes. This agreement may restrict future changes to use of the property. This document must be recorded and a copy provided to the city. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.92.050.] 


17.92.090 Parking – Front yard.

Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces shall not be located in a required front yard, except in the case of single-family and duplex dwellings, but such space may be located within a required side or rear yard. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.92.100 Development and maintenance standards for off-street parking areas. 

A. Access. Except for single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, and groups of no more than two parking spaces, all other parking areas must be located and served by a driveway so there will be no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street or right-of-way other than an alley. 

B. Screening. A commercial off-street parking area for more than five vehicles shall be effectively screened by a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or planting on each side which adjoins property situated in a residential zone or the premises of any school. 

C. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided so that all facilities are thoroughly illuminated and visible from adjacent sidewalks during all hours of use. Any lighting used to illuminate the off-street parking areas shall be so arranged that it will not project light rays directly upon any adjoining property in a residential zone. Lighting for parking facilities shall be energy efficient type.

D. Surfacing. Areas used for parking and maneuvering of vehicles shall have dust-free, asphaltic or concrete surfaces, or other materials approved by the site plan committee. This surface must be maintained adequately for all weather use and adequately drained so as to avoid flow of water across sidewalks, and constructed to support use by solid waste vehicles and fire-fighting apparatus. 

E. Vision Clearance. Commercial service drives shall have a rectangular vision clearance area measured from the intersection of the face of the curb or pavement edge of the driveway and the face of the curb or pavement edge of the street.  This rectangular area shall be calculated by measuring 25 feet along the street frontage and 10 feet along the drive. Two “No Parking” signs, one on each side of the driveway, shall be installed at the point where the corner vision area ends adjacent to the back of the sidewalk or the edge of paving. Corner vision clearance requirements are found in BMC 17.128.040.
[IMAGE]


Commercial service drives in the downtown core area as depicted and described on Map 17.92.030-1 shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by the intersection of the driveway centerline, the street right-of-way line, and straight lines connecting a point on the driveway 20 feet from their intersection and 15 feet in both directions along the property line. Corner vision clearance requirements are found in BMC 17.128.040.


[IMAGE]


F. Curbing and Wheel Stops. Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot shall be contained by a curb or a bumper rail so placed to prevent a motor vehicle from extending over an adjacent property, or a street or sidewalk. Wheel stops shall be a minimum of four inches in height and width, and six feet in length, shall be firmly attached to the ground, and so constructed as to withstand normal wear. Wheel stops shall be provided where appropriate for all spaces abutting property lines, buildings, and landscaping, and no vehicle shall overhang a public right-of-way.

G. Marking. All spaces shall be clearly marked, and such marking shall be replaced regularly, to remain visible.

H. Landscaping. In all zones except SR, R-1, and R-2 zones, all parking facilities shall include landscaping to cover not less than seven percent of the area devoted to outdoor parking facilities, including any landscaping required in subsection (B) of this section. Said landscaping shall be distributed throughout the parking area, be provided with drip system or other conservation-type irrigation facilities and protective curbs or raised wood headers. It may consist of trees, plus shrubs, groundcover or related plant material. Parking facilities adjacent to streets must be screened from view by trees or plants a minimum of three feet in height. The landscape screening shall be a minimum of five feet in width from the property line and contain a minimum of one tree for each 60 feet of street frontage. No tree shall be planted within 20 feet of any street corner. At least 20 percent of plantings must be drought-resistant plants. As much as 30 percent of the landscaped area may be decorative rock or other hardscape materials. The landscape plan must be submitted at the time a development permit is requested. 

I. Parking Layout and Design Criteria. All required parking areas shall be drawn to scale and designed in accordance with the following parking layout chart. The standard parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet in width, 20 feet in length, have eight feet of vertical clearance, and shall have a minimum 24-foot backup space except where parking is angled. Parking lots may have up to 30 percent of the spaces designated for compact cars. Compact car spaces must have signage stating they are reserved for small or compact cars only. A compact space measures eight feet in width by 17 feet in length. Backup space requirement remains the same as for a standard space. Standards for bicycle parking spaces within a parking lot are found in BMC 17.92.120.

Vehicle Parking Facility Diagrams


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 12-O-689 § 2; Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.92.110 Handicapped parking. 

A. Handicapped parking shall be provided at the following rate: 

	Total Parking in Lot	Minimum Required ADA Spaces

	1 to 25	1

	26 to 50	2

	51 to 75	3

	76 to 100	4

	101 to 150	5

	151 to 200	6

	201 to 300	7

	301 to 400	8

	401 to 500	9

	501 to 1,000	2 percent of total

	1,001 and above	20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000

B. Parking Spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and shall have an adjacent access aisle of six feet in width. A minimum of one and a ratio of one van space for each eight required accessible spaces shall be provided. A van space shall be a minimum of nine feet wide with an adjacent access aisle of eight feet. Parking access aisles shall be a part of the accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Two parking spaces for the handicapped may share a common access aisle. [Ord. 07-O-594; Ord. 03-O-446.QQ; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.92.120 Bicycle parking standards.

A. Location of Bicycle Parking Facilities. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located on-site in well-lit, secure locations within 50 feet of well-used entrances.

B. General Design Requirements for Bicycle Parking. All bicycle parking and maneuvering areas shall be constructed to the following minimum design standards:

1. Surfacing. Outdoor bicycle parking facilities shall be surfaced in the same manner as a motor vehicle parking area. This surface will be maintained in a smooth, durable and well-drained condition. 

2. Parking Space Dimension Standard. Bicycle parking spaces shall be at least six feet in length, two feet in width and have eight feet of vertical clearance.

3. Bike Rack. The bike rack must be compatible with current style of bike locks.

4. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided in a bicycle parking area so that all facilities are thoroughly illuminated and visible from adjacent sidewalks or motor vehicle parking lots during all hours of use. Any lighting used to illuminate the off-street parking areas shall be so arranged that it will not project light rays directly upon any adjoining property in a residential zone. 

5. Aisles. A five-foot aisle for bicycle maneuvering shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking.

6. Signs. Where bicycle parking facilities are not directly visible from the public rights-of-way, entry and directional signs shall be provided to direct bicycles from the public rights-of-way to the bicycle parking facility. 


[IMAGE]


Bicycle Parking Facilities Diagram

[Ord. 07-O-594.]


Chapter 17.94 LANDSCAPING

Sections:

17.94.010    Purpose.

17.94.020    Definitions.

17.94.030    Open space standards.

17.94.040    Recommendations with incentives.

17.94.050    Private trees.


17.94.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to encourage water conservation, reduce stormwater runoff, and maintain an attractive, livable community. The provisions in this chapter also are designed to minimize impacts to storm drainage facilities and serve to recharge the groundwater to better utilize our water resources. The component relating to the preservation or replacement of trees within the city is designed to preserve the beauty of the community and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Brookings. As an important component of landscaping, the city encourages property owners to retain existing, mature trees or plant new trees. [Ord. 09-O-635 § 2.]


17.94.020 Definitions.

“Drought-resistant plants” means plants requiring minimal watering to survive. A suggested list of drought-resistant plants, entitled “Water-wise Plants for Brookings,” is available at the planning department. Other drought-resistant plants may be used if documentation of their low water needs is provided.

“Impervious surface” means mainly artificial structures, such as pavements, rooftops, sidewalks, roads covered by impenetrable materials such as traditional asphalt and concrete.

“Pervious” means allowing absorption of water. 

“Private trees” means trees located on private property. [Ord. 09-O-635 § 2.]


17.94.030 Open space standards.

These requirements apply to new construction only. An open space plan, prepared by the property owner or their agent, must be submitted with an application for a building permit. The plan will be reviewed by the site plan committee to ensure compliance with the following:

A. Residential (SR, R-1, R-2, R-MH) Property. Install landscaping, or keep free of impervious surfaces, an area equal to at least 25 percent of the property. Easement areas may count as part of the open space plan if left as pervious surfaces. If landscaping is to be used, 40 percent of the plants must be drought-resistant. Must also comply with BMC 17.94.050. 

B. Multifamily Residential (R-3) Property. Required to have 15 percent of the lot with usable open space recreation area per BMC 17.28.110, and seven percent of the required parking lot landscaped in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H). If landscaping is proposed elsewhere on the property, the open space plan must have at least 40 percent drought-resistant plants. Must also comply with BMC 17.94.050.

C. Commercial and Industrial (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, IP, M-2) Property. Required to have seven percent of the required parking lot landscaped in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H). Any required landscaping within setback areas must also be in compliance with BMC 17.92.100(H). Must also comply with BMC 17.94.050. [Ord. 09-O-635 § 2.]


17.94.040 Recommendations with incentives. 

A. These incentives are for new development. A refund equal to two percent of the water component of the system development charge will be given when the property owner implements any of the following. If both incentives are implemented, the refund will be four percent.

1. Increases by 50 percent or more the percentage of drought-resistant plants used in landscaping beyond the minimum requirement.

2. Installs a drip irrigation system or other water conservation-type irrigation system. This is not applicable to multifamily residential, commercial, and industrial properties.

B. A refund equal to two percent of the storm drain component of the system development charge will be given when the property owner implements any of the following. A two percent refund will be given for each incentive implemented.

1. Use of nonvegetation pervious materials in an area equal to an additional 25 percent of the subject property beyond any of the percentage requirements in BMC 17.94.030. 

2. Uses low impact storm drainage techniques such as rain gardens, swales, permeable paving, rain barrel, cistern, or other approved method of reducing use of the city’s storm drain system. 

3. Maintain or plant a minimum of two trees on parcels less than one-half acre or four trees on a parcel one acre or larger. 

The refund will be given as a rebate after a certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure and installation of the proposed improvements, as listed above, are in place. 

When a new building is a replacement structure and existing landscaping is in place, the applicant will not be required to comply with this chapter. [Ord. 09-O-635 § 2.]


17.94.050 Private trees.

These standards apply to all properties in city limits.

A. Trees planted on private property that overhang the sidewalk and/or street shall be maintained by the property owner as follows: 

1. So as not to obstruct the light from a street lamp.

2. To not obstruct the view of any adjacent street intersection, which means trees shall be pruned so there is a clear space of 13-1/2 feet above the street surface and eight feet above a sidewalk surface.

3. All dead, diseased or dangerous trees, broken or decayed limbs, or roots which constitute a hazard to the public shall be removed.

B. Failure of the property owner to maintain trees as described above shall be subject to penalties pursuant to Chapter 8.15 BMC, Nuisances.

C. The public works director, or designee, will determine when a tree is out of compliance as described in subsection (A) of this section. [Ord. 09-O-635 § 2.]


Chapter 17.98 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections: 

17.98.010    Statutory authorization.

17.98.020    Findings of fact.

17.98.030    Statement of purpose.

17.98.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

17.98.050    Definitions.

17.98.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

17.98.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

17.98.080    Penalties for noncompliance.

17.98.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

17.98.100    Interpretation.

17.98.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

17.98.120    Severability.

17.98.130    Development permit required.

17.98.140    Application for development permit.

17.98.150    Designation of the city manager.

17.98.160    Duties and responsibilities of the city manager.

17.98.170    Use of other base flood data (in A or V zones).

17.98.180    City manager – Information to be obtained and maintained.

17.98.190    City manager – Alteration of watercourses.

17.98.200    City manager – Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.

17.98.210    Appeal board.

17.98.220    Conditions for variances.

17.98.230    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

17.98.240    Specific standards.

17.98.250    Before regulatory floodway.

17.98.260    Floodways.

17.98.270    Coastal high hazard standards.

17.98.280    Critical facility.


17.98.010 Statutory authorization.

The state of Oregon has in Article XI, Section 2 of the Oregon Constitution delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Brookings does ordain as set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.020 Findings of fact.

A. The flood hazard areas of the city of Brookings are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.030 Statement of purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

A. To protect human life and health;

B. To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.050 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

“Area of special flood hazard” is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.” 

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

“Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

“Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

“Flood” or “flooding” means:

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 

a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surface of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)(a) of this definition.

“Flood elevation study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at BMC 17.98.240(A)(2).

“Manufactured dwelling” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.

“New construction” means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Start of construction” (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling. “Structure,” for insurance purposes, means:

1. A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site;

2. A manufactured dwelling (a “manufactured dwelling,” also known as a mobile home, is a structure: built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or

3. A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community’s floodplain management and building ordinances or laws.

For the latter purpose, “structure” does not mean a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in subsection (3) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

“Water-dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Brookings. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Curry County and Incorporated Areas,” dated November 16, 2018, with accompanying Flood Insurance Maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at 898 Elk Drive. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in BMC 17.98.170 shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under BMC 17.98.170. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.080 Penalties for noncompliance.

As per BMC 1.05.010. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.100 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Brookings, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.120 Severability.

If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.130 Development permit required.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in BMC 17.98.070. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in BMC 17.98.050, Definitions, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in BMC 17.98.050, Definitions. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.140 Application for development permit.

Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building department and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A. Elevation in relation to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) and mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

B. Elevation in relation to NAVD 88 and mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in BMC 17.98.240(B); and

D. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.150 Designation of the city manager.

The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.160 Duties and responsibilities of the city manager.

Duties of the city manager shall include but not be limited to permit review as follows:

A. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

B. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

C. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of BMC 17.98.260(A) are met.

D. Notify FEMA within six months of project completion when an applicant has obtained a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA, or when development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain boundaries, or modified base flood elevations. This notification shall be provided as a letter of map revision (LOMR). [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.170 Use of other base flood data (in A or V zones).

When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A zones) in accordance with BMC 17.98.070, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer BMC 17.98.240, Specific standards, and 17.98.260, Floodways. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.180 City manager – Information to be obtained and maintained.

A. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in BMC 17.98.170, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 88) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or as required in BMC 17.98.170:

1. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 88) to which the structure was floodproofed; and

2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in BMC 17.98.140(C).

C. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.190 City manager – Alteration of watercourses.

A. Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.200 City manager – Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.

Make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in BMC 17.98.210. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.210 Appeal board.

A. The city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

B. The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city of Brookings in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the city council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the district court.

D. In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where applicable;

6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

E. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (D) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

F. The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.220 Conditions for variances.

A. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in BMC 17.98.210(D)(1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Statewide Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

C. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

E. Variances shall only be issued upon:

1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in BMC 17.98.210(D), or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

F. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to the physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

G. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (A) of this section, and otherwise complies with BMC 17.98.230(A).

H. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.230 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:

A. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

2. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

B. Construction Materials and Methods.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other utility and service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

C. Utilities.

1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;

2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and

3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

D. Subdivision Proposals.

1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

4. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

E. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (BMC 17.98.170), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.240 Specific standards.

In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided (Zones A1-30 and AE) as set forth in BMC 17.98.070, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or 17.98.170, Use of other base flood data (in A or V zones), the following provisions are required:

A. Residential Construction.

1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation.

2. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

B. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

1. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in BMC 17.98.180(B).

4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in this subsection (B).

5. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below the base flood level).

C. Manufactured Homes. For all manufactured dwellings to be placed or substantially improved on sites:

1. The stand shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE unless the foundation wall is opened on one side or end so that floodwater cannot be trapped (Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code, 4-3.1(5));

2. The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones, and the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the dwelling in V zones, shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE (see definition of “lowest floor” in the Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code);

3. The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas guidebook for anchoring techniques) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(6)); and

4. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE (Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code 6-4.2(1)).

D. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3. Meet the requirements of subsection (C) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.250 Before regulatory floodway.

In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. [Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.260 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 17.98.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B. If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of BMC 17.98.230, Provisions for flood hazard reduction. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3.]


17.98.270 Coastal high hazard standards.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 17.98.060 and 17.98.070 are coastal high hazard areas, designated as Zones VE, V, or coastal A. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in this chapter and state building codes, the following provisions shall also apply:

A. All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones VE, V (where base flood elevation data is available), and coastal A shall be elevated on pilings and columns such that:

1. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood level; and

2. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto are anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).

B. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section.

C. Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The local administrator shall maintain a record of all such information.

D. Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions:

1. Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2. If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation.

E. Walls intended to break away under flood loads shall have flood openings that meet or exceed the following criteria:

1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

3. If a building has more than one area enclosed by breakaway walls, each area shall be equipped with sufficient flood openings.

F. The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).

G. Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings.

H. All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.

I. Prohibit manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage.

J. All manufactured dwellings to be placed or substantially improved within Zone V, VE or coastal A on the community’s FIRM on sites shall meet the following requirements:

1. Meet the standards of BMC 17.98.060 and 17.98.070 through subsections (J) and (L) of this section.

2. The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be elevated to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.

3. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the base flood elevation.

K. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zone V, VE, or coastal A on the community’s FIRM shall either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

3. Meet the requirements of BMC 17.98.130 and 17.98.060 through subsection (I) of this section.

L. For construction of new essential and new special occupancy structures refer to ORS 455.446 and 455.447 which state that new essential and new special occupancy structures may not be constructed in the tsunami inundation zone. The tsunami inundation zone would include V, A, and potentially other flood zones. If an exception is granted, then the coastal high hazard area construction standards in the model ordinance shall apply to the building of these new structures in the tsunami inundation zone. Coastal communities should be encouraged to adopt coastal high hazard area standards to all new structures or substantially improved or damaged structures that fall within the tsunami inundation zone. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B).]


17.98.280 Critical facility.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. [Ord. 18-O-775 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 15-O-743 § 3. Formerly 17.98.270.]


Chapter 17.100 HAZARDOUS BUILDING SITE PROTECTION HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS*

Sections: 

17.100.010    Purpose.

17.100.020    Definitions.

17.100.030    General mitigation.

17.100.040    Decision authority of city manager or planning commission.

17.100.050    Authority to require site study.

17.100.060    Geologic report required.

17.100.070    Engineered plans required.

17.100.080    Enforcement.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 89-O-446, 94-O-446.V, 95-O-446.Z and 99-O-446.FF.


17.100.010 Purpose. 

A. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the effects of flooding, erosion, landslides and siltation during all stages of development on all lots or parcels within the city and to reduce the hazards associated with construction on the steeper hillsides, beach fronts and/or wherever hazards are known or may exist. This chapter applies to all property within the city and the level of protection required is based on the steepness of slopes, relation to coastal bluffs and other known or hazardous conditions that may exist. This chapter is intended to advance the above purpose: 

1. By requiring the study of such areas by a qualified professional as defined in BMC 17.100.020(D) and 17.100.070(B), prior to development, as defined in BMC 17.100.020(C).

2. By requiring special construction techniques to control dust, mud, water runoff, soil erosion, rock or sediment deposition during construction.

3. By establishing mechanisms for enforcement to ensure compliance with this code.

B. The policies and standards of this chapter are based upon the data contained in the Brookings Comprehensive Plan, Goal 7.

C. This chapter is not meant to regulate landscaping/gardening activities on an existing, developed property unless there will be a disturbance of greater than one-half acre in size, or involve terracing or similar activities. A property owner may apply to the site plan committee for authorization to conduct more intense landscaping/gardening activities if they exceed one-half acre in size. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.020 Definitions. 

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Average slope” means the overall increase/ decrease in elevation over the area proposed for development or the subject property, expressed as a percentage based on the following formula: difference in elevation over horizontal distance. 

B. “Determination of 15 Percent Slopes.” The applicant may be required to provide a topographic map prepared by a licensed engineer or surveyor. The topographic map shall contain lines drawn approximately perpendicular to the contours indicating the percent of slope. In some instances, the city engineer may accept a sketch and/or certificate prepared by a licensed individual indicating the average slope of the property.

1. If the average slopes are less than 15 percent, but the proposed development is on an area of 15 percent slopes, standards in BMC 17.100.030, 17.100.060 and 17.100.070 shall apply.

2. If the average slopes are greater than 15 percent, but the development is proposed on an area of less than 15 percent slopes, a site-specific review of the proposal by the site plan committee shall determine if standards in BMC 17.100.060 and 17.100.070 apply. 

C. “Development” means the alteration of improved or unimproved land, including but not limited to a land division, buildings or other structures, grading, filling or removal of vegetation.

D. “Geologic report” means a report prepared by a qualified professional geologic consultant – A geologist or engineering geologist working under their professional guidelines, and registered by the state of Oregon. The report would comply with “Guidelines for Preparing Engineering Geologic Reports in Oregon” as adopted by the Oregon State Board of Geologic Examiners and contain the following information:

1. The stability of the property and the suitability for the proposed type of construction in relation to the size of lot, including all existing and proposed new streets.

2. A statement of the need for engineered foundations or for site-specific studies to determine if engineered foundations are necessary.

3. A clear statement of all requirements or conditions on the proposed development that the qualified professional geologic consultant licensed in the state of Oregon has determined is necessary to mitigate the geological hazards that have been identified in the site investigation.

4. For oceanfront sites, see additional requirements in BMC 17.100.060(B)(2).

E. “Grading” means movement of earth for whatever reason including removal of the root systems for brush and trees.

F. “Hazardous sites” mean areas containing or adjacent to a fault zone, sinkhole, unstable soils, steep slopes, high water table, or other geologic hazards as discussed in BMC 17.100.010(A), purpose statement. 

G. “Vegetation removal” means cutting of brush and trees. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.030 General mitigation.

Prior to development activity on any property, certain standards must be met to reduce building site hazards such as flooding, landslides, soil erosion, sediment deposition, etc. The following process is required:

A. When partitioning or subdividing, the requirements of BMC 17.100.070, including a determination of seasonal high water table level impact on development of the property, and ground water drainage mitigation design, if necessary, must be submitted with the application.

B. Prior to any site preparation, the applicant must provide a plan demonstrating that no property shall be disturbed, graded, excavated, filled or developed within the city so as to cause slides of mud, soil, rock, vegetative material or any eroded or depositional material to be deposited on the property of another. The plan shall also include the strategy for the minimal removal of vegetation cover, particularly tree cover, necessary for building placement or access. This plan shall be submitted to the site plan committee with a permit clearance form, requesting a building permit, or a land use permit application.

C. If site preparation will disturb an area greater than one acre in size, the property owner is required to contact the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and comply with their erosion control requirements. The property owner must provide proof of meeting the DEQ’s requirements. This will satisfy the city’s erosion control requirements. 

D. No grading or filling of more than 50 cubic yards can occur until a grading permit or building permit has been issued. Any amount of grading or filling in a hazardous site, as defined in BMC 17.100.020(F), or in a floodplain must have a grading permit. Grading plans must show compliance with the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.040 Decision authority of city manager or planning commission.

A. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall review and approve or deny requests for building permits or grading permits within areas identified as hazardous sites.

B. The planning commission shall review and approve or deny land use applications proposed within areas identified as being hazardous sites and for all land divisions. 

C. The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions or require changes or deny the proposal based upon the criteria or standards listed in BMC 17.100.050, 17.100.060, and 17.100.070. Planning commission decisions may be appealed to the city council as provided in Chapter 17.156 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.050 Authority to require site study.

A. The city manager or his or her designee shall require a site study by a qualified professional geologic consultant licensed in the state of Oregon prior to any disturbance on property, or the approval of a land use application, in hazardous sites, as defined in BMC 17.100.020(F). 

B. If the report in subsection (A) of this section indicates additional information is needed, site-specific studies prepared by a qualified professional shall be required by the city manager or his or her designee, or the planning commission. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.060 Geologic report required.

Note: If minimal brush removal is needed to allow surveying and/or site study prior to applying for a permit, a plot plan and request must be submitted by the applicant describing the amount and location of vegetation removal. Brush and trees can only be cut off at ground level and stumps and roots shall not be removed. The city shall review and approve this plan prior to any removal of vegetation. Erosion control measures must be implemented for any disturbed areas.

Except as stated above, prior to any vegetation removal and/or development, as defined in BMC 17.100.020(C), a geologic report, as described in BMC 17.100.020(D), shall be required as follows:

A. When developing land within the city, the following provisions apply:

1. All lots and parcels with slopes of less than 15 percent shall provide erosion control measures pursuant to BMC 17.100.030.

2. On all lots and parcels that contain slopes of 15 percent or greater, or other identified hazards, but where development is proposed on an area away from these hazardous sites, only compliance with BMC 17.100.030 is required, unless other provisions of this section are required at the discretion of the site plan committee. 

3. All lots and parcels with average slopes of 15 percent or greater, or other identified hazards, or on lots where the desired development is on a slope of 15 percent or greater, a geologic report and engineered plans in compliance with the provisions of BMC 17.100.070 are required prior to the removal of any vegetation or development on the property.

4. On lands that contain slopes of greater than 15 percent, all lots and parcels may be of the minimum lot size allowed by underlying zone, except larger lots may be required if the geologic survey of the property requires a larger lot or parcel to avoid hazardous areas or other conditions. 

B. Development on properties adjacent to the Chetco River with slopes greater than 15 percent, or oceanfront, shall comply with the provisions of this section as follows:

1. A geologic report shall be provided prior to the following:

a. Partitioning or subdividing property.

b. Siting a new structure on a vacant lot.

c. Constructing an addition to an existing structure on the water side or the side yard area.

d. Constructing a second floor on an existing structure.

e. Siting an accessory structure (garage, shop, etc.) on the water side or side yard area of an existing dwelling.

2. The geologic report shall contain the following information in addition to the requirements in BMC 17.100.020(D):

a. The stability of the bluff and its suitability for the proposed type of construction in relation to the size of lot proposed, including any required setback from the edge of the bluff necessary to accommodate a proposed structure for its projected lifetime. An assessment of the long-term response of the bluff toe, including undertaking assessments of the types of failure (e.g., slumps/landslides) that may be characteristic of the lithology that makes up the bluff. Assessments should be consistent with the methodology used by the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries to assess bluff erosion potential in its published coastal erosion studies of other Oregon coastal regions.

b. The need for engineered foundations or for site-specific studies to determine if engineered foundations are necessary.

c. A clear statement of all requirements or conditions on the proposed development that the qualified professional geologic consultant has determined is necessary to mitigate the geological hazards that have been identified in the site investigation. 

3. A geologic report (unless the site plan committee determines conditions dictate otherwise) is not required when:

a. Remodeling within an existing intact structure; or

b. Siting an addition or accessory structure on the upland (furthest from the water) side of the existing dwelling. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.070 Engineered plans required. 

A. No property shall be disturbed, graded, excavated, filled, stormwater drainage redirected or developed within the city so as to cause slides of mud, soil, rock, vegetative material or any eroded or depositional material to be deposited on the property of another.

B. The applicant shall submit plans prepared by an Oregon-licensed civil engineer prior to any site preparation, including vegetation removal, except as allowed for survey purposes in BMC 17.100.060. Note: On a lot or parcel with hazardous conditions as defined in BMC 17.100.020(F) and on any proposed partition or subdivision. At the discretion of the site plan committee, this requirement may be waived or modified on lots or parcels greater than one acre in size. The plans must be approved by the city and shall include the following information: 

1. An erosion control plan showing the area to be denuded of vegetation, erosion control measures and implementation time table. Erosion and sedimentation caused by stormwater runoff shall be minimized by employing the following measures, or substitute measures deemed acceptable by the city manager or his or her qualified designee:

a. Only the minimal removal of vegetation cover, particularly tree cover, necessary for building placement or access shall be done. Removal of trees and brush for view enhancement can be a part of the grading plan if such an action does not increase the potential hazard and/or mitigation can be applied. The city shall observe this in the development of streets and building pads.

b. Measures for controlling runoff, such as silt fencing, hay bales, berms, holding ponds, terraces, ditches, hydroseeding or permanent cover, shall be used as required, particularly in areas having slopes of 15 percent or greater. The applicant shall contact the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) concerning the possible need for a 1200-C stormwater general permit. 

2. Prior to any grading, a grading plan showing all cut-and-fill slopes associated with new or improved roads, driveways, and building pads, and all utility grading including water, sewer, electrical, telephone, and television cables. The grading plan shall include associated erosion control measures and implementation time table for the grading operation. 

3. A drainage plan to control ground water and stormwater runoff.

a. All storm drainage shall be designed by a civil engineer and approved by the city. The storm drain facilities shall be designed for storms having a 25-year recurrence frequency. Stormwater shall be directed into drainage with capacity to be calculated in accordance with the city’s comprehensive plan for storm drainage development and Chapter 8.10 BMC, and address on-site and off-site impacts, so as not to flood adjacent or downstream property. 

b. In all areas of the city, the city manager or his or her designee may require culverts or other drainage facilities, designed in accordance with the city’s comprehensive plan for storm drainage development and Chapter 8.10 BMC, to be installed as a condition of construction.

c. The plan must include a determination of seasonal high water table level impact on development of the property, and a ground water drainage mitigation design if necessary. 

C. Developments which abut the coastal bluffs or coastal shoreland boundary, or direct surface water runoff over the bluffs or boundary, shall require any special impact mitigation measures as recommended in the geologic hazard report.

D. Filling of lowlands shall be done only where it is determined that the fill shall not cause flooding or damage to adjacent properties and where adequate drainage facilities are installed. This provision may be superseded when lowlands contain jurisdictional wetlands, where state wetland removal/fill permits would be required, or areas regulated by the city flood damage prevention ordinance, Chapter 17.98 BMC.

E. No work shall commence until the applicant has received written approval from the city and required permits have been issued.

F. The property owner/applicant is responsible for the work being done in conformance with the approved plans. If the approved plans were reviewed by the city engineer, the design engineer or authorized representative shall provide inspection reports and complete and sign a statement (“certification of project”) that the project was inspected and found to be in accordance with the approved plans. For all other engineered plans approved by the city, the property owner shall complete and sign a statement (“certification of project”) that the work performed on the subject property was completed in compliance with the approved plans. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


17.100.080 Enforcement.

A. The removal of vegetation, grading, construction, location, development or use of land or structures, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, ordinance or permit, or any conditions or limitations approved pursuant to this code, is a violation.

B. In addition to other remedies set forth in Chapter 17.160 BMC, and other remedies provided by ordinance or under state law, the city may institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, abate or remove the unlawful location, erection, construction, development, maintenance, repair, alteration, occupancy or use of land or structures.

C. If the city manager determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city shall provide written notice to the owner of the land and the developer, general agent, architect, builder, contractor or other person or entity who is known by the city to have participated in committing the violation, through a stop work order, to cease all further development until such time as the violation has been remedied. If development continues in disregard of notice from the city, the city may seek an injunction to stop further development until the violation has been remedied. The amount of time to remedy the violation shall depend upon the nature of the violation, the circumstance then existing and whether an emergency exists. Noncompliance within the time set by the city shall cause the city to take remedial steps to cure the violation and charge the costs, fees and expenses of such remedial action to the owner of the land. This shall include any expenses, costs and fees paid by the city to third persons for labor and materials to remedy the violation. Charges made under this subsection shall be a lien against the real property on which the violation arises and the city recorder is authorized to enter the amount of such charges immediately in the docket of city liens.

D. The owner of the land, and the developer, general agent, architect, builder, contractor or other person or entity who takes part in any violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation. 

E. The remedies set forth in this section are cumulative and not exhaustive of all remedies the city may exercise to prevent, correct or abate a violation under this section. [Ord. 09-O-650 § 2; Ord. 07-O-582 § 2.]


Chapter 17.104 HOME OCCUPATIONS

Sections: 

17.104.010    Purpose and scope.

17.104.020    Permit required.

17.104.030    Criteria.

17.104.040    Exclusions.

17.104.050    Revocation.

17.104.060    Appeal.

17.104.070    Repealed.


17.104.010 Purpose and scope.

The intent of the home occupation permit for residential zones is to provide for a limited cottage industry type activity which is conducted in such a manner that the residential character of the building and the neighborhood is preserved. “Home occupation” means any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit, including handicrafts, laundering, seamstress, specially food items, catering, office of clergyman, bookkeeping, teaching of music, dancing and other instruction when limited to attendance of no more than five pupils at a time, and other like occupations. The permit shall not be transferable and the privileges it grants shall be limited to the person named in the permit and to the location and activity for which it is issued. [Ord. 09-O-629 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.104.020 Permit required.

The city manager or his designee shall issue a home occupation permit only if it is found that all of the following criteria are and will be met by the individual applicant. The permit may include conditions requiring periodic review and renewal, requiring the applicant to sign an acknowledgement of the conditions, or other conditions specifically dealing with the property use involved, where such conditions are found to be reasonably necessary to maintain the criteria herein listed. [Ord. 09-O-629 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.104.030 Criteria.

The home occupation proposal must conform to the following criteria:

A. The activity must be conducted entirely within the dwelling, garage, or accessory structure.

B. The activity must be conducted only by persons residing in the dwelling.

C. The outward residential appearance of all buildings must be preserved, and the use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.

D. Not more than 50 percent of the floor area of the individual dwelling unit may be utilized for the intended purposes. Any part of a garage or accessory structure may be used provided off-street parking requirements are met.

E. No merchandising or sale of commodities may be conducted on the premises, except such as is produced by the occupants on the premises.

F. A sign may be maintained in conjunction with the home occupation activity, provided it is nonlighted, indicates only the name and trade of the property owner, and is no greater than two square feet in area.

G. With the exception of the bed and breakfast in subsection (J) of this section, the use requires no additional off-street parking spaces.

H. There shall be no emission of odorous, toxic, noxious matter nor any use causing electrical or telecommunication interference, vibration, noise, heat or glare in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along or outside property lines of a home occupation so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard.

I. Proof of a current business license unless exempt must be provided.

J. A bed and breakfast limited to the rental of one bedroom in an owner-occupied single-family residence may be approved as a home occupation. A breakfast meal may be served during the a.m. hours only. One off-street parking space in addition to two spaces for the homeowner shall be provided. A transient room tax will be applied pursuant to Chapter 3.10 BMC. [Ord. 16-O-762 § 2; Ord. 09-O-629 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.104.040 Exclusions.

Home occupation permits shall not be issued for any of the following:

A. Beauty shops;

B. Barber shops;

C. Pet grooming;

D. Photo studios that use chemicals in their processes;

E. Headquarters for the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch to other locations. [Ord. 09-O-629 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.104.050 Revocation.

The permit may be revoked by the city manager or his designee for a violation of any conditions listed in BMC 17.104.030. The permittee shall be given written notice of the intent to revoke, a list of reasons for revocation, and the remedies and appeal process. The city manager or his designee may elect to resolve the violation pursuant to Chapter 17.160 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-629 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.104.060 Appeal.

Any applicant, or affected property owner or resident has the right to appeal the administrative decision of the city manager or his designee to the planning commission in a manner as provided in Chapter 17.156 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-629 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.104.070 Existing uses.

Repealed by Ord. 09-O-629. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.112 REAR LOT DEVELOPMENT

(Repealed by Ord. 07-O-587)


Chapter 17.116 PLANNED COMMUNITY

Sections: 

17.116.010    Purpose.

17.116.020    General requirements.

17.116.030    Application.

17.116.040    Standards for approval.

17.116.050    Variations to be authorized.

17.116.060    Subdivision regulations.

17.116.070    Planning commission action.

17.116.080    Violation of conditions.

17.116.090    Minor change.

17.116.100    Mapping.


17.116.010 Purpose.

The purpose of planned community approval is to allow greater variety in the relationships between buildings and open spaces, while still ensuring compliance with the purpose and objectives of various zoning district regulations, as well as the intent of these land development sections. Allowing developers more freedom to design and construct projects, rather than strictly applying the provisions of this code, results in better harmony with site conditions, enhanced aesthetics, and greater economy. By encouraging innovative planning, this code also provides compatible mixed-use development, improved open space protection, greater transportation options, and more efficient use of land. Use of these provisions, however, is dependent upon submission of a complete and acceptable conceptual plan. Use also requires conformance to and compliance with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.116.020 General requirements. 

A. If a zone change is proposed, materials addressing criteria in Chapter 17.140 BMC must be submitted with the planned community application. Such planned community application shall not be used to justify or create unauthorized uses within the underlying zoning classification. 

B. Requirements pertaining to area, density, yards or similar dimensions, standards and criteria of the underlying zoning classification within which the proposed planned community is to be situated shall be used as a guide in determining the proposal’s compliance with the purposes and intent of the land development code. 

C. No planned community shall be approved in any residential district if the housing density of the proposed development will result in an intensity of land use greater than that permitted in the residential district. For this purpose, maximum density is calculated by dividing the total gross area of the subject property by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit prescribed for the zone. If a public or private street is platted as part of the planned community, the square footage used for the street must be subtracted from the gross area prior to calculating the density. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.030.] 


17.116.030 Application.

The owner or his authorized agent may make application for a planned community approval by filing forms provided by the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 

A. A filing fee in an amount established by general resolution of the city council. No part of the filing fee is refundable.

B. An applicant shall submit an application form, appropriate fees, and seven copies of a preliminary site plan for review by the site plan committee pursuant to BMC 17.80.020. When cleared by the committee, the application will be scheduled for the next available planning commission hearing. The preliminary site plan shall be drawn to scale and include, but not be limited to, the following information: 

1. Proposed use, location, dimensions and height of all buildings; proposed number of dwelling units, if any, to be located in each building;

2. Proposed circulation pattern including the location and width of streets, private drives, and sidewalks and/or pedestrian ways; the location of any curbs; the status of street ownership; and the location of parking areas and the number of spaces therein;

3. Proposed use and location of all open spaces, including a plan for landscaping and any other shared amenities to be provided;

4. Slope: contour map with contour intervals of five feet or less shall be provided. Sufficient lines should be drawn approximately perpendicular to the contours to indicate slopes throughout the project area;

5. Preliminary proposed grading and drainage pattern;

6. Proposed method and plan for provision of water, sewer, storm drainage facilities, fire hydrants, electrical facilities, cable television, mail box facilities, solid waste disposal and street lights;

7. On parent parcels containing slopes of 15 percent or greater, or other hazardous conditions, materials must be submitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Sites; 

8. A determination of seasonal high water table impact on development of the property, and, if necessary, a ground water drainage mitigation design;

9. Such other pertinent information shall be included as may be considered necessary by the planning commission to make a determination that the contemplated arrangement or use makes it necessary and desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable under this code;

10. If a land division is proposed, the applicant must comply with any relevant provisions of Chapter 17.172 BMC, Land Divisions. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.040.] 


17.116.040 Standards for approval.

In granting approval for a planned community, the planning commission shall seek to determine, based upon evidence provided by the applicant, that: 

A. The proposal conforms with the comprehensive plan and implementing ordinances of the city in terms of goals, policies, location and general development standards.

B. There are special physical conditions or objectives of development which the proposal will satisfy so that a departure from standard zoning district regulations can be warranted.

C. The project will satisfactorily take care of the traffic it generates, both on- and off-site, by means of adequate off-street parking, access points, and, if required, additional street right-of-way improvements.

D. That the proposed utility and drainage facilities are adequate for the population densities and type of development proposed and will not create major problems or impacts outside the boundaries of the proposed development site.

E. Any conditions of approval relating to the construction of the project after completion of the required infrastructure and recording of a plat, if proposed, must be made a part of a recorded covenants, conditions, and restrictions document. Enforcement of these matters will be the responsibility of the homeowners’ association of the subject property. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.060.] 


17.116.050 Variations to be authorized.

The planning commission may authorize variations to the standards for the zone in which the planned community is located relating to: 

Individual site areas and dimensions;

Site coverage;

Yard requirements (setbacks);

Height of structures;

Distances between structures;

Off-street parking and loading facilities;

Street standards and access requirements; and

Landscaped areas.

To authorize any variations to the standards, the applicant must demonstrate by the design proposal that the objectives of the land development regulations of this chapter will be achieved. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.080.] 


17.116.060 Subdivision regulations.

When a planned community involves approval of a subdivision plat, the planning commission may initially grant preliminary approval of the application. The city will grant final approval when the applicant submits the final subdivision plat in the manner prescribed by the land division regulations, BMC 17.172.080. Building permits will not be issued for the planned community until the subdivision plat has been recorded. [Ord. 12-O-694 § 2; Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.090.]


17.116.070 Planning commission action.

A. The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application as submitted. Any planned community as authorized shall be subject to all conditions imposed, and shall be exempted from the other provisions of this code only to the extent specified in said authorization. 

B. Approval Periods.

1. Planned Community without Subdivision Plat. The applicant has two years from the date of approval to install any needed off-site and on-site infrastructure for the development. The city may grant a two-year extension of time. If phases (staging) are proposed, see subsection (B)(3) of this section. 

2. Planned Community with Subdivision Plat. The applicant has two years from the date of approval to install the off-site and on-site infrastructure for the development and submit the final plat for approval. The city may grant a two-year extension of time. If phases (staging) are proposed, see subsection (B)(3) of this section. 

3. Planned Community Proposed in Phases (Stages). The applicant must submit a timeline to the planning commission for their consideration. The applicant must comply with the approved phasing timeline. 

C. In approving the conceptual master plan for the planned community, the planning commission may attach conditions it finds necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 

1. Required setbacks;

2. Height of buildings;

3. Location and number of vehicular access points;

4. Establishing new streets, increasing the right-of-way or roadway width of existing streets, and, in general, improving the traffic circulation system;

5. Number of parking spaces;

6. Number, size, location, and lighting of signs;

7. Designating sites for open space and recreational development;

8. Additional fencing, screening, and landscaping. [Ord. 12-O-694 § 2; Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.070.]


17.116.080 Violation of conditions.

Components of the development, subsequent to the completion of the infrastructure and the recording of the plat, if proposed, shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) to be enforced by the homeowners’ association. Ongoing maintenance for the components stated above shall be enforced by the homeowners’ association. Violations of any uses authorized by the final order will be resolved pursuant to Chapter 17.160 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.100.] 


17.116.090 Minor change.

The applicant may apply to the planning commission for a minor change to the site plan and/or conditions of approval of an approved planned community. The planning commission will hold a public hearing to consider the nature of the requested change, impacts the change may have on surrounding properties and/or on the remaining portion of the project, and the impact on the city’s services and facilities. The commission may approve or deny the minor change. If the change is approved it may be incorporated into the project. If it is denied the project remains as originally approved and the change cannot be incorporated. Applications for a minor change must be submitted with the following: 

A. A filing fee in an amount established by general resolution of the city council. No part of the fee is refundable. 

B. A site plan or revised subdivision map showing the proposed changes and how they compare to the originally approved project. If the change does not include the physical site plan of the project, a text explaining the desired change must be submitted.

C. A statement explaining how the proposed change relates to the approved project and any impacts it may have on the project and/or adjoining property holders and city services and facilities. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.J § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.110.] 


17.116.100 Mapping.

Within 30 days after the granting of a planned community permit, the symbol “PC” shall be indicated on the zoning map, in addition to the existing zoning designation, on the lot or lots affected by such permit. [Ord. 09-O-636 § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.J § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.116.120.] 


Chapter 17.120 NONCONFORMING USES

Sections: 

17.120.010    Continuation of a nonconforming use.

17.120.020    Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.

17.120.030    Destruction of a nonconforming use or structure.

17.120.040    Completion of structure.

17.120.050    Enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming structure.


17.120.010 Continuation of a nonconforming use.

A lawfully preexisting use of a structure or site, which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a lawful, nonconforming use and may be continued, subject to the following regulations: 

A. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on structures or sites. 

B. No nonconforming structure shall be moved, altered, or enlarged unless required by law, allowed elsewhere in this code, or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement will result in the elimination of the nonconforming use. 

C. No structure partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be moved, altered or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space occupied by the nonconforming use. [Ord. 09-O-637 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.120.020 Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.

If a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, or if the nonconforming use of a building, structure or premises is discontinued for the time period specified below, the said use shall be considered abandoned, and said building, structure or premises shall thereafter be used only for a use permitted as an allowed outright use or as a conditional use in the district in which it is located:

A. Residential uses in a commercial zoning district: five years, unless the building has been altered to the point that it is no longer suitable as a residence;

B. All other uses: two years. [Ord. 09-O-637 § 2; Ord. 90-O-446.B § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.120.030.] 


17.120.030 Destruction of a nonconforming use or structure.

If a nonconforming residential or commercial structure is destroyed to any extent, by any cause beyond the owner’s control, it may be rebuilt or replaced by a structure that is no larger than the original structure. Time limits for this replacement shall comply with BMC 17.120.020. [Ord. 09-O-637 § 2; Ord. 90-O-446.B § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.120.040.] 


17.120.040 Completion of structure.

Nothing contained in this code shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a valid permit exists unless work is discontinued and the building permit expires prior to completion. [Ord. 09-O-637 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.120.050.] 


17.120.050 Enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming structure.

Existing structures that do not conform to current standards, including but not limited to setbacks, coverage, and height requirements, can be expanded, but only if all new construction complies with current standards and does not increase the area out of compliance. This provision allows additional stories that meet setbacks to be sited on an existing structure with nonconforming setbacks. [Ord. 10-O-659 § 2; Ord. 09-O-637 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.120.060.]


Chapter 17.124 SPECIFIC STANDARDS APPLYING TO CONDITIONAL USES

Sections: 

17.124.010    Day care or nursery schools.

17.124.011    Public or private schools.

17.124.020    Commercial excavation – Removal of earth products.

17.124.030    Utilities.

17.124.040    Poultry farms and eggeries.

17.124.070    Kennels, riding academies and public stables.

17.124.080    Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.

17.124.090    Cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, columbarium.

17.124.100    Churches, hospitals, other religious or charitable institutions.

17.124.120    Community buildings, social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations, and clubs in an “R” district.

17.124.130    Drive-in theaters.

17.124.140    Bed and breakfast facilities.

17.124.150    Recreation vehicle parks.

17.124.160    Manufactured home parks.

17.124.170    Short-term rentals.

17.124.180    Dwelling groups.

17.124.190    Keeping of livestock.

17.124.200    Temporary living quarters for caretakers.

17.124.210    Multifamily dwelling standards in the R-2 zone.

17.124.220    Cottage industry.

17.124.230    Amateur radio facilities.


17.124.010 Day care or nursery schools. 

A. Facilities for 17 or more children are subject to these provisions, and all state regulations and requirements. All preschool children residing in the dwelling which also serves as a day care or nursery facility shall be counted in the total number of children in such facility for purposes of calculating the category of such facility. 

B. Day care or nursery school facilities located in any residential zone shall have a minimum site size of 10,000 square feet. Facilities located in the C-3 zone shall be located on lots of sufficient size to provide for required buildings, parking, pickup and drop off area, and outdoor play area.

C. All such facilities shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor play areas with a minimum area of 75 square feet per child at total capacity and a sight-obscuring fence, wall or vegetative hedge of at least four feet but not more than six feet in height shall be provided, separating the play area from abutting lots with residential uses.

D. Adequate off-street parking and loading space shall be provided.

E. Must provide copies of any license/permit required by federal or state agencies to operate the school. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.S § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.H § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.011 Public or private schools.

Must provide copies of any license/permit required by federal or state agencies to operate the school. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2.]


17.124.020 Commercial excavation – Removal of earth products. 

A. Before a conditional use permit for the commercial excavation and removal of earth products can be granted, plans and specifications showing the location of the premises, grading plan, existing and proposed drainage, proposed truck access, existing vegetation and plant material on the site, and details of proposed reclamation following excavation and removal of earth products relating to regrading and revegetation of the site shall be submitted to, and approved by, the planning commission. 

B. Any deviation from the plans as approved by the planning commission will serve as grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. 

C. In reviewing the application, the commission may consider the most appropriate use of the land, distances from the property lines, the protection of pedestrians and vehicles, the prevention of the collection and stagnation of water at all stages of the operation, screening and/or berming of the excavation project site from adjoining properties, and the reclamation and rehabilitation of the land upon termination of the operation. 

D. A bond may be required to ensure performance for reclamation of the project site following removal of such earth products.

E. Erosion control measures must be implemented. If the disturbance is greater than one acre in size, a permit from the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) is required. A copy of the approved DEQ permit must be provided to the city.

F. If any disturbance will be on slopes greater than 15 percent, the applicant must comply with Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Site Protection Hillside Development Standards. 

G. Applicant must provide copies of any federal, state, or local permits/licenses required for this use. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.030 Utilities.

The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utility or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, shall be permitted in any district. Utility transmission and distribution lines, poles and towers may exceed the height limits otherwise provided for in this code. Any proposed outside storage of equipment must be screened by a six-foot sight-obscuring fence or hedge. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.040 Poultry farms and eggeries.

Any building housing poultry, consisting of more than 10 chickens or other poultry, shall be located not less than 200 feet from every lot line. Odor, dust, noise, feathers, flies or drainage shall not be permitted to create or become a nuisance to surrounding property. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.070 Kennels, riding academies and public stables.

A. Kennels, riding academies, and public stables shall be located not less than 200 feet from any property line, shall provide automobile and truck ingress and egress, and shall also provide parking and loading spaces so designed as to minimize traffic hazards and congestion.

B. Applicants shall show that odor, dust, noise, and drainage shall not constitute a nuisance, hazard, or health problem to adjoining property or uses.

C. No animals shall be permitted to leave the property and wander at large. [Ord. 14-O-723 § 2; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 98-O-446.DD § 11; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.080 Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.

A veterinary clinic or animal hospital shall not be located within 100 feet of a lot in any adjoining residential district, and the applicant shall show that adequate measures and controls shall be taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. This use does not allow boarding of animals unless they are being treated at the facility. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.090 Cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, columbarium.

A. A cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, or columbarium shall have its principal access on a street adequate to serve the use with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion. A traffic impact statement pursuant to BMC 17.170.090 may be required. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.92 BMC.

B. Cemeteries located within any “R” district or abutting an “R” district shall establish and maintain a landscape buffer five feet in width as well as a sight obscuring fence, hedge or planting to minimize the conflict with abutting residential use. No mortuary or crematorium can be within 100 feet of an adjacent street or within 200 feet of a residential lot.

C. All laws and regulations of the state of Oregon must be adhered to and copies of all required permits and licenses shall be provided to the city. [Ord. 14-O-723 § 2; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.100 Churches, hospitals, other religious or charitable institutions.

In any “R” district, all such uses shall be located on a street adequate to serve the use. All off-street parking facilities shall be adequately screened from abutting property to reduce noise and other negative impacts. [Ord. 09-O-640 § 2; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.120 Community buildings, social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations, and clubs in an “R” district.

In any “R” district, all such uses shall be located on a street adequate to serve the use. All off-street parking facilities shall be adequately screened from abutting property to reduce noise and other negative impacts. [Ord. 09-O-640 § 2; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.130 Drive-in theaters.

Drive-in theaters shall be located on a street adequate to serve the use and be able to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion. The use shall be screened from an “R” district or dwelling so that any noise, lights, or signs shall not disturb residents. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.140 Bed and breakfast facilities.

“Bed and breakfast” means the rental of more than one bedroom in an owner-occupied single-family residence where a breakfast meal may be served during the a.m. hours only. All residences proposed for bed and breakfast accommodations shall provide one off-street parking space per rental unit in addition to two spaces for the owner. In terms of eligibility and acceptability, preference will be given by the planning commission to residences applying for bed and breakfast accommodations which display significant architectural or historic character and quality. The property owner shall obtain a business license from the city of Brookings. A transient room tax will be applied pursuant to Chapter 3.10 BMC. [Ord. 16-O-762 § 3; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.150 Recreation vehicle parks.

Recreation vehicle parks are regulated by, and must comply with, health division and building code requirements. The following additional standards shall also apply:

A. The space provided for each recreation vehicle shall be not less than 800 square feet in area, exclusive of any space used for common areas, such as roadways, general use structures, walkways, parking spaces for other than recreation vehicles, and common open and landscaped areas. 

B. Roadways, other than dedicated, public rights-of-way, shall not be less than 36 feet in width if parking is permitted on the margin of the roadway, or less than 28 feet in width if parking is not permitted on the edge of the roadway, shall be paved with asphaltic concrete, Portland cement concrete or similar impervious surface and designed to permit easy access to each recreation vehicle space. The roadway widths may be reduced for one-way travel lanes to a standard approved by the site plan committee. 

C. Each recreation vehicle space shall be covered with crushed gravel or paved with asphalt, concrete or similar material and be designed to provide runoff of surface water. The part of the space which is not occupied by a recreation vehicle, not intended as an accessway to the recreation vehicle or part of an outdoor patio, need not be paved or covered with gravel provided the area is appropriately landscaped and thereafter maintained. One paved automobile parking space shall be located in the park equal to one space per recreation vehicle park and three spaces for the manager residence and guest parking. 

D. There shall be provided trash receptacles for disposal of solid waste materials situated in convenient locations for the use of guests of the park and located in such a manner and be of such capacity that there is no uncovered accumulation of trash at any time. Such trash receptacles shall be screened from public view. 

E. Recreation vehicle parks shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from any abutting public streets. Said setback area shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained and a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall of not less than six feet in height shall be located at least 10 feet within the required setback area. Except for the area abutting public streets as described above, the park shall be screened on all other sides by a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall of not less than six feet in height and said fence, hedge or wall may be located on the property line. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.160 Manufactured home parks.

Manufactured home parks are regulated by the Department of Commerce/building code provisions which contain rules establishing minimum safety standards for the design and construction of manufactured home parks. The following additional standards shall also apply:

A. Each space for a manufactured home shall contain not less than 3,000 square feet, exclusive of space provided for the common use of tenants, such as roadways, general use structures, guest parking, walkways and areas for recreation and landscaping purposes. 

B. Roadways, other than dedicated, public rights-of-way, shall not be less than 36 feet in width if parking is permitted on the margin of the roadway, or less than 28 feet in width if parking is not permitted on the edge of the roadway, shall be paved with asphaltic concrete, Portland cement concrete or similar impervious surface and designed to permit easy access to each mobile home space. The roadway widths may be reduced for one-way travel lanes to a standard approved by the site plan committee. 

C. The manufactured home park shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from any abutting public streets. Said setback area shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained and a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall of not less than six feet in height shall be located at least 10 feet within the required setback area. Except for the area abutting public streets as described above, the park shall be screened on all other sides by a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall of not less than six feet in height and said fence, hedge or wall may be located on the property line. 

D. Each manufactured home situated within the manufactured home park shall be required to install and maintain rodent-proof skirting around the unit within 30 days of first locating within the park.

E. Two parking spaces must be provided for each space. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.124.170 Short-term rentals.

Any existing dwelling in any of the residential zones and in the general commercial (C-3) zone can be used for short-term rental purposes as set forth in that zone and pursuant to certain regulations as follows:

A. The property owner or holder shall obtain a business license from the city of Brookings and register the dwelling on a separate form.

B. A transient room tax will be applied pursuant to Chapter 3.10 BMC.

C. The property owner shall provide the name, address and telephone number of a local representative, either a property management business or an individual living within the Brookings urban growth boundary, who has the authority to make or have repairs made, resolve disputes and/or terminate occupancy if necessary.

D. Representative’s name and telephone number shall be posted within the dwelling.

E. Applicant shall subscribe to a scheduled waste collection service and provide garbage receptacles on the property.

F. Short-term rental conditional use permits are specific to the owner of the dwelling unit and shall not run with the land. To continue with the use, within six months of the sale of the property, the new owner shall submit an minor change application pursuant to BMC 17.116.090 to address the criteria in this section. If the minor change is not approved by the planning commission or no application is submitted, the approval shall terminate. [Ord. 16-O-766 § 2; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2; Ord. 01-O-446.MM.] 


17.124.180 Dwelling groups.

Dwelling groups shall be allowed on lots that cannot otherwise be divided and are less than four acres in size, subject to the following standards:

A. Density. The number of dwelling units allowed shall be established by dividing the total lot area by the minimum lot area of the underlying zone. 

1. All residential buildings shall be the type of dwelling unit as allowed in the underlying zone. 

2. Buildings may be clustered on the lot. 

B. Setbacks. The distance between any principal buildings and the property line shall be not less than established in the zone in which the dwelling group is located. The minimum distance between residential buildings shall be twice the minimum side yard setback that would be required for the tallest building on the lot; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than 10 feet. An inner courtyard providing access to double-row dwelling groups shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.

C. Access. Every building containing a dwelling in the group shall be within 60 feet of an access driveway of at least 20 feet in width providing vehicular access from a public street. This 20-foot-wide driveway shall have “No Parking” signs installed along the entire length.

D. Neighborhood Character. The development of dwelling groups shall respect the character of both the neighborhood in which it is located and the properties adjacent to said dwelling group. Emphasis shall be placed on retention of neighborhood character and privacy of adjacent properties when reviewing dwelling groups.

E. All dwelling groups shall be subject to the review and approval of the site plan committee, as provided in Chapter 17.80 BMC.

F. Each dwelling unit must have two parking spaces provided within a garage or carport or on a paved surface adjacent to the dwelling. These parking spaces must be available for parking. Spaces may not be converted to habitable space, used for storage of goods, equipment, inoperable vehicles, or other items. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2.]


17.124.190 Keeping of livestock.

A. No horses, cattle, sheep, or other livestock shall be kept on a lot less than three acres in area. No more than two head may be kept on the first three acres; however, one additional animal may be kept for each acre over three acres.

B. All animals must be confined to an area on the property and said area of confinement shall not be located closer than 125 feet to a dwelling on any contiguous property. Barns, stables and other buildings and structures to house livestock shall not be located closer than 50 feet to any property line.

C. Odor, dust, noise, flies or drainage shall not be permitted to create or become a nuisance to surrounding property.

D. No horses, cattle, sheep, or other livestock shall be permitted to leave the property and wander at large. [Ord. 14-O-723 § 2; Ord. 08-O-616 § 2.]


17.124.200 Temporary living quarters for caretakers.

Where it can be demonstrated that there is a need for a temporary caretaker of either property or individuals residing on the subject property, living quarters may be provided temporarily in the existing dwelling or an accessory structure. The following standards shall apply:

A. Detailed explanation of the need for a caretaker.

B. Plot plan indicating size, layout, and location of the proposed living quarters.

C. Kitchen facilities shall be limited to a sink, refrigerator, hot plate, and microwave. 

D. The applicant shall sign an agreement to remove the kitchen facilities and no longer use the temporary living quarters as a separate dwelling once the need for a caretaker no longer exists.   

E. A written request to the planning department must be submitted annually indicating there is an ongoing need for the caretakers’ living quarters. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2.]


17.124.210 Multifamily dwelling standards in the R-2 zone.

A. An area equal to at least 15 percent of the site area, inclusive of required setback yards, shall be devoted to usable open space recreation areas. This area must be cleared of brush or obstructions and not used for temporary or regular parking of     vehicles. 

B. If commercial dumpsters are to be used, they shall be appropriately screened. [Ord. 08-O-616 § 2.] 


17.124.220 Cottage industry.

A. A person residing in the dwelling shall be engaged in the operations of the cottage industry. The business may employ individuals not residing in the dwelling.

B. The operation of the cottage industry shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and during the normal work week of Monday through Friday, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission.

C. Materials and/or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of the normal residence shall be screened from view of the street and adjacent residential parcels.

D. There shall be no retail sales of products or services not directly produced on the premises.

E. The activity shall not require or involve the use of heavy commercial or industrial vehicles with more than two axles and six tires for delivery of materials to or from the premises.

F. The exterior residential appearance of all structures shall be preserved, and the use is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.

G. Additional parking required for the activity shall be provided on the premises pursuant to Chapter 17.92 BMC and the activity shall not require on-street parking. The required two off-street parking spaces for each residential unit shall not be utilized for the cottage industry. The planning commission shall determine the appropriate parking requirements for uses not listed in Chapter 17.92 BMC.

H. There shall be no emission of odorous, toxic, noxious matter nor any use causing electrical or telecommunication interference, vibration, noise, heat or glare in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along or outside property lines so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard.

I. All cottage industries shall be evaluated to determine if additional system development charges (SDC) are applicable. All additional SDCs shall be paid to the city prior to operation of the cottage industry.

J. No more than 50 percent of the dwelling shall be used for the cottage industry. Any accessory structure may be used in conducting the activity. If the property contains a carport or garage it shall not be converted to create a nonconforming residence.

K. Manufacturing, processing, and similar operations shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission.

L. Proof of a current city business license unless exempt shall be provided.

M. All state and federal laws and regulations must be adhered to and copies of all required permits and licenses shall be provided to the city. [Ord. 14-O-722 § 3.]


17.124.230 Amateur radio facilities. 

Amateur radio facilities are private, noncommercial wireless communication facilities consisting of antennas, towers, and/or support structures. The city recognizes the importance of amateur radio operators and their service to the community especially in the event of emergencies. 

Amateur radio facilities are considered an accessory use to a residential dwelling. BMC 17.128.020(B) provides for exceptions to height limitations for masts, aerials and antennas. 

The following siting criteria shall apply to amateur radio facilities that do not meet the provisions of BMC 17.128.020(B) and/or the applicable zoning district. The criteria are intended to maximize public safety and minimize visual impacts to promote and protect the residential characteristics of the residential zoning districts consistent with federal and state law. Public notice shall be provided to all property owners within 1,000 feet of a proposed amateur radio facility requesting approval with a conditional use permit (CUP).

A. Height. The maximum tower/antenna height shall not exceed 70 feet from the finished grade at the base of the tower. A narrative must be submitted with the application providing justification of the need for the requested height. The narrative need not be complex but must provide an explanation as to why a taller tower/antenna is needed to obtain the reliable communications desired by the applicant.

B. Front, Side and Rear Yard Setbacks. All components of the facility, including guy wires, antennas, and footings shall meet the minimum setbacks of the applicable zone.

C. Construction. A building permit shall be obtained for the construction or erection of the amateur radio facility. Plans and calculations shall be provided and shall comply with the provisions of Section 3108 of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. 

D. Finish (Paint/Surface). The facility shall have a finish, tone or color that reduces its visibility. In most circumstances this condition may be satisfied by painting the facility with a flat light haze gray paint. The owner shall maintain the finish, painted or unpainted. Red and white or orange and white finish is not allowed. If these colors are required by the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) or ODA (Oregon Department of Aviation), the height shall be reduced to a level that it is not required. 

E. Fencing and Security. For security purposes, towers and accessory facilities shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot fence or be equipped with anti-climb devices. If this conflicts with TIA-222 or other agencies, the most restrictive requirements shall prevail. 

F. Lighting. No lighting shall be permitted on the facility. If required by the FAA or ODA, the facility shall be reduced to a level that does not require lighting. 

G. Airport Overlay Zone. The facility shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 17.76 BMC, Airport Approach (AA) Overlay Zone. 

H. Advertising/Signs. No advertising or signs of any type are to be placed on the tower at any time except those required or necessary for safety and warnings. Safety and warning signs shall be less than two square feet and be placed on the facility at a height of less than six feet. 

I. License. The owner of the facility shall possess and provide a copy of a current FCC license to the city. After six months with no valid license, the facility shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the property owner within 60 days thereafter. The owner shall provide a copy of a valid FCC license every three years. 

J. Abandonment. The property owner shall provide annual written documentation that the facilities are functioning. Amateur radio facilities that do not have functioning antennas for a period of six months shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the facility within 60 days thereafter. Upon written application, prior to the expiration of the six-month period, the planning commission if approved with a CUP or staff if permitted outright may, in writing, grant a six-month time extension for reuse of the facility. Additional extensions beyond the first six-month extension may be granted by the planning commission subject to any conditions required to bring the project or facility into compliance with current regulation(s).

K. Maintenance. Amateur radio facilities shall be maintained in good order and repair at all time so to not constitute any danger or hazard to adjacent properties. All facilities 25 years or older must be inspected by an Oregon structural engineer every three years and a report provided to the city. The building official may request an inspection of a facility of any age where signs of deterioration or instability are observed. If repairs are needed, they must be completed within six months, reinspected, and a report provided to the city. 

L. Unrelated Equipment. Equipment and antennas for other than amateur radio facilities shall comply with height and setback requirements of BMC 17.128.020(B) and the underlying zone.

M. Hazardous Building Sites. Construction or erection of amateur radio facilities shall comply with Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Site Protection Hillside Development Standards. 

N. Permanent structures must not be located in any easement.

O. The city must be notified if the property is sold. The city will provide the new property owner a copy of the final order with conditions of approval of the conditional use permit granting approval.

P. The amateur radio facilities must be located, designed and installed so as to minimize conflicts with scenic views to the extent possible and to not endanger the safety of persons or property. [Ord. 16-O-752 § 2.]


Chapter 17.126 SPECIAL SETBACK PROVISIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS

Sections:

17.126.010    Purpose and designation of streets.

17.126.020    Compliance required.

17.126.030    Variance procedure.


17.126.010 Purpose and designation of streets.

Because of heavy or arterial traffic volume and congestion, existing or probable intensive or commercial development of abutting properties, substandard paving widths, the probability of inadequate sight distances, and other like conditions affecting traffic safety and light, air, and vision along streets, the city council finds that the public health, safety and welfare require that building setback lines, as hereinafter specified, be, and they are hereby, established on all properties abutting the following named streets and sections of streets. Where applicable, requirements set forth in this provision shall be in addition to the yard requirements specified for the zoning districts. Unless otherwise specified, the distances set forth shall be measured from the centerline and at right angles to the centerline of the street.

	Street	Distance

	(Table Reserved)

[Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.126.020 Compliance required.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, erect or locate any building or other structure within any setback lines as established in this chapter. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


17.126.030 Variance procedure.

Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this code may result from the strict application of the provisions of this section, a variance may be granted pursuant to the provisions and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.132 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


Chapter 17.128 INTERPRETATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

17.128.010    General exceptions to the lot size requirements.

17.128.020    Exception to height regulations.

17.128.030    Exception to yard requirements.

17.128.040    Vision obstruction and vision clearance area.

17.128.050    Access.

17.128.060    Authorization of similar uses.

17.128.070    Existing land restrictions.


17.128.010 General exceptions to the lot size requirements.

A discrete parcel having an area less than that required for the zoning district in which the property is located may nevertheless be occupied by any use allowed in the district, subject to compliance with all other requirements of the district, including all yard requirements. Substandard lots within a platted, recorded subdivision which have been consolidated for taxing purposes remain discrete parcels unless a legal planning process to combine the parcels has been completed. [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.128.020 Exception to height regulations.

Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this code shall not apply to: 

A. Barns, silos, water towers and tanks, other farm buildings and structures, or outdoor theater screens, provided they are not less than 50 feet from every lot line.

B. Chimneys, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, smokestacks, flagpoles, grain elevators, cooling towers, monuments, fire hose towers, masts, aerials, antennas, elevator shafts, and other similar projections; and these are subject to minimum setback requirements, excluding setbacks based on height. 

In no case shall the height of structures listed above exceed one and one-half times the height limitation set forth in the applicable zoning district, except as exempted in BMC 17.124.030. [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.128.030.] 


17.128.030 Exception to yard requirements. 

A. Projections into Required Yards. Certain architectural features may project into required yards or courtyards as follows: 

1. Cornices, canopies, eaves, sills, or other similar architectural features, including bay windows if no floor area is involved, but these may not in any case extend more than 24 inches into any required yard area.

2. Fire escapes, open uncovered porches, balconies, decks, landing places, or outside stairways may not in any case extend more than 24 inches into any required side or rear yards, and not exceed six feet into any required front yard.

3. In the case of dwellings existing on the effective date of adoption of this code and which have a front yard setback at or less than that required by the applicable zoning district regulation, an enclosed covered entry porch may project into the required front yard not exceeding six feet and the enclosed porch may not exceed 36 square feet in area. 

4. Any open porches, patios, stoops or decks not exceeding 30 inches in height may extend to within 18 inches of any lot line. 

5. Fences, walls and hedges may be located within required yards up to the property line, except that such sight-obscuring fences, walls or hedges within a vision clearance area pursuant to BMC 17.128.040 shall not exceed three feet in height measured from the top of curb, or street centerline grade, whichever shall be lower.

B. Exceptions to Front Yard Requirements. If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yards less than the required depth for the district, the front yard for the subject lot need not exceed the average front yard of the abutting dwellings. [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 89-O-454 § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.128.040.]


17.128.040 Vision obstruction and vision clearance area. 

A. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to permit a sight obstruction within any required yard area along any street or at a street or alley intersection interfering with the view of operators of motor vehicles or pedestrians on streets or alleys to such an extent as to constitute a traffic hazard. Violations of these requirements will be subject to Chapter 17.160 BMC, Enforcement and Penalties. 

B. Vision clearance areas shall be located on the corners of properties abutting the intersections of two or more streets and intersections of streets with alleys. A vision clearance area shall consist of a triangular area measured from the corner of the intersecting property lines for a distance specified in this regulation. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the nonintersecting ends of the other two sides. The following are minimum distances establishing the two sides of the triangle: 

1. In a residential district the distance shall be 20 feet along each property line from the point of intersection of two or more streets. For the intersection of a street and an alley, measure 10 feet along the property line adjacent to both the street and alley. 

2. In all commercial and industrial zones where yards are required, the distance shall be 15 feet along each property line from the point of intersection of two or more streets. At the intersection of a street and an alley, measure 10 feet along the property line adjacent to both the street and alley.

C. A vision clearance area shall contain no planting, fence, wall, structure, or temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding three feet in height, measured from the top of the curb, or street centerline grade, whichever shall be lower. Trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches and foliage are removed to a height of eight feet above grade. [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.128.050.]


17.128.050 Access.

Except as permitted by other provisions of this code, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless said lot abuts a street, dedicated and improved as a public right-of-way, other than an alley, or an accepted private street, for a distance of at least 20 feet. Residential development is permitted on dedicated but unimproved streets; provided, that the applicant has signed and recorded a deferred improvement agreement. On all lots created after the date of this amendment, the frontage street is the street providing access to the lot or parcel. The lot or parcel must be addressed to that street. The site plan committee may require that driveway construction be completed and approved by the city prior to the recordation of a subdivision or partition plat. Secondary access may be allowed but cannot replace the primary access from the frontage street. [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.F § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.128.060]


17.128.060 Authorization of similar uses.

The site plan committee may make a determination that a use not specifically named in the allowed uses of a district shall be authorized if the use is of the same general type. [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.128.070.]


17.128.070 Existing land restrictions.

It is not intended by this code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this code imposes a greater restriction the provisions of this code shall govern. The city has no obligation to identify, investigate, or enforce any such covenants, conditions, or restrictions (CC&Rs). [Ord. 08-O-617 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.128.090.]


Chapter 17.132 VARIANCES

Sections: 

17.132.010    Purpose.

17.132.020    Planning commission authority.

17.132.030    Applications.

17.132.040    Burden of proof.

17.132.050    Action by commission.

17.132.060    Appeal.

17.132.070    Effect.

17.132.080    Limitation on new application.

17.132.090    Violation of conditions.

17.132.100    Mapping.

17.132.110    Variance to run with the land.


17.132.010 Purpose.

Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this code may result from the strict application of certain provisions thereof, variance may be granted as provided in this chapter. This chapter may not be used to allow a use that is not in conformity with the uses specified in this code for the district in which the land is located. In granting a variance, the city may impose conditions similar to those provided for conditional uses to protect the best interests of the surrounding property, the neighborhood or the city as a whole. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.020 Planning commission authority.

The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove any proposed variance. The planning commission may, but shall not be required to, act upon the proposed variance at the meeting in which the applicable public hearing is held; provided, however, that disposition shall be made of the matter within 40 days of the date of the applicable public hearing; provided, further, that nothing shall prohibit the planning commission from, by motion, postponing disposition to definite time. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.030 Applications.

The property owner or his authorized agent may make application for a variance from the provisions of this code by filing an application, on a land use application form, with the city manager or his designee for review by the site plan committee pursuant to BMC 17.80.030(B). Upon clearance from the site plan committee, the application will be scheduled for the next available planning commission hearing. Such application shall be accompanied by the following information: 

A. A filing fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council (no part of which is refundable);

B. A legal description of the property; 

C. Plans and elevations necessary to show the proposed development; 

D. A map (Curry County assessor’s plat) showing the subject property, surrounding properties and the names and addresses of current property owners within 250 feet of the subject property; 

E. A statement, plans and supportive evidence that all of the following conditions exist:

1. Exceptional or extraordinary conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, which conditions are a result of lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control, and to which the applicant has not contributed;

2. The variance is necessary for the preservation of the property right of the applicant substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity;

3. The authorization of the variance shall not be materially detrimental to the purpose of this code, be injurious to property in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located or be otherwise detrimental to the objectives of any city development plan or policy;

4. The variance request is the minimum variance from the provisions and standards of this code which will alleviate the hardship. [Ord. 93-O-446.N § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.040 Burden of proof.

In order for the planning commission to grant a variance, all the conditions and circumstances listed in BMC 17.132.030(A), (B), (C), (D), and (E) must be found to exist. The specific findings by the planning commission in granting a variance must be factual and supported by substantial evidence. The burden of producing substantial evidence to support the requisite findings is on the applicant seeking the variance from the provisions of this code. If no evidence is produced concerning any or all of the findings listed in BMC 17.132.030 (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E), the application must be denied based upon improper or inadequate findings. All evidence produced must be recited in the findings for approval of any variance application. [Ord. 93-O-446.N § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.050 Action by commission. 

A. Within 60 days after the filing of the application, a public hearing shall be held and the commission shall render its decision. 

B. Where the planning commission is of the opinion that said proposed variance shall be granted, it shall, in open public meeting, by a majority of its members in attendance, enter a planning commission order granting the variance, which order shall include the specific findings of fact, conclusions and supportive evidence pertaining to each specific condition and circumstance that exists pursuant to BMC 17.132.030(A), (B), (C), (D), and (E). 

C. Entry of Order. The chairman, or in his absence, the officer presiding over the planning commission meeting in which the above described order is enacted, shall forthwith sign the order and cause the same to be filed with the city recorder, the order shall be in full force and effect. An order denying the variance shall be entered and filed in a like manner, with the necessary findings, where the planning commission, based on the standards specified herein, determines that the variance should not be granted. 

D. In granting a variance, the planning commission may impose such conditions or limitations as it deems reasonably necessary to serve the public purposes of this code. The variance shall not be effective if any such express condition is not fulfilled or is violated or if the activity of the applicant exceeds any express limitation in the variance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the use of any property in violation of the express conditions or limitations of any variance granted with respect to such property. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.060 Appeal.

Any applicant or any other interested person, firm, or corporation, within 15 days after the decision of the planning commission is filed with the city recorder, and appeal the same to the city council in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.152 BMC. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.070 Effect.

No building or zoning permit shall be issued in any case where a variance is required until 15 days after the decision of the planning commission is filed with the city recorder, and then only in accordance with the terms and conditions of said approval. An appeal from the action of the commission shall automatically stay the issuance of the building or other permit until such appeal has been completed and the council has acted thereon. In the event the council acts to grant said variance, the building or zoning permit may be issued immediately thereafter, in accordance with such terms and conditions as may have been imposed upon said variance. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.080 Limitation on new application.

In the case where an application is denied by the planning commission, or denied by the city council on appeal from the planning commission, unless specifically stated to be without prejudice, it shall not be eligible for resubmittal for a period of one year from the date of said denial unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence is submitted or conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is warranted. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.090 Violation of conditions. 

A. The planning commission, on its own motion, may revoke any variance for noncompliance with conditions set forth in the granting of said variance after first holding a public hearing and giving notice of such hearing as provided in BMC 17.132.050 through 17.132.070. The foregoing shall not be the exclusive remedy. 

B. If an established time limit for development expires and no extension has been granted, the variance shall be considered void. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.100 Mapping.

Within 30 days after the entry of the variance order, the permit application file number shall be indicated on the officially adopted zoning map on the lot or lots affected by such variance permit. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.132.110 Variance to run with the land.

A variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the application, except as otherwise provided in this section. [Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


Chapter 17.136 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections: 

17.136.010    Purpose.

17.136.020    Planning commission authority.

17.136.030    Application.

17.136.040    Public hearings.

17.136.050    Action by the planning commission.

17.136.060    Burden of proof.

17.136.070    Final order.

17.136.080    Time limitation.

17.136.090    Appeal.

17.136.100    Effect of an appeal.

17.136.110    Violation of conditions.

17.136.120    Limitation on new applications.

17.136.130    Notification of action.

17.136.140    Minor change.

17.136.150    Use permit to run with the land.


17.136.010 Purpose.

Each zone includes two categories of use:

A. Permitted Use. Those uses that are allowed outright.

B. Conditional Use. Those uses that require a land use decision process by the appropriate governing body. It is these uses that are the subject of this chapter. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.020 Planning commission authority.

The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, deny or revoke conditional use permits subject to the provisions of this chapter. This applies to changes in use, expansion of site area, or alteration of structure or uses classified as conditional and existing prior to this code. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.030 Application.

The property owner or authorized agent may request a conditional use permit using a land use application form, which is then submitted to the planning department and reviewed by the site plan committee pursuant to BMC 17.80.030(B). After review by the site plan committee, the application will be scheduled for the next available planning commission hearing. Such application shall be accompanied by a statement and supportive evidence indicating the precise manner of conformance with each of the applicable provisions of this code together with any other data pertinent to the findings as listed in BMC 17.136.050(C) and any specific criteria applicable to the proposal as found in Chapter 17.124 BMC, Specific Standards Applying to Conditional Uses. The application shall be submitted with the appropriate filing fee. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.040 Public hearings.

Before a conditional use is permitted, the proposed conditional use shall be considered by the planning commission at a public hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.84 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 6; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.050 Action by the planning commission. 

A. A public hearing shall be held and the commission shall render its decision. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

B. The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions or deny the conditional use permit application. The decision shall be documented in a final order.

C. Findings of Fact. In order to grant any conditional use, the planning commission must find, based upon factual evidence, provided by the applicant, that:

1. The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and other features required by this code;

2. The site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways adequate in width and degree of improvement to handle the quantity and kind of vehicular traffic that would be generated by the proposed use;

3. The proposed use will have minimal adverse impact upon adjoining properties. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the proposed location of the improvements on the site, vehicular egress/ingress and internal circulation, pedestrian access, setbacks, height and bulk of buildings, walls and fences, landscaping, screening, exterior lighting and signing;

4. In areas designated as requiring preservation of historic, scenic or cultural attributes, proposed structures will be of a design complementary to the surrounding area;

5. The proposal is in compliance with the comprehensive plan.

D. Conditions of Approval. In permitting a conditional use, the planning commission may impose, in addition to regulations and standards expressly specified in this code, other conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood, or the city as a whole. These conditions may include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Increasing required lot size, yard dimensions, open spaces or buffer areas;

2. Requiring fences, walls or landscape screening and/or buffering where necessary to reduce noise, glare and maintain the property in a character in keeping with the surrounding area;

3. Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;

4. Increasing street widths, controlling the location and number of vehicular access points to the property for ingress/egress;

5. Requiring means of pedestrian/bicycle access pathways to serve the property;

6. Increasing the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required; surfacing and proper drainage of parking areas;

7. Limiting size, location and number of signs;

8. Limiting the location, coverage or height of buildings because of obstruction to view and reduction of light and air to adjacent property;

9. Limiting or prohibiting openings in sides of buildings or structures;

10. Enclosing of storage areas and limitation of outside display and/or storage of merchandise;

11. Requiring maintenance of grounds;

12. Regulating noise, vibration, odors, etc.;

13. Regulating time for certain activities;

14. Establishing a time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;

15. Requiring a bond for removal of such use within a specified period of time;

16. Increasing the size, type or capacity of any or all utility services, facilities or appurtenances;

17. Requiring any future enlargement or alteration of the use to be reviewed by the planning commission and new conditions imposed;

18. Requiring an applicant to record a deferred improvement agreement (DIA) to provide for sharing the cost of future development of streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water, sanitary sewers, storm sewers or other necessary and essential public improvements to city standards. If the proposed use is no more intense a use than what exists presently, it is not lawful for the city to require improvements to the above-listed infrastructure;

19. Requiring site plan committee review and approval to accomplish the purposes and objectives of this code; and

20. Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this section. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.060 Burden of proof.

In any land use decision, the burden of producing substantial evidence to demonstrate compliance with the applicable criteria is upon the applicant. If adequate evidence is not provided, the application must be denied. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.070 Final order.

If the planning commission approves the conditional use permit, it shall be documented in a final order. The approval and appeal period shall begin from the postmarked date on the mailing of the final order to the applicant and participants. Denial of a conditional use permit shall also be documented in a final order. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.080 Time limitation.

A conditional use permit shall become void after two years following approval, or after such greater time as may be specified as a condition of approval, unless within that time the required building construction, alteration or enlargement has been commenced and diligently pursued or, if no such construction, alteration or enlargement is required, unless the permitted activity is being regularly conducted on the premises. The city may extend the period of time allowed to establish the conditional use for an additional period of one year, for good cause, if such extension request is submitted prior to expiration and subject to the requirements of this code. [Ord 12-O-693 § 2; Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.090 Appeal.

The applicant or any participant in the hearings for an application may, within 15 days after the decision (postmarked date on mailing of final order) of the planning commission, appeal the same to the city council in the form prescribed by the city. The appeal procedure shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.152 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.100 Effect of an appeal.

No permit shall be issued until 15 days after the decision of the planning commission (postmarked date on mailing of final order). An appeal of a planning commission decision shall automatically prevent (stay) the issuance of a permit until all opportunities for appeal have been exhausted. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.110 Violation of conditions.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any condition imposed by a conditional use permit. The planning commission may revoke any conditional use permit for noncompliance with conditions set forth in the granting of said permit after first holding a public hearing and giving notice of such hearing as provided in Chapter 17.84 BMC. The foregoing shall not be the exclusive remedy for a violation of conditions of approval. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 6; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.120 Limitation on new applications.

When an application is denied by the planning commission, or denied by the city council on appeal from the planning commission, it shall not be eligible for resubmittal for a period of one year from the date of the denial. If, in the opinion of the planning director, new evidence is submitted or conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is warranted, an application may be considered in less than one year from the first hearing. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.130 Notification of action.

The planning department shall mail a notice of the decision and/or copy of the final order to the applicant and participating parties within five days following the planning commission’s decision. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.136.140 Minor change.

A minor change to the approved conditional use permit may be allowed through the procedure set forth in BMC 17.116.090. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.J § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.136.150.] 


17.136.150 Use permit to run with the land.

A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application, unless revoked by the planning commission for violation of the conditions of approval. [Ord. 09-O-641 § 2; Ord. 92-O-446.J § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.136.160.]


Chapter 17.140 LEGISLATIVE TEXT AMENDMENTS AND QUASI-JUDICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP AND/OR ZONE CHANGES

Sections: 

17.140.010    Procedure.

17.140.020    Proposed amendments.

17.140.030    Application for a citizen-initiated text amendment.

17.140.040    Application for a comprehensive plan map and/or zone change.

17.140.050    Qualified comprehensive plan map and/or zone change.

17.140.060    Action by the planning commission.

17.140.070    Action by the city council.


17.140.010 Procedure.

The Brookings comprehensive plan and land development code may be amended by adopting revisions to reflect changes in the law, clarify language or procedures, correct mistakes, or to reflect changing community conditions. Amendments to the text follow legislative procedures.

This chapter also provides standards and procedures for quasi-judicial amendments to consider comprehensive plan map and/or zone changes for specific properties. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.140.020 Proposed amendments.

A. An amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or land development code may be proposed as a legislative hearing by the city council, planning commission, planning director, or an individual.

B. A comprehensive plan map and/or zone change for specific properties may be initiated as a quasi-judicial hearing by a property owner or the city. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.140.030 Application for a citizen-initiated text amendment.

A text amendment proposed by a citizen will first be presented to the planning commission in the form of a written request. 

A. If the planning commission believes there is merit to the request, the amendment will be considered city-initiated and no fee will be charged. 

B. The planning commission will determine whether a workshop is needed prior to the hearing, depending on complexity of the matter. 

C. Staff will prepare draft language for the amendment and this will be reviewed by the land development code (LDC) committee. 

D. After review by the LDC committee, a workshop or hearing before the planning commission will be scheduled.

E. If the planning commission decides the city should not undertake the proposed text amendment, the citizen may take the request to the city council for consideration during the public comment portion of the council agenda. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2.] 


17.140.040 Application for a comprehensive plan map and/or zone change. 

The property owner, authorized agent, or the city may make application for a zone change amendment by filing an application with the planning department for review by the site plan committee pursuant to Chapter 17.80 BMC. After the site plan committee determines the application is complete, a quasi-judicial hearing before the planning commission will be scheduled. Such application shall be accompanied by the following information: 

A. A completed land use permit application form.

B. A description of the subject property, the requested zoning designation, and the proposed uses. 

C. Compatibility of the proposed zoning designation with the surrounding land uses.

D. Impacts on city services and streets serving the area.

E. Statement and supportive evidence indicating the manner in which the proposed zone change amendment is in conformance with the comprehensive plan for the city of Brookings, applicable provisions of this code, and any applicable statewide planning goals. 

F. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 6; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.140.030.]


17.140.050 Qualified comprehensive plan map and/or zone change.

A. When considering a comprehensive plan map and/or zone change, the planning commission and city council may qualify, or condition, a zone change such that:

1. The property may not be utilized for all the uses ordinarily permitted in a particular zone; or

2. The development of the site must conform to certain specified standards; or

3. Any combination of the above.

B. A qualified zone change shall be dependent on findings of fact including but not limited to the following:

1. Such limitations are deemed necessary to protect the best interests and ensure compatibility with the surrounding property or neighborhood; or 

2. Such limitations are deemed necessary to protect public safety and the city’s best interests and/or infrastructure; or

3. Such limitations are deemed necessary to prevent or mitigate potential adverse environmental effects. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2.]


17.140.060 Action by the planning commission. 

A. Upon filing of said application for an amendment as described in BMC 17.140.030 or 17.140.040, the matter shall be referred to the planning commission and a public hearing shall be held on the matter for which notice shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.84 BMC. 

B. In the case of a text amendment, the planning commission shall review the draft language and make any revisions that are considered necessary. The planning commission shall recommend approval, qualified approval, or denial to the city council. 

C. In the case of a comprehensive plan/zone change amendment, the planning commission shall recommend the approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application to the city council. 

D. In the case of a simple zone change amendment (changing from one residential zone to another residential zone, or from one commercial zone to another commercial zone), the planning commission is the decision-making body and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 

E. If the proposed zone change is for property containing a mobile home park, notice shall also be provided to tenants of such mobile home park. The commission may recommend an alternate zoning designation for the area under consideration. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 7; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.140.040.] 


17.140.070 Action by the city council. 

A. Following the planning commission hearing and recommendation for a comprehensive plan/zone change, a hearing before city council shall be scheduled. Notice of said public hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.84 BMC. 

B. In the case of a text amendment, the council shall enact an ordinance approving or denying the amendment. 

C. In the case of a zone change amendment, the council shall enact an ordinance to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.

D. The council may opt to remand the proposal to the planning commission for further review. A council remand shall communicate specific concerns and issues for the planning commission’s consideration. The commission shall reconsider the proposal at their next regularly scheduled meeting and report their findings and recommendations at the next regular meeting of the city council. 

E. To adopt an ordinance for a zone change, findings must be made, and adopted as a part of said ordinance, that are adequate to support the amendment proposal. The findings must be factual and must be supported by substantial evidence submitted into the record. It must be found that the amendment complies with and conforms to the comprehensive plan goals, policies, generalized land use map, and any applicable statewide planning goals. [Ord. 09-O-631 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 7; Ord. 94-O-446.W § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.140.050.] 


Chapter 17.144 ANNEXATIONS

Sections: 

17.144.010    Generally.

17.144.020    Application procedures.

17.144.030    Annexation impact analysis.

17.144.040    Zoning of annexed property.

17.144.050    Hearing process.


17.144.010 Generally.

A proposal to annex territory to the city of Brookings shall be processed in accordance with the requirements contained herein; provided, that the proposal complies with the provisions of ORS 222.111 to 222.180 and ORS 222.840 to 222.915. [Ord. 10-O-658 § 2; Ord. 05-O-446.UU § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.144.020 Application procedures.

An application for annexation may be filed with the city on a form prescribed by the city, accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council. Said application shall contain the following information:

A. Vicinity map identifying the proposed area of annexation and existing city limits.

B. Assessor’s parcel maps of the proposed annexation area, which maps shall indicate and identify those parcels for which consents to annex have been signed by either electors and/or owners depending on which annexation process is used under the provisions of the ORS.

C. Consent to annex forms completed and signed by all property owners within the territory proposed to be annexed.

D. Legal metes and bounds, or lot and block description of the territory proposed to be annexed.

E. Specific information on each parcel within the territory proposed to be annexed as follows:

1. Current assessed valuation as shown on the Curry County assessor’s tax rolls.

2. Acreage.

3. Map and tax lot number.

4. Owners of record and/or registered electors residing on the premises of the subject parcel.

F. Addresses of all dwelling units and businesses within the territory proposed to be annexed.

G. Significant natural features within the area proposed for annexation including, but not limited to, streams, wetlands, slopes, and areas of geological significance.

H. Adjoining land uses.

I. Proposed land uses/development plan of the territory proposed to be annexed.

J. Written findings of fact prepared by the petitioner(s) or petitioner(s) representatives which address the following:

1. Existing land uses within the territory proposed to be annexed.

2. Existing zoning and comprehensive plan designations within the territory.

3. Existing improvements, such as water system, streets, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage.

4. Proposed or existing local improvement districts within the territory proposed to be annexed.

5. Urban services needed and necessary to service the territory proposed to be annexed, including the availability of the same relative to capacity, condition and cost of extension and/or improvement to urban standards and an estimated timeline for any required improvements. City staff will provide written information regarding existing infrastructure and any improvements that would be necessary to serve the territory proposed to be annexed, as well as any other properties within the urban growth area that would also be served by these improvements in the future. 

6. Compliance with all applicable goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.

7. Compliance with all of the items listed in BMC 17.144.030.

8. The burden of providing the findings is the responsibility of the applicant. [Ord. 10-O-672 § 1; Ord. 10-O-658 § 2; Ord. 05-O-446.UU § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.144.030 Annexation impact analysis.

The following criteria shall apply to all annexation requests:

A. The proposed use for the site complies with the Brookings comprehensive plan and with the designation on the Brookings comprehensive plan map. If a redesignation of the plan map is requested concurrent with annexation, the uses allowed under the proposed designation must comply with the Brookings comprehensive plan.

B. An adequate level of urban services and infrastructure to accommodate anticipated future development either is available, or can reasonably be made available. An adequate level of urban services shall be defined as: municipal sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water service meeting the requirements enumerated in the Brookings public facilities plan and the land development code for provision of these services. The adequacy of these services shall be considered in relation to annexation proposals. If any substandard infrastructure exists within the boundaries of the area proposed for annexation, the city may deny an annexation application.

C. Documentation of impacts on existing streets within the annexation area and adjacent transportation facilities by future development of the area. The adequacy of the transportation facilities shall be considered in relation to annexation proposals.

D. As development occurs within the annexed area new streets shall be constructed to the standards of the Brookings transportation system plan and land development code. While it is preferred that public streets located within the city limits be a part of the city-maintained street system, streets within the annexed area shall remain in the county’s jurisdiction until such time as they are improved to the city street standards. If the proposed annexation includes the transfer of county maintained roads to the city maintained street system, said streets located within the annexation area shall be improved to city standards prior to annexation approval, or the formation of a local improvement district to fund said street improvements shall accompany the annexation application.

E. Documentation of the availability and adequacy to serve the proposed annexation with police, fire, parks, and school facilities and services.

F. Improvements for needed infrastructure shall be secured by a funding mechanism that will place the economic burden on the territory proposed for annexation and not on the city of Brookings. [Ord. 10-O-658 § 2; Ord. 05-O-446.UU § 2; Ord. 91-O-446.G § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.144.040.] 


17.144.040 Zoning of annexed property. 

A request for a city zoning designation for the territory proposed to be annexed shall be considered at the time of the annexation proposal; however, the city council will ultimately determine the zoning to be applied. The zoning designation of annexed territory shall be specified in the annexation ordinance and shall become effective upon acceptance of the annexation by the Secretary of State. [Ord. 10-O-658 § 2; Ord. 05-O-446.UU § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.144.050.] 


17.144.050 Hearing process.

A. The planning commission will conduct a public hearing to consider the application request. The commission will review the materials submitted and analyze how the application relates to the criteria stipulated in BMC 17.144.030. A recommendation from the planning commission will be forwarded to the city council.

B. The city council will consider the planning commission’s recommendation and whether the application meets the appropriate criteria. The council will make a decision to approve or deny the requested annexation. [Ord. 10-O-658 § 2.]


Chapter 17.148 VACATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-O-711)


Chapter 17.152 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL

Sections: 

17.152.010    Generally.

17.152.020    Public hearings.

17.152.030    Appeal procedure.

17.152.040    Review by city council.


17.152.010 Generally.

Any applicant or any other participant in a land use hearing may, within 15 days, appeal a decision of the planning commission to the city council. The appeal period begins from the postmark date on the mailing of the final order for the specific hearing. The appeal shall be made on forms provided by the planning department (available at office or on city webpage) and submitted to that department together with the appropriate fee. The appeal fee shall be paid by the appellant. The written request appealing the decision of the planning commission shall state specific reasons for the appeal based upon pertinent, applicable sections of this code. Upon receipt of the written request, staff shall prepare the required legal notice and council agenda report for the next available council meeting. [Ord. 09-O-645 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.152.020 Public hearings.

Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.84 BMC. A decision concerning the appeal shall be given within 120 days of the date the original application was deemed complete unless such time limitations are extended with the consent of the applicant or as otherwise provided by Oregon Revised Statutes. [Ord. 09-O-645 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 8; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.152.030 Appeal procedure.

The appeal is a de novo hearing (new hearing) and evidence or testimony not previously presented to the planning commission will be allowed. The city council shall, at the time of the public hearing, hear the applicant, if any, the appellant or their representative, a representative of the planning commission, if they chose to participate, any agency representative, and the public. If the council decides to modify or reverse the final order of the planning commission, the council may refer such matter back to the planning commission for a report and recommendation prior to the council taking final action. The final decision of the city council shall be a written final order which sets out the extent and conditions of the decision. The city council may uphold, modify or reverse the planning commission’s decision. [Ord. 09-O-645 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.152.040 Review by city council.

Within 15 days following the postmark date on the mailing of the final order of the planning commission decision, the city council may, on its own motion, initiate proceedings to review the action. The city council shall give notice of the time and place when the decision of the planning commission will be reviewed. Notice of hearing will be given in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.84 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-645 § 2; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 8; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.]


Chapter 17.156 APPEAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections: 

17.156.010    Generally.

17.156.020    Appeal procedure.

17.156.030    Public hearing.


17.156.010 Generally.

In the event of an ambiguity in this title affecting enforcement, the planning commission shall have the power to hear and decide appeals from administrative interpretations and to declare the meaning and intent, and interpret the provisions of this code. In thus resolving ambiguities, being considered in this appeal, the planning commission shall so interpret this code as to carry out BMC 17.01.020 and the expressed purpose of the zoning district involved. [Ord. 09-O-646 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.156.020 Appeal procedure.

Any interested person may, within 15 days from the postmark date on the mailing of the decision of the site plan committee or administrative staff, file an appeal with the planning department on forms provided by that department (available at office or on city webpage) together with the appropriate fee. The written request appealing the decision shall state specific reasons for the appeal based upon pertinent, applicable sections of this code. Staff shall prepare the required legal notice and staff report for the next available planning commission meeting. [Ord. 09-O-646 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.156.030 Public hearing.

The planning commission shall, at the time of the public hearing, hear the appellant or their representative, city staff, any agency representative, and the public. The decision of the planning commission shall be documented in a written final order. Any participant in the hearing may, within 15 days after the postmark date on the mailing of the final order, appeal the decision to the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.152 BMC. [Ord. 09-O-646 § 2.]


Chapter 17.160 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections: 

17.160.010    Enforcement.

17.160.020    Violations.

17.160.030    Penalties for violations.


17.160.010 Enforcement.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-584 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.160.020 Violations.

Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this code and any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to provisions of this code shall be and the same is hereby declared a violation and a public nuisance. These public nuisances may be abated and removed pursuant to BMC 8.15.090, General abatement procedure. It is provided, however, nothing in this section requires the city to exhaust these administrative remedies prior to seeking equitable relief or damages in circuit court. [Ord. 07-O-584 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.160.030 Penalties for violations.

Pursuant to Chapter 1.05 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-584 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.164 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections: 

17.164.010    Purpose.

17.164.020    Definitions.

17.164.030    Application.

17.164.040    Siting requirements.

17.164.050    Abandoned towers.


17.164.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to provide criteria to regulate the siting and operation of wireless telecommunication facilities within the city of Brookings, that meet the provisions of federal law and do not unreasonably discriminate among wireless telecommunication providers. [Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.164.020 Definitions.

A. “Antenna” means a device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish, for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radiation. An antenna is typically mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast or building.

B. “Collocation” means the placement of two or more antenna systems or platforms by separate FCC license holders (“providers”) on a structure such as a tower, building, water tank or utility pole. 

C. “Stealth characteristics” means the use of camouflage techniques to disguise or minimize the visual impact of a tower or antennas (i.e., located in conjunction with a church, steeple, stadium lighting, made to look like a tree or flagpole, etc.)

D. “Wireless telecommunication” means the transmission, via radio frequency electromagnetic waves, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 

E. “Wireless telecommunication facility” means an unmanned facility for the transmission and reception of radio frequency (RF) signals; usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment, a support structure (tower), antennas or other, transmission and reception devices. 

F. “Wireless telecommunication provider” means a person or company in the business of offering telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

G. “Wireless telecommunication tower” means a structure more than 10 feet tall, built primarily to support one or more telecommunication antennas. [Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.164.030 Application.

An application for a wireless telecommunication tower shall be made and processed pursuant to Chapter 17.136 BMC, Conditional Use Permits, except when in the public open space zone as allowed in Chapter 17.40 BMC, Public Open Space (P/OS) District. [Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.164.040 Siting requirements. 

A. Height. The maximum tower height shall not exceed 100 feet from the finished grade at the base of the tower. 

B. Front, Side and Rear Yard Setbacks. Front and yard setbacks shall be determined by the underlying zone in which the tower is to be placed. 

C. Construction. All new wireless telecommunication towers shall be of a lattice or monopole structure. Where possible new towers will be located in such a manner that they blend in with the background around them, using stealth characteristics. If the new wireless telecommunication facility is to be collocated on an existing tower, the design of any antenna(s), accessory structures or equipment shall, to the extent possible, use materials colors and textures that will match the existing tower structure to which the equipment of the collocating provider is being attached. 

D. Collocation. New towers shall be constructed so as to allow at least two or more users to collocate on the facility. If collocation is not possible, all applications shall include findings which demonstrate why it is not possible. 

E. Fencing and Security. For security purposes, towers and accessory facilities shall be enclosed by a minimum eight-foot sight-obscuring fence. 

F. Lighting. No lighting shall be permitted on a tower except as required by the FAA. 

G. Advertising/Signs. No advertising or signs of any type are to be placed on the tower at any time except those required or necessary for safety and warnings. 

H. Landscaping. All sites shall be landscaped pursuant to the requirements of the underlying zone. Towers located in the P/OS (public open space) and I-P (industrial-park) zones will also include sight-obscuring landscaping around the security fence. The planning commission may require additional landscaping as a condition of approval. [Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


17.164.050 Abandoned towers.

A. Wireless telecommunication towers that do not have functioning antennas for a period of six months shall be considered to be abandoned and shall be removed by the operator within 60 days thereafter.

B. Upon written application, prior to the expiration of the six-month period, the planning commission may, in writing, grant a six-month time extension for reuse of the facility. Additional extensions beyond the first six-month extension may be granted by the planning commission subject to any conditions required to bring the project or facility into compliance with current regulation(s) and make it compatible with surrounding development. [Ord. 99-O-446.GG § 1; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1.] 


Chapter 17.168 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR UTILITIES*

Sections: 

17.168.010    General on-site development standards and requirements.

17.168.020    Off-site development standards and requirements.

17.168.030    Easements.

17.168.040    Underground utilities.

17.168.050    Service extension.

17.168.060    Improvement plans.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 89-O-454, 91-O-446.C and 94-O-446.S.


17.168.010 General on-site development standards and requirements.

“On-site” means utilities on the subject property. Unless otherwise provided by this code, all improvements shall be at the sole cost and expense of the developer, who shall provide, install or cause to be installed, including, but not limited to, the following:

A. Water mains and fire hydrants, sanitary sewer mains, storm drain mains and all associated equipment and easements required by the city.

B. Electrical, communication, and cable TV conduits or raceways and transformer bases.

C. Street light bases and stanchions.

D. Grading and erosion control and drainage plans pursuant to Chapter 17.100 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-596; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 16.05.010.]


17.168.020 Off-site development standards and requirements.

“Off-site” means city utilities not on the subject property. 

A. New single-family or duplex development on an existing lot may not be required to upgrade existing city water, sanitary sewer, or storm drain mains, unless deemed necessary by the site plan committee. The site plan committee will determine if up-sizing of utility infrastructure is needed to accommodate the proposed development and what funding mechanisms would be employed.

B. New multifamily or commercial development will be considered on a case-by-case basis. The site plan committee will determine if up-sizing of utility infrastructure is needed to accommodate the proposed development and what funding mechanisms would be employed. If the site plan committee allows deferment of the up-sizing, the deferred improvement agreement (DIA) process will be as described in BMC 17.170.070. 

C. Land divisions will be handled as stated in subsection (B) of this section.

D. Conditional use permits will be dealt with as stated in subsection (B) of this section only if the approval of the application will result in more intense use of the subject property. 

E. The site plan committee’s decision regarding required improvements to existing city infrastructure may be appealed to the planning commission.

F. If the original developer is required to install off-site improvements, future reimbursement may be applicable. The public works document, “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications,” contains provisions for the reimbursement process. [Ord. 07-O-596.]


17.168.030 Easements.

A. Public Utility Easements (PUE). All development including partitions, subdivisions, and planned communities shall provide a continuous five-foot PUE adjacent to the right-of-way on street frontages to be utilized for water-related equipment (meters, valves, etc.) and other utilities (electrical pedestals, street lights, telephone and other facilities).

B. Unless determined as unnecessary by the city, an easement dedicated to the city shall be placed over all water and sanitary sewer mains and storm drain facilities, including natural watercourses used for engineered drainage, located across private property or common areas. The width of the required easement will be determined at the time of review and approval of construction plans for the facility. [Ord. 07-O-596; Ord. 94-O-446.U § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 16.05.030.]


17.168.040 Underground utilities.

Primary utility lines, including, but not limited to, electricity, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be required to be placed underground, whenever possible. Secondary utility lines must be undergrounded. All such service and facilities shall be located in a public utility easement or right-of-way with a junction box. The developer shall confer with each utility company to determine the necessary conduits and equipment, their location and installation requirements. All costs of such equipment and installation shall be at the developer’s cost or as agreed to between the developer and the utility provider. [Ord. 07-O-596; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.168.120.]


17.168.050 Service extension.

A. Main Extension. Where no city utility mains presently exist, a condition of development permit approval will be provision of basic urban services (water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage and streets) along the full length of all portions of the subject property fronting a public right-of-way. Installation of services shall be according to the provisions of the city’s current edition of the Infrastructure Development Guidelines. 

B. Lateral Extension. Laterals must be stubbed out to the property lines of any proposed new lots or parcels when mains are extended or street improvements are required and installed. The applicant may request an exemption from this requirement by providing site plan committee with documentation of extraordinary circumstances. [Ord. 14-O-741 § 1; Ord. 07-O-596; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.168.130.]


17.168.060 Improvement plans.

The developer shall cause plans and specifications for all public improvements to be prepared by an engineer registered in the state of Oregon. A security deposit in the amount established by the city ordinance shall be collected by the city to cover the cost of plan review and inspections. [Ord. 07-O-596; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.168.170.]


Chapter 17.170 STREET STANDARDS

Sections:

17.170.010    Purpose.

17.170.020    Definitions.

17.170.030    General development standards and requirements.

17.170.040    Secured improvement agreement.

17.170.050    Street construction standards.

17.170.060    Street standards.

17.170.070    Off-site street improvements, deferred.

17.170.080    Street names and signs.

17.170.090    Traffic impact statement or analysis.

17.170.100    Access management.

17.170.110    Bicycle and pedestrian development standards.

17.170.120    Residential driveway approaches.


17.170.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a multi-modal circulation system within the city that preserves the flow of motorized traffic in terms of safety, capacity, functional classification, and level of service while at the same time providing and encouraging a safe and efficient bicycle and pedestrian system throughout the city. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply for the purpose of this chapter. Also see definitions in Chapter 17.08 BMC.

“Access” means a way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, or motor vehicular entrance or exit to a property.

“Access classification” means a ranking system for roadways used to determine the appropriate degree of access management. Factors considered include functional classification, the appropriate local government’s adopted plan for the roadway, subdivision of abutting properties, and existing level of access control.

“Access management” means the process of providing and managing access to land development while preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and speed.

“Bicycle facilities” is a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all bikeways. Wherever bicycle facilities are provided, proper signage must be installed, including the use of “sharrows,” if appropriate.

“Bikeway” means any road, path, or way that is in some manner specifically open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are shared with other transportation modes. The five types of bikeways are:

1. “Multi-use path” means a paved 10- to 12-foot-wide way that is physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic; typically shared with pedestrians, skaters, and other nonmotorized users.

2. “Bike lane” means a four- to six-foot-wide portion of the roadway that has been designated by permanent striping and pavement markings for the exclusive use of bicycles.

3. “Shoulder bikeway” means the paved shoulder of a roadway that is four feet or wider; typically shared with pedestrians in rural areas.

4. “Shared roadway” means a travel lane that is shared by bicyclists and motor vehicles. Designating a street as a “bicycle boulevard” or “sharrow” will require appropriate signage and modifications. These should only be considered on residential, low traffic volume, interconnected streets.

5. “Multi-use trail” means an unpaved path that accommodates all-terrain bicycles; typically shared with pedestrians.

“Corner clearance” means the distance from an intersection of a public or private road to the nearest driveway or street measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting road to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection along the traveled way.

“Cross access” means a commercial or industrial service drive providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system.

“Development driven improvement” means improvements to be installed when new development increases the need and demand for roadway, bicycle, or pedestrian facilities.

“Frontage road” means a public or private drive which generally parallels a public street between the right-of-way and the front building setback line. The frontage road provides access to private properties while separating them from the arterial street.

“Functional area (intersection)” means that area beyond the physical intersection of two roads that comprises decision and maneuver distance, plus any required vehicle storage length.

“Functional classification” means a system used to group public roadways into classes according to their purpose in moving vehicles and providing access.

“Joint access (or shared access)” means a driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the public street system.

“Lot” means a parcel, tract, or area of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument, which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title, has frontage upon a public or private street, and complies with the dimensional requirements of this code.

“Lot, corner” means any lot having at least two contiguous sides abutting upon one or more streets; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.

“Lot depth” means the average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line.

“Lot frontage” means that portion of a lot extending along a street right-of-way line.

“Multi-modal” means consideration of various modes of transportation (walking, cycling, automobile, public transit, air, and water systems).

“Nonconforming access features” means features of the property access that existed prior to the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter adopting and do not conform to the requirements of this chapter.

“Off-site improvements” means street facilities not on the subject property.

“On-site improvements” means street facilities installed on the subject property.

“Pedestrian facilities” is a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage walking, including sidewalks, accessways, crosswalks, ramps, paths, and trails.

“Plat” means an exact and detailed map of the subdivision of land.

“Private road” means a local access road that is built to city standards and that the city has not officially accepted for purposes of jurisdiction, or an existing local access road that was not constructed to city standards and was never intended to be dedicated to the public.

“Public road” means a road over which the public has a right of use that is a matter of public record.

“Reasonable access” means the minimum number of access points, direct or indirect, necessary to provide safe access to and from the roadway.

“Right-of-way” means land reserved, used, or to be used for a highway, street, alley, walkway, drainage facility, or other public purpose.

“Sharrows” means shared lane markings with wayfinding signage that reminds road users that people biking can occupy the full travel lane.

“Significant change in trip generation” means a change in the use of the property, including land, structures or facilities, or an expansion of the size of the structures or facilities causing an increase in the trip generation of the property exceeding: (1) local – 10 percent more trip generation (either peak or daily) and 100 vehicles per day more than the existing use for all roads under local jurisdiction; or (2) state – 25 percent more trip generation (peak volume) and 100 vehicles per day more than the existing use for all roads under state jurisdiction.

“Stub-out (street stub)” means a portion of a street or cross access drive used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future.

“Through connector” means a short spur that provides through connectivity for bicycle circulation between adjoining streets, between abutting dead-end roads, through a multiple-family dwelling cluster, or through a park.

“Walkway” means a hard-surfaced area intended and suitable for pedestrians, including sidewalks and the surfaced portions of accessways. [Ord. 17-O-770 § 2 (Att. C); Ord. 11-O-675 § 2; Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.030 General development standards and requirements.

A. On-site improvements shall be provided, paid for and installed, or caused to be installed by the developer, including by way of example and not by way of limitation curbs and gutters, sidewalks and pedestrian walkways, street base course and wearing course materials, bridges, street signs, and traffic control devices.

B. Off-site improvement requirements are found in BMC 17.170.060.

C. If the original developer is required to construct off-site improvements, future reimbursement may be applicable. The public works document, “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications,” contains provisions for the reimbursement process. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.040 Secured improvement agreement. 

The developer shall enter into a secured improvement agreement pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.80.080, if requesting postponement for installation of public improvements. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.050 Street construction standards.

The improvement plans shall comply with the standards and criteria set forth herein and with the specifications contained in the current public works document, “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications.” Proposed construction of improvements not covered by the above document shall be reviewed for approval by the city. The materials and workmanship of said improvements shall be warranted as outlined in BMC 17.80.090. Other improvements may be required pursuant to Chapter 17.168 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.060 Street standards.

A. All parcels of land subject to the issuance of a development permit shall be provided access to a public or private street as follows:

1. Street improvements are required along the street frontage of all newly created lots and of new development on an existing vacant lot. Improvements shall be to the standards as shown in Table 17.170.060 or as in an approved neighborhood circulation plan, planned unit development or master plan. Deferment of street improvements may be allowed when authorized by the site plan committee as described in BMC 17.170.070. Some development is exempt from street improvements as described in BMC 17.04.070.

2. Newly created lots must have access from the street on which they front.

3. Existing residential, commercial or industrial lots must take access from the street on which they front. Easement access is acceptable if no street frontage exists or topography or other circumstance, not in applicant’s control, prohibits access from the fronting street.

B. Street classification and location shall conform to the transportation systems plan, or to an adopted neighborhood circulation plan. Where street classification or location is not shown in the transportation systems plan, the arrangement of public streets shall provide for connectivity and alignment with existing streets in the surrounding area. 

C. Standard Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Width. Unless otherwise indicated in an adopted neighborhood circulation plan, planned unit development, or authorized by the planning commission as stated in subsection (C)(1) of this section, the street right-of-way and roadway widths shall not be less than the standard shown in Table 17.170.060. Additional width on hillside streets may be required in curves. The city engineer will determine when such additional width is required.

Table 17.170.060 Standard Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Width for New Streets –  Guidance for Existing Streets 

	Type of Street**	Minimum ROW (Feet)	Minimum Road Surface Width (Feet)	Pedestrian Improvements

	State Highway Arterial1	84	70	5 – 12 feet, both sides

	Residential Collector	50	36	10-foot multi-use path (in lieu of bike lanes and sidewalk)

	Residential Local***	42	28	5 feet, both sides

	Residential (Local)***

Maximum of 12 dwelling units taking access6	38	24	5 feet, both sides

	Residential (Local)***

Maximum of 8 dwelling units taking access and on-street parking available within 400 feet on this street2	29	20	5 feet, one side

	Downtown Core Area1 

(See Map 17.92.030-1)	50	36	5 – 8 feet, both sides

	Residential One-Way Street2	34	20	5 feet, both sides

	Half Street2, 5	1/2 of accepted standard	1/2 of accepted standard	5 feet, one side 

	Access Road Turn-Around 	See public works document “General Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications”	To be determined based on type of turn-around

	Commercial/Industrial1	58	44	5 – 8 feet, both sides

	Commercial One-Way Street 	50	36	5 – 8 feet, both sides

	Hillside Collector Street2, 3, 4, 9	27	20	4-foot paved shoulder, one side

	Hillside Local Street2, 3, 4, 9

Maximum of 12 dwelling units taking access	23	20	None

	Hillside One-Way Street2, 3, 4, 7, 9	23	16	4-foot paved shoulder, one side

	Alley	20	20	None

	The following standard is the minimum standard for existing streets. This standard can only be used when the street is serving a limited area and approved by the city council.

	Must be approved by the city council in a local improvement district process2, 8	30	16	Proposal by applicants

** If bike lanes are proposed, an additional 10 feet of right-of-way will be needed.

*** See layout guidelines in “Neighborhood Street Design Guidelines” document. Low impact development techniques such as landscaped buffers, vegetated swales, parking pavers, etc., are encouraged.

1Sidewalks must be the maximum possible when adequate right-of-way is available and topography allows.

2No parking on either side on pavement.

3Requires documentation that topographical constraints warrant use of hillside streets. Site plan committee approval required. 

4Alternative engineered design standards may be considered and right-of-way width may vary depending on topography.

5Only used when easement for second half width is secured on adjacent property. Must be approved by planning commission.

6Parking on one side only. 

7Paved shoulder must be constructed to meet paved roadway standards.

8Parking facilities to be proposed by applicant.

9Curbs may be required, depending on city engineer’s recommendation.

1. The planning commission may accept a narrower right-of-way width and/or alternate construction standard than those set forth in Table 17.170.060 where it can be shown by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the commission and to the fire chief having jurisdiction, that the topography or the small number of lots served and the probable future traffic development are such that the proposal is justified.

2. Slope Easements. The planning commission may require a perpetual, unobstructed easement adjacent to a public right-of-way where the slope of the land is such that earth movements might damage a public right-of-way. Within this easement area, the natural vegetative cover shall not be disturbed.

3. In areas where a neighborhood circulation plan has been adopted, the right-of-way and roadway width can be constructed to the standards of Table 17.170.060 or at the standards of the adopted neighborhood circulation plan. Once a standard has been determined for any street segment, the remaining portion of the segment will be constructed at that standard at the discretion of the planning commission.

The existing collector streets listed below are not physically able to meet adopted collector standards as stated in Table 17.170.060. Any future improvements to these streets must meet the following standards. These streets are in the county’s jurisdiction as of the date of this revision. When the existing street pavement is equivalent to the city’s construction standards, the city will accept jurisdiction.

	Specific Standards for Certain Streets	Right-of-Way (feet) 	Minimum Road Surface Width (feet)	Sidewalk Improvements

	Old County Rd.1, 2	As needed	 20 ft. and 4 ft. paved shoulder one side adjacent to the north-bound travel lane	None

	Parkview Dr.1, 2	As needed	20 ft.	Sidewalk on east side only

	North Bank Chetco River Rd.2	As needed	Future improvements to match existing pavement	None

1.    When applicant’s engineer demonstrates there are constraints that make this standard impracticable, the four-foot paved shoulder or multi-use path may be eliminated. The city must review and agree with the analysis prior to planning commission review. 

2.    Parking prohibited on paved shoulder.

D. Bikeways. See BMC 17.170.020, Definitions, for descriptions of various bikeways. These provisions require consideration of bicycle circulation while providing for flexibility in street design. The city of Brookings encourages this mode of transportation.

1. Bicycle circulation must be considered on all new streets. Depending on street standard employed, a street must be designated as a shared roadway, or other type of bikeway as described in BMC 17.170.020.

2. Where sidewalks are required by street design standards, one 10-foot shared bicycle/ pedestrian pathway may be substituted for bike lanes and sidewalk on one side. If the street standard requires sidewalks on both sides, the 10-foot shared pathway on one side does not eliminate the required sidewalk on the opposite side, unless the planning commission eliminates that requirement.

E. Low Impact Designs. Use of low impact designs including permeable pavement and storm drainage system utilizing engineered bio-swales, or other techniques/best management practices reviewed and approved by the city, are encouraged and may be required in some areas. Additional right-of-way may be needed to accommodate the designs. A refund equal to a percentage of the storm drain component of the system development charge may be given by implementing these low impact techniques. See examples in the document titled “Portland Stormwater Manual.”

F. All development proposals, plan amendments or zone changes shall be in conformance with the adopted transportation systems plan. 

G. Frontage Roads. When any parcels front on an arterial street, the planning commission may require the developer to dedicate and improve a frontage road at the front of the parcel to serve the resulting lot(s).

H. Planting Strips. When a lot borders an arterial street, the planning commission may require the developer to dedicate and improve a planting strip adjacent to said highway or arterial street.

I. Alleys. When any lots are proposed for commercial or industrial usage, alleys at least 20 feet in width may be required at the rear thereof with adequate ingress and egress for truck traffic unless alternative commitments for off-street service truck facilities without alleys are approved by the planning commission.

J. Street Alignment. As far as practical, streets other than minor streets shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuation of the centerline thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in “T” intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the centerlines of streets having approximately the same direction and otherwise shall not be less than 125 feet. In areas with an adopted neighborhood circulation plan, alignment shall conform to the adopted plan.

K. Future Extension of Streets. When necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future division or development of adjoining land, a public street shall be extended to the boundary of the development and the resulting dead-end street may be approved without a permanent turn-around provided a temporary turn-around is constructed in a manner approved by the city fire chief.

L. Street Intersection Angles. All streets within or abutting a development shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as is practicable in each specific case unless otherwise necessitated by topographical conditions or other pre-existing conditions and approved by the city.

M. Cul-de-Sacs. A cul-de-sac shall be as short as possible. Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of 400 feet, although where unusual circumstances exist the planning commission may authorize a longer street. A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a turn-around as specified in Table 17.170.060, and a minimum corner radius of 20 feet is required at curb returns. In areas with an adopted neighborhood circulation plan, cul-de-sac length and design shall conform to the adopted plan.

N. Private Streets. A private street is permitted only if provisions are made to assure private responsibility for future maintenance. Unless otherwise specifically authorized as part of a street plan or adopted neighborhood circulation plan, a private street shall comply with the same standards as a public street. A street held for private use shall be distinguished from public streets and any reservations or restrictions relating to the private street shall be described in the land division documents and the deed records.

O. Street Grades.

1. A collector shall not exceed 10 percent grade.

2. A local street shall not exceed 15 percent grade.

3. The planning commission may approve an alternative street grade standard if deemed appropriate and the fire chief is in agreement. 

4. Streets are to follow the natural terrain whenever feasible. Travel ways, walkways, and parking areas are to be designed to parallel the natural contours of the site.

P. Fire Suppression Sprinkler Systems. If the driveway or street is deemed inaccessible for fire fighting purposes by the fire chief, any dwelling units must have an automatic fire suppression sprinkler system. Other structures may also be required to install sprinkler systems, at the discretion of the fire chief. [Ord. 17-O-770 § 2 (Att. C); Ord. 11-O-675 § 2; Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.070 Off-site street improvements, deferred.

Street improvements may include pavement, curbs, gutters, pavement markings, sidewalks, and storm drainage. These improvements may be deferred by the site plan committee. The site plan committee will consider street improvement requirements on a case-by-case basis utilizing the following information:

•    The condition and standard of the existing, abutting street;

•    The likelihood and timing of new improvements given existing development on parcels in the vicinity;

•    Topographic constraints;

•    Safety concerns;

•    Other details specific to the subject property or vicinity.

A. When an entire street, or a segment of a street, is on the city’s capital improvement project list to be improved within the next five years, the property owner will be required to provide an engineer’s estimate of cost for street improvements to the frontage of the subject property. This estimate must be reviewed and approved by the city. These costs must be paid and these funds will be put into an account to be used when the project is initiated.

B. Deferred Street Improvements. When street improvements are deferred, the developer shall enter into a deferred improvement agreement for each lot fronting the street segment and record said agreement with the Curry County recorder’s office. Said agreement shall run with the land and require that the property owner agree to the performance of the work deferred by conformance with one of the following options:

1. Work Performed by Property Owner. The owner of the property subject to a deferred improvement agreement shall be responsible for performance of the work identified in said agreement and for obtaining contractors therefor. The owner shall cause satisfactory plans and specifications for the improvements to be prepared and to submit said plans and specifications to the city public works department for approval prior to commencement of the work to be done. Such work shall be done in accordance with city standards in effect at the time the improvement plans are submitted for approval. The owner agrees to make payments required by the city including, but not limited to, engineering deposits, permit fees and inspection fees. The owner shall obtain a permit to work in the right-of-way and notify the city public works department at least 48 hours prior to the start of work.

Prior to approval of improvement plans by the city, the owner may be required to execute and deliver to the city a security bond in an amount and form acceptable to the city, to be released by the city upon the city’s final acceptance of the work performed.

2. Recordation of a deferred improvement agreement shall be equivalent to consent to the establishment of a local improvement district. If the property owner does not complete the improvement pursuant to BMC 17.80.080(F), the city may do the work as a local improvement project following the procedures established by ordinance for such projects and assess the cost against the property specially benefited. Permission to enter onto the property of the owner is granted to the city or its contractor as may be necessary to construct such improvements.

3. Activation of Deferred Improvement Agreements. When the city determines the improvements must be constructed, the city shall notify affected property owners in writing. All or any portion of said improvement may be required at a specified time. Each affected owner shall participate on a pro rata basis of the cost of installation of the improvements. The city may require a local improvement district to be formed for a street or segment of a street involving all properties’ owners to participate when this street or segment has at least 50 percent of the properties subject to a deferred improvement agreement. As city funds are available, the city may participate in the expense of the project.

C. The site plan committee’s decision regarding required street improvements may be appealed to the planning commission. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.080 Street names and signs.

A. The name of any public or private street shall not duplicate or be so similar as to be confused with the name of any existing street within the 97415 zip code area.

B. Street names and traffic control signs shall be installed by the applicant as required by the city. 

C. An alley may be named if it has a paved surface and an unobstructed travel way between two streets.

D. Street names shall be approved by the planning commission. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.090 Traffic impact statement or analysis. 

A. Applicability. A traffic impact statement or analysis may be required by the city as necessary to determine a development impact on the adjacent street system. When required, the traffic impact statement or analysis shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the state of Oregon and submitted to the city prior to action on a project authorization for which the traffic impact statement or analysis was required.

B. The traffic impact statement or analysis is designed to identify the traffic impacts and potential problems which may be caused by a proposed use, and to identify all improvements required to ensure safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular ingress to and egress from a proposed development, to maintain an adequate street capacity, and to eliminate hazardous conditions and situations. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.100 Access management. 

A. Access standards for the state highway are shown in the Oregon Highway Plan. 

B. Special Transportation Areas (STA). Access to arterial streets located in the area designated as a special transportation area is less restrictive than in the Oregon Highway Plan.

C. Commercial Joint and Cross Access.

1. Adjacent commercial properties classified as major traffic generators shall be provided a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites.

2. A system of joint use driveways and reciprocal access agreements shall be established wherever feasible and shall incorporate the following:

a. A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation consistent with the highway’s access management classification system if accessing the highway; 

b. A design speed of 10 miles per hour and a maximum width of 20 feet to accommodate two-way travel aisles designated to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles;

c. Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross access via a service drive;

d. A unified access and circulation system plan for coordinated or shared parking areas is encouraged.

3. Shared parking areas shall be permitted a reduction in required parking spaces if peak demands do not occur at the same time periods pursuant to BMC 17.92.080.

4. Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:

a. Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive;

b. Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the roadway will be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint use driveway;

c. Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.

D. Commercial Access Connection and Driveway Design.

1. Driveways shall meet the following standards:

a. If the driveway is a one-way-in or one-way-out drive, then the driveway shall be a minimum width of 10 feet and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection.

b. For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.

2. Driveway approaches must be designed and located to provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view. Construction of driveways along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers shall be avoided due to the potential for vehicular weaving conflicts.

3. The length of driveways shall be designed in accordance with the anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation.

4. Approval from the jurisdiction with authority must be provided when substantial expansion of a commercial structure that requires additional parking or a new driveway access to a public street is proposed.

E. Reverse Frontage.

1. Residentially zoned lots that front on more than one street shall be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification, or lower average daily traffic, if both facilities have the same functional classification. Where safety or other concerns exist, the city will have final authority to permit appropriate access. 

2. When a residential subdivision is proposed that would abut an arterial, it shall be designed to provide through lots along the arterial with access from a frontage road or interior local road, unless otherwise constrained by topography. Access rights of these lots to the arterial shall be dedicated to the city and shown on the recorded plat. A berm or buffer yard may be required at the rear of through lots to buffer residences from traffic on the arterial. The berm or buffer yard shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

F. Connectivity.

1. The street system of proposed subdivisions shall be designed to connect with existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the subdivision as provided in this section.

2. Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided to provide access to abutting properties or to logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. All street stubs shall be provided with a temporary turn-around unless specifically exempted by the site plan committee, and the restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any future developer of the abutting land.

3. Collector and local residential access streets shall connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods or facilitate emergency access and evacuation. Connections shall be designed to avoid or minimize through traffic on local streets. Appropriate design and traffic control and traffic calming measures are the preferred means of discouraging through traffic.

4. When a public or private street intersects a state highway, the Oregon Highway Plan will be used to determine proper spacing and signal placement. [Ord. 17-O-770 § 2 (Att. C); Ord. 12-O-696 § 2; Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.110 Bicycle and pedestrian development standards.

New commercial and multifamily development will provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access and connections such as accessways, walkways, and transit facilities.

A. Internal pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be provided in new commercial, office and multifamily residential developments through the clustering of buildings, construction of hard surface walkways, landscaping, accessways, or similar techniques.

B. Bikeways shall be required, where possible, along existing arterial and collector streets. Bikeways shall be required on proposed collector streets. [Ord. 07-O-595.]


17.170.120 Residential driveway approaches.

A. Distance from Intersection. Driveway approaches shall be positioned from the intersection of a residential street a distance of no less than 20 feet and 100 feet for collector and arterial streets; provided, however, that such distances may be reduced by the city engineer where impractical due to lot configuration and/or width.

B. Number of Accesses Permitted. Access points to a public street shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access while not inhibiting the safe traffic circulation and carrying capacity of the street. Each parcel or lot may have one access to the street unless an additional access is approved by the site plan committee.

C. Joint Access Encouraged. Common accessways at a property line shall be encouraged and in some instances may be required in order to reduce the number of access points to streets. Construction of common accessways shall be preceded by recording of joint access and maintenance easements.

D. Approval from the jurisdiction with authority must be provided when a new driveway access to a public street is proposed.

E. Driveway Approach Width Standards. Driveway approaches for single-family and two-family dwellings shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a maximum width of 27 feet in addition to ADA compliant wings on either side. All other residential driveway approaches shall be a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 36 feet. Approaches shall be built to city standards per the “Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Infrastructure.”

Requests for wider approaches shall be reviewed by the site plan committee on a case-by-case basis. For properties where the ADA compliant wings would extend beyond the property lines, the driveway shall be centered on the property frontage and the approach design shall be reviewed by the site plan committee. Considering ADA requirements, an approved recommendation shall be given that will mitigate the narrower approach to prevent undue inconvenience to neighboring properties. Approaches that serve driveways within an easement shall be reviewed by site plan committee on a case-by-case basis. [Ord. 17-O-770 § 2 (Att. C); Ord. 07-O-595.]


Chapter 17.171 NEIGHBORHOOD CIRCULATION PLANS

Sections:

17.171.010    Purpose.

17.171.020    Adoption of neighborhood circulation plan.

17.171.030    Dawson Tract neighborhood circulation plan standards.


17.171.010 Purpose.

A neighborhood circulation plan may be created for a specific area in the city to address existing and proposed streets. The plan will provide for the optimum traffic flow considering the special limitations and opportunities present in the particular neighborhood. [Ord. 07-O-585.]


17.171.020 Adoption of neighborhood circulation plan.

Neighborhood circulation plans may be developed for appropriate areas. Such plans shall identify the street classification, projected average daily traffic (ADT), existing condition, design criteria and right-of-way and roadway width of all existing and projected street systems within the neighborhood circulation plan area. Within an adopted neighborhood circulation plan, right-of-way and roadway widths can be either the standards of BMC 17.170.060 or the standards of the circulation plan; provided, that once a standard has been established for a street segment, the remainder of the street will be constructed at that standard. [Ord. 07-O-585.]


17.171.030 Dawson Tract neighborhood circulation plan standards. 

A. Dawson Tract Right-of-Way and Roadway Width Standards. Street right-of-way and roadway widths shall conform to the values shown in Table 17.171.030 or the standard right-of-way and road widths in Table 17.170.060. The Dawson Tract standards shall apply to all public and private streets in the Dawson Tract area, as defined in the Dawson Tract neighborhood circulation plan. Once a standard has been established by construction for any street segment, the remaining portion of the street shall be constructed at that standard.

B. Dawson Tract Neighborhood Circulation Plan Map. The neighborhood circulation plan map (see Map 17.171.030-1) is to be used in conjunction with the neighborhood circulation plan standards in Table 17.171.030. In the event of a conflict between the map and the table of standards, the table shall govern.

1. The neighborhood circulation plan offers alternative right-of-way and roadway widths for the main loop road of the Dawson Tract system (Dawson Road (North), Dawson Road (West), the Skyline/Passley connection, and Passley Road (see Table 17.171.030)). Pacific Heights (Dawson South), Shorewood Terrace, Ridgeway Street, and Skyline Drive are already developed to the standard minimum (see Table 17.171.030). North of Dawson Road North, Blueberry Drive (portion) and Holmes Court are also developed to the standard minimum.

2. For the area within the Dawson Road/Skyline/Passley loop, Type A and Type B cul-de-sac access streets are shown conceptually for single owner sites (see Map 17.171.030-3).

3. For the area north of Dawson Road North, a Holmes Drive/Blueberry Lane loop is anticipated. In addition, lane, place and private drive access shall be developed as required to serve future property divisions. Right-of-way and roadway widths, and location of these future streets, shall be approved by the planning commission as part of tentative plan approval. Approval shall be determined by the estimated average daily traffic (ADT) right-of-way and roadway widths shown in Table 17.171.030, Dawson Tract Right-of-Way and Roadway Width.

4. For “landlocked” tax lots located to the east of Passley Road, lane, place, and drive access in some combination will be required for service in order to further develop these sites, although no location is shown on the neighborhood circulation plan map. Access location, right-of-way, and roadway width shall be approved by the planning commission as part of tentative plan approval. Approval shall be determined by the estimated average daily traffic (ADT) right-of-way and roadway widths shown in Table 17.171.030, Dawson Tract Right-of-Way and Roadway Width.

Table 17.171.030 Dawson Tract Right-of-Way and Roadway Width

	Street Name or Type	Estimated ADT+	Right-of-Way Width (Feet)	Roadway (Curb Face to Curb Face) Width (Feet)	Minimum Sidewalk Width (Feet)	Curbs

Square Curb (SC)

Rolled Curb (RC)

Gutter (GT) 

Gravel Shoulder (GS)

	Dawson Road (North•)	1,400	50	28*	4 – Both sides Park on north 	SC/GT

	Dawson Road (West•)	800	50	26**	4 – East side	SC/GT

	Pacific Heights••	 	50	36	5 – Both sides	SC/GT

	Shorewood Terrace••	 	50	36	5 – One side	SC/GT

	Skyline Drive••	 	50	36	5 – Both sides	SC/GT

	Ridgeway Street••	 	50	36	5 – Both sides	SC/GT

	Passley Road	800	50	26**/30*	4 – Both sides	SC/GT

	Skyline/Passley Connector	800	50	26**/30*/36	5 – Both sides	SC/GT

	Holmes/Blueberry Loop (Future)	 	 	 	 	 

	Type A (cul-de-sac)

50 lot maximum

750 feet maximum length	400	45	24**/30*	4 – One side	RC

	Type B (cul-de-sac)

12 lot maximum 

400 feet maximum length	100	45	20**/30*	4 – One side	RC

	Cul-de-sac radius or hammerhead dimensions	See Map 17.171.030-3	See Map 17.171.030-3	N/A	One side	 

	Private (private drive)

6 lot maximum	60	20***	N/A	 	GS

	• Existing, improved one side only.

	•• Existing, improved both sides.

	* Parking one side only. Lots serviced by no-parking side shall provide six off-street parking spaces in parking bays or on each lot. Add 1,500 square feet to minimum lot size. (See Map 17.171.030-2.)

	** No on-street parking. All lots serviced by no-parking streets shall provide six off-street parking spaces in parking bays or on each lot. Add 1,500 square feet to minimum lot size. (See Map 17.171.030-2.)

	*** For properties landlocked, or impacted by steep slopes, geological or soil hazards, or unusual parent parcel dimensions. No on-street parking permitted. Lots serviced by drives shall provide six off-street parking spaces in parking bays or on each lot. Add 1,500 square feet to minimum lot size. (See Map 17.171.030-2.)

	+ ADT = Average daily traffic. (For mixed family/retirement area, computed at eight ADT per dwelling unit.)

Map 17.171.030-1 Dawson Tract Neighborhood Circulation Plan Map


[IMAGE]


Map 17.171.030-2 Dawson Tract Neighborhood Circulation Plan Parking Examples


[IMAGE]


Map 17.171.030-3 Dawson Tract Neighborhood Circulation Plan Turn-Around Options for Type A and Type B Cul-de-Sacs


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 07-O-585.]


Chapter 17.172 LAND DIVISIONS

Sections: 

17.172.010    Purpose.

17.172.020    Applicability.

17.172.030    Procedures.

17.172.040    Lot line adjustments and lot line vacations.

17.172.050    Lot design standards.

17.172.060    Partition.

17.172.061    Rear lot partitions (flag lots).

17.172.070    Subdivisions.

17.172.080    Final subdivision plat approval.

17.172.090    Subdivision replat.


17.172.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures, standards and criteria for the processing and creation of lots or parcels for residential, commercial and industrial uses consistent with state statutes, and provisions and standards of this code. [Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 16.10.010.] 


17.172.020 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter apply to all lands within the city limits which are proposed to be further divided into lots or parcels. [Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 16.10.020.]


17.172.030 Procedures.

The following procedures are intended to expedite land divisions, and to ensure thorough public review and comment for land division which may have greater neighborhood impact to existing and future public facilities and services. 

A. Preapplication Conference. Prior to submitting a preliminary map or plat for review, the applicant is encouraged to request a preapplication conference with city staff, unless the applicant and city manager, or his/her designee, agree that the conference is not needed.

Subdivision applications are required to have a preapplication conference conducted by the subdivision committee as stated in BMC 17.172.070(A).

1. The purpose of the conference is to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of this section, to provide for an exchange of information regarding applicable elements of the comprehensive plan and development code requirements, and to otherwise identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed development. [Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 16.10.030.]


17.172.040 Lot line adjustments and lot line vacations.

A complete application together with all required filing materials shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee prior to review of the request.

A. Lot Line Adjustment. A lot line adjustment alters a property line between two existing discrete parcels or lots.

1. Application and Submittal Requirements. 

a. Completed application form and fee. All vested property owners of the parcels involved shall sign the application.

b. Two copies of a map of survey prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon.

c. If there is any existing development on the subject properties it shall be shown on the map of survey to confirm that required setbacks and other zoning requirements are maintained for any proposed adjustment of property lines.

d. Current deeds with legal descriptions of each parcel associated with the proposed adjustment.

e. New legal description of each parcel after adjustment.

2. Criteria for Approval. The city manager or his/her designee shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request based upon the following criteria:

a. An additional lot is not created by the lot line adjustment.

b. An existing parcel is not reduced in size below the minimum lot size established by the applicable zoning district.

c. The adjusted lot configuration does not result in a substandard condition relative to all applicable site development standards of this code. 

d. Failure to provide any information required by this code shall not constitute a waiver to any standards, criteria or requirements of this code.

3. Filing an Approved Lot Line Adjustment. Within 60 days of approval, the applicant shall file an approved map with the Curry County surveyor and record the resulting deed(s) with the new descriptions with the office of the clerk. If this process is not completed within 60 days from the date of approval, the approval becomes null and void. The city may consider and approve an extension if a written request and justification is submitted. The applicant shall provide a copy of the filed map and recorded deeds to the city planning department to complete the process.

4. Appeals. The final action of the city manager or his/her designee may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.156 BMC.

B. Lot Line Vacations. A lot line vacation removes a property line between two existing discrete parcels or lots. 

1. Application and Submittal Requirements.

a. Completed application form and fee. All vested property owners of the parcels involved shall sign the application.

b. Two copies of a plot plan, drawn to scale, indicating the outside boundary of the entire area involved and the interior property line to be vacated.

c. Copies of the current deeds for the properties involved and the new description of the outside boundary of the entire new parcel as it is proposed. 

2. Criteria for Approval. The city manager or his/her designee shall approve or deny the request based upon the following criteria:

a. Ownership of both parcels must be identical in order to combine into one parcel.

b. Property taxes must be current prior to recording the deed.

3. Finalizing Lot Line Vacation. Staff will send an approval letter with the plot plan and descriptions to the Curry County surveyor and to the Curry County assessor’s office to authorize updating of the assessor’s map and the recording of a deed for the newly created parcel. The applicant shall provide a copy of the recorded deed to the city planning department to complete the process. If this process is not completed within 60 days from the date of approval, the approval becomes null and void. The city may consider and approve an extension if a written request and justification is submitted. 

4. Appeals. The final action of the city manager or his/her designee may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.156 BMC. [Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.FF § 3; Ord. 89-O-454 § 4; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 16.10.040.] 


17.172.050 Lot design standards.

In any residential land division, lots and blocks shall conform to the following standards, in addition to the provisions of Chapters 17.16 through 17.32 BMC.

A. Lot Arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reason of topography or other condition, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the requirements of this code.

B. Lot Dimensions. The lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of this code. If the proposed partitioning results in the creation of lots greater than twice the minimum lot size allowed, indicate by dashed lines whether future divisions and streets can be created.

C. Through Lots. Through (double frontage) lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential developments from streets of collector and arterial street status or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and/or orientation. Access shall be limited to the residential street frontage wherever possible, as determined by the city.

D. Arterial Access. When driveway access from arterial or major collector streets is necessary for several adjoining lots, the review authority shall require that such lots be served by a combined access driveway in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such streets. The driveway shall be designed and arranged to prohibit vehicles from backing into traffic traveling on arterials. An access control strip may be required to be placed along all lots abutting arterial streets requiring access onto the lesser class street where possible.

E. Fire Protection. The fire marshal may require the installation of a fire hydrant where the length of an accessway would have a detrimental effect on fire-fighting capabilities.

F. Reciprocal Easements. Where a common drive is to be provided to serve more than one lot, a reciprocal easement which will ensure access rights shall be recorded with, and shown on, the approved final plat.

G. Rear Lot Partitions (Flag Lots). This configuration can only be used when the subject property cannot be subdivided or partitioned utilizing standard configurations. Standards for rear lot partitions are found in BMC 17.172.061. [Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.172.080.]


17.172.060 Partition.

A partition is a land division creating three or fewer parcels and not creating a platted street. 

A. The property owner or his authorized agent may request a partition by filing an application on a land use application form with appropriate fees with the city manager or his/her designee for review by the site plan committee pursuant to BMC 17.80.020. Upon determination by the site plan committee that the application is complete, the application will be scheduled for a planning commission hearing. Such application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of the preliminary partition plat and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following material:

1. A plat not smaller than 18 inches by 24 inches drawn in ink, prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon. 

2. North arrow, date of preparation, and scale (appropriate to the area involved and sufficient to show detail of the plan and related data at a standard engineering scale). 

3. Name and address of each of the following: property owner(s), surveyor, and engineer.

4. Streets: names, locations, and pavement widths of adjoining rights-of-way. 

5. Easements: locations, widths, and purpose of all existing and proposed easements.

6. Utilities: location and size of all existing and proposed storm drains, sanitary sewer mains, water mains, and above and below ground utilities.

7. Natural features: location and extent of creeks, streams, marshes, and wooded areas.

8. Flood areas: show location of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain and other areas subject to ponding. 

9. Slope: contour map with contour intervals of five feet or less shall be provided. Sufficient lines should be drawn approximately perpendicular to the contours to indicate slopes throughout the project area. This is to determine compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Site Protection Hillside Development Standards. Elevations shall be referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). 

10. Drainage: show direction of drainage. 

11. Lot dimensions: existing and proposed lot lines and their bearings and dimensions.

12. Lot size: existing and proposed lot size in square feet and acreage.

13. Existing uses: location and outline of existing buildings on the property with distances in feet to new lot lines created by the proposed partition.

14. The approving authority (planning commission) certificate shall contain a statement that acknowledges compliance with all conditions of development permit and state statutes, and such compliance shall be certified by the signature of the chair of the planning commission affixed thereon.

B. Supplemental Materials to Be Supplied by the Applicant.

1. A copy of the most recent deed for the subject property.

2. A statement by the city finance director that all city liens and assessments on the property have been paid, or that the application has been made to the city to segregate assessments.

3. If the proposed partitioning results in the creation of lots greater than twice the minimum lot size allowed, indicate by dashed lines whether future divisions and streets can be created.

4. One copy of the preliminary partition plat shall have an access plan showing the location of driveways on the proposed parcels.

5. A determination of seasonal high water table impact on development of the property, and any necessary ground water drainage mitigation design.

6. One copy eight and one-half inches by 11 inches of the preliminary plat to be used for exhibit purposes.

C. Planning Commission Authority. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny the request, based upon the following criteria:

1. Conformance with the comprehensive plan, and applicable development standards of this code, and state and federal laws. 

2. Development of any remainder of property under the same ownership, if any, can be accomplished in accordance with this code.

3. Adjoining property under separate ownership can either be developed or be provided access that will allow its development in accordance with this code.

4. The ability to take access from the frontage road pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.128.060. 

5. Conditions necessary to satisfy the intent of the land development code and comprehensive plan can be satisfied prior to final approval.

D. Final Plat Requirements. 

1. Any changes or modifications resulting from preliminary plat review shall be incorporated and submitted as the minor partition final plat, along with additional supplementary information as required by conditions of approval.

2. The final plat shall conform to the requirements of Oregon Revised Statutes and Curry County surveyor. It must be prepared on archivable Mylar by a surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon.

E. Filing an approved final plat must be completed within one year from the date of preliminary approval. An extension of time may be granted, for good cause, by the city if such extension request is submitted prior to the expiration of the initial one-year period and provided such extension does not exceed one additional year. After obtaining all required approvals and signatures, the developer shall:

1. File the plat with the Curry County surveyor within 90 days of receiving approval and signature of the partition plat by the city of Brookings, and failure to file same within said time period shall render the approval null and void. 

2. Within 10 days after filing the survey plat with the county surveyor, the owner/developer shall provide the city two copies of the survey plat.

F. Appeals. The final action of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 17.152 BMC. [Ord. 12-O-692 § 2; Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.FF § 3; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 7; Ord. 91-O-446.F § 3; Ord. 89-O-454 §§ 5, 6, 7; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.172.050.] 


17.172.061 Rear lot partitions (flag lots).

Rear lot partitions (flag lots) are to be used only when the subject property cannot be subdivided or partitioned utilizing standard configurations.

A. The following criteria must be met before a lot is eligible to be developed under the provisions of this section:

1. Property must be less than four acres in area; 

2. Property must be situated, dimensioned, or contain existing development that prevents using standard parcel configurations;

3. Minimum Area. Twice that required by the underlying zoning district and not including the area necessary for the accessway;

4. Minimum Width. Twenty feet greater than required by the applicable zoning district.

B. Development Standards. Provided the eligibility requirements are met, a partition may be approved subject to the following standards and criteria: 

1. Front Lot. 

a. Minimum lot width: the same as required by the applicable zoning district. 

b. Minimum lot depth: 75 feet. 

c. Setback requirements: same as required in the applicable zoning district. 

2. Rear Lot. 

a. Accessway minimum width: 20 feet. 

b. Setback requirements: no building shall be erected within 10 feet of any property line on any proposed or existing lot with a rear lot configuration. 

c. Minimum lot size: same as required by the applicable zoning district, not including the area of the accessway. 

d. Maximum length of accessway: 200 feet. 

e. Accessway shall be conveyed with ownership of the rear lot and shall be an integral part of the rear lot. 

f. Accessway shall be improved to a permanent, dust-free surface of asphaltic concrete or portland cement. 

3. The partitioning of the property pursuant to the rear lot standards shall be in accordance with BMC 17.172.060 and other applicable sections of this code. 

4. No more than two lots shall be created to the rear of another lot which fronts on a street in a residential district. Tandem (side by side) accessways to rear lots are not allowed. [Ord. 07-O-587 § 2.]


17.172.070 Subdivisions.

A subdivision is a division of land that includes creating a new street or any division creating four or more lots.

A. There is hereby created a subdivision committee consisting of the city manager, planning director, city engineer, building official, public works director, or their designees, and representatives from all affected utilities including, but not limited to, electrical power, communications and cable television, county surveyor, county planning department, State Highway Department, if the property is adjacent to a state highway, and the school district. 

The purpose of the subdivision committee is to determine compliance with the objectives, standards, and criteria of the land development code and provisions contained herein, and to review all submitted preliminary plat requests for conformance with requirements thereof. Following submittal of the preliminary plat and requisite filing material, a meeting of the subdivision committee shall be convened to which the subdivider or his representative is invited to attend and participate. 

Eighteen copies of the preliminary plat, containing information as listed in subsection (A)(1) of this section, shall be submitted by the applicant. Copies will be distributed to the subdivision committee which will be given 10 days to review the plat and submit comments to be included within the subdivision committee report. Following consultation and discussion, a report shall be prepared by the committee, which report shall include any deficiencies or missing information as noted by the subdivision committee.

Following the subdivision committee meeting, the applicant will submit the needed materials pursuant to the subdivision committee’s report. This submittal will be reviewed by the site plan committee to determine completeness of the application. Upon written clearance from the site plan committee, the application will be scheduled at planning commission hearing. 

1. Plat Requirements. The application shall be accompanied by 18 copies of the plat, not less than 18 inches by 24 inches in size, drawn by a surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following material:

a. North arrow, date of preparation, and scale (appropriate to the area involved and sufficient to show detail of the plan and related data at a standard engineering scale). 

b. The plat must state both the proposed name of the subdivision and be titled “Preliminary Subdivision Plat.” The proposed subdivision name cannot duplicate or resemble the name of any other subdivision or partition in Curry County.

c. A surveyor’s certificate showing location by section, township, range, and legal metes and bounds description sufficient to define the location and exterior boundaries of the parent parcel.

d. Names and addresses of property owner(s), surveyor, and engineers.

e. A vicinity sketch shown on the plat map of a sufficient size to locate the project site. 

f. Boundaries of the subject tract, drawn to scale, proposed blocks (if applicable), lot numbers, dimensions, and area in square feet and acreage. 

g. Slope: contour map with contour intervals of five feet or less shall be provided. Sufficient lines should be drawn approximately perpendicular to the contours to indicate slopes throughout the project area. This is to determine compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.100 BMC, Hazardous Building Site Protection Hillside Development Standards. Elevations shall be referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).

h. Streets existing: location, names, pavement widths, alleys and rights-of-way on, abutting and/or adjoining the tract.

i. Streets proposed: location, names, rights-of-way, pavement widths, radius of curves, grades, and proposed connectivity. The proposed name of a street in the subdivision shall be approved by the commission provided it is not the same as, similar to or pronounced the same as the name of an existing street in the same zip code area, unless the street is approved as a continuation of an existing street. A street name or number shall conform to the established pattern for the area. Streets that are proposed to be held for private use shall be distinguished from the public streets on the subdivision plat, and reservations and restrictions relating to the private streets are established.

j. Easements: locations, widths, and purpose of all existing and proposed easements on, adjoining and/or abutting the tract.

k. Pedestrian ways: location and widths of all proposed sidewalks and pedestrian facilities.

l. Natural features: location and direction of flow of all creeks, drainageways, and marshes. 

m. Flood areas: location of Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain and all other areas subject to seasonal ponding.

n. Utilities: location and size of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains, storm drain facilities, water mains, irrigation canals, and above and below ground utility installations on, abutting or pertinent to the tract.

o. Proposed streets, and utility improvements on the property. 

p. Dedication: locations of all areas to be offered for dedication for public use, with the purpose, condition, or limitations of such reservations clearly indicated.

q. Existing improvements on the property with scaled location and present use of all existing structures. 

r. Special setbacks: locations of special setback lines.

s. The following tabulated data:

i. Total site area (in acres and square feet).

ii. Total area designated for public or private rights-of-way. 

iii. Net usable site area (in acres and square feet; subsection (A)(1)(s)(i) of this section minus subsection (A)(1)(s)(ii) of this section).

iv. Maximum dwelling units allowed (divide subsection (A)(1)(s)(iii) of this section by the density allowance of the zoning district within which the proposal is located).

v. Actual number of lots proposed for each phase of the proposed project development.

vi. Lot sizes: proposed lot sizes in square feet and acreage.

t. Any areas designated for phasing of the project development.

u. Zoning of property.

v. Plat must be stamped and signed by the responsible surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon.

2. Required Supplemental Materials.

a. A copy of the most recent deed for the subject property.

b. A determination of seasonal high water table impact on development of the property, and a ground water drainage mitigation design, if necessary. 

c. If the proposed subdivision results in the creation of lots greater than twice the minimum lot size allowed, indicate by dashed lines how future divisions can be created or remainder lot must be deed restricted to prohibit further partitioning.

d. One copy of the subdivision plat shall have an access plan showing the location of driveways on the proposed lots.

e. On parent parcels containing slopes of 15 percent or greater or other hazardous conditions, a geologic report prepared by a geologist, geotechnical engineer or other qualified individual, licensed by the state of Oregon, shall be submitted. The report shall be prepared pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.100 BMC. 

f. An engineered grading, stormwater drainage, and erosion control plan pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.100.070.

g. Findings of Fact. The applicant shall provide written findings that demonstrate the proposed subdivision is in compliance with the criteria set forth in subsections (B)(1) through (7) of this section.

h. One copy eight and one-half inches by 11 inches of the preliminary plat to be used for exhibit purposes.

B. Planning Commission Authority. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request, based upon the following criteria:

1. Conformance with the comprehensive plan, and applicable development standards of this code, and state and federal laws. 

2. Development of any remainder of property under the same ownership, if any, can be accomplished in accordance with this code.

3. Adjoining property under separate ownership can either be developed or be provided access (connectivity) that will allow its development in accordance with this code.

4. The proposed name of the subdivision shall be approved by the commission, provided the name does not use a word which is the same as, similar to or pronounced the same as a word in the name of any other subdivision in Curry County, except for the words “town,” “city,” “place,” “court,” “addition,” or similar words unless the land platted is contiguous to and platted by the same applicant that platted the subdivision bearing that name, or unless the applicant files and records the consent of the party who platted the subdivision bearing that name and the block numbers continue those of the plat of the same name last filed.

5. The proposed name of a street in the subdivision shall be approved by the commission provided it is not the same as, similar to, or pronounced the same as the name of an existing street in the same zip code area, unless the street is approved as a continuation of an existing street. A street name or number shall conform to the established pattern for the area.

6. Streets that are proposed to be held for private use shall be distinguished from the public streets on the subdivision plat, and reservations and restrictions relating to the private streets are established.

7. If the developer intends to record and develop a subdivision granted preliminary plat approval in phases, the planning commission may authorize a total time schedule for platting all phases not to exceed 10 years, but the first phase and each subsequent phase must each be recorded within consecutive three-year periods. 

C. Public Hearing. Before preliminary plat approval may be granted by the planning commission, the proposed preliminary plat shall be considered by the commission in a public hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.84 BMC. 

D. Conditions. Conditions of approval may be attached to the preliminary plat approved by the planning commission, but only as required to comply with the applicable provisions of this code, the comprehensive plan, state statutes, or federal law. All conditions of approval shall be satisfied prior to final plat approval.

E. Appeals. The final action of the planning commission may be appealed as provided in Chapter 17.152 BMC.

F. Minor Change. A minor change to an unrecorded subdivision plat map may be allowed through the procedure set forth in BMC 17.116.090. 

G. Expiration of Preliminary Plat. The applicant has two years from the date of approval to submit the final plat for approval. An extension of time may be granted, for good cause, by the city if such extension is submitted prior to expiration of the two-year period, and provided such extension not exceed two additional years. No further extensions may be authorized without resubmittal of a preliminary plat application to the planning commission. [Ord. 12-O-692 § 2; Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 99-O-446.FF § 3; Ord. 96-O-446.BB § 9; Ord. 93-O-446.N § 7; Ord. 92-O-446.J § 5; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.172.060.] 


17.172.080 Final subdivision plat approval.

The form and content of a final plat shall be in accordance with the provisions of ORS Chapter 92.010 et seq., and in addition shall comply with all the provisions of this code. A complete application together with all required materials shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee prior to review of the request for final plat approval. Within 30 days of submission, the city manager or his/her designee shall determine whether the final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat, and conforms with the applicable requirements of this code. If it is found that the plat fails to conform, then the applicant shall be advised and afforded an opportunity to make corrections.

A. Final Plat Requirements. The plat must comply with ORS Chapter 92.010 et seq. The application shall be accompanied by two copies of the plat not less than 18 inches by 24 inches in size, prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state of Oregon and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following material:

1. North arrow, date of preparation, and scale (appropriate to the area involved and sufficient to show detail of the plan and related data at a standard engineering scale). 

2. Names of the owner(s) and surveyor.

3. All monuments found or existing and set pertinent to the subdivision.

4. Existing streets: location, names, pavement widths, alleys, and rights-of-way on, abutting, and/or adjoining the tract.

5. New streets: location, names, rights-of-way, pavement widths, radius of curves, grades, and proposed connectivity. Streets that are proposed to be held for private use shall be distinguished from the public streets on the subdivision plat, and shall indicate reservations and restrictions relating to the private streets.

6. All easements shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if they are already easements of record, the plat must state that. The widths of the easements and the lengths, bearings of the lines, and sufficient titles thereon to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If an easement, other than a right-of-way, is being dedicated by the plat, it shall be referred to in the certificate of dedication and its purpose and scope shall be adequately stated in said certificate.

7. Lot numbers beginning with the number “1” and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision. 

8. Lot size: existing and proposed lot size in square feet and acreage.

9. Identification of land to be dedicated for any public purpose, or designated for any private purpose, to distinguish it from lots. The following phrasing shall be used when identifying open space areas:

a. “Common open space” shall be used to identify those areas created for the purpose of common ownership, enjoyment, and maintenance by an approved homeowners’ association group or listed as being held in common ownership, with appropriate deed restrictions and responsibilities, by owners of property within the subdivision.

b. “Public open space” shall be used when identifying those areas dedicated to the city of Brookings for open space purposes.

10. The following certificates which may be combined where appropriate:

a. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any proprietary interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the final plat.

b. A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, designating all areas shown on the final plat intended for private use. 

c. A certificate conforming to ORS Chapter 92.010 et seq. with the seal and signature of the surveyor responsible for the survey and final plat.

d. A certificate signed by all parties having any proprietary interest in the land, dedicating to the public any streets, roads, public open space, bikeways, and pedestrian facilities. 

e. A certificate signed by all parties having any proprietary interest in the land, dedicating to the public any utility infrastructure.

11. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain, as applicable.

B. Supplementary Materials. At the time of filing for final plat approval, the applicant shall also file concurrent therewith the following:

1. Written confirmation from the city that all infrastructure has been installed, improved, and accepted by the city or that a satisfactory secured improvement agreement, as described in Chapter 17.80 BMC, has been provided and accepted by the city. The applicant must also provide a copy of the required warranty bond for the project.

2. A title report or subdivision guarantee by a title company doing business in Curry County, showing names of all persons whose consent is necessary for the preparation of said plat and for any dedication to the public use, and their interest therein, certified for the benefit and protection of the city that the persons therein named are all of the persons necessary to dedicate to the streets and other easements thereon. Said title report shall be dated no later than 15 days from the date of submittal.

3. A copy of proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) if the CC&Rs contain a statement required as a condition of approval. This must be recorded simultaneously with the plat and the instrument number shown on the plat.

4. Such streets, offers of dedication, or other instruments as are required by the conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.

5. A statement that all applicable fees required by the city code have been paid.

6. A plan showing building setback lines, if any are to be made a part of the subdivision’s deed restrictions.

C. City Authority. The city shall approve or deny the request for final plat approval based upon the following criteria:

1. Substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat.

2. Compliance with conditions of approval. The applicant must provide written documentation in the form of the final plat and other materials documenting that all required conditions of approval have been met. 

D. Final Action. The city will provide written confirmation to the applicant concerning the approval or denial of the request.

E. Appeals. The final action of the city staff may be appealed as provided in Chapter 17.156 BMC.

F. Approval Signatures and Recording of Final Plat. Following review and approval of the final plat, the developer/owner shall, within six months of the date of final approval, take the following actions:

1. Obtain the signature of the chair of the planning commission and city staff certifying the final plat is approved by the city.

2. Obtain all other signatures required to be on the final plat as stated in ORS Chapter 92.010 et seq.

3. After all the necessary approvals and signatures have been obtained, the applicant shall forthwith file for record the approved final plat. 

4. Within 10 days after recordation of the final plat, the developer/owner shall provide the city with two copies of the recorded plat. 

G. Staff shall provide a copy of the final, approved subdivision plat to the planning commission at their next meeting. If a majority of the commission does not believe the plat is in substantial conformance with the preliminary approval, the commission chair will notify the city manager of this determination. [Ord. 12-O-692 § 2; Ord. 07-O-587 § 2; Ord. 94-O-446.W § 3; Ord. 89-O-446 § 1. Formerly 17.172.070.]


17.172.090 Subdivision replat.

The act of replatting shall allow the reconfiguration of lots and public easements within a recorded plat. A replat shall comply with all applicable subdivision standards as found in BMC 17.172.070. Staff will advise the applicant concerning the required materials and criteria to be addressed based on the specific proposal. [Ord. 11-O-682 § 2.]


Chapter 17.180 WORKFORCE HOUSING

Sections:

17.180.010    Purpose.

17.180.020    Definitions.

17.180.030    Density bonus.

17.180.040    Accessory dwelling unit.

17.180.050    System development charge (SDC) deferrals.


17.180.010 Purpose.

Affordable housing is needed within our community to provide for those individuals and households earning less than the median income as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The provisions of this chapter are intended to create flexibility, provide developer incentives and provide a means for developing affordable housing. [Ord. 08-O-620 § 2.]


17.180.020 Definitions.

“Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)” means a separate dwelling unit contained within or detached from a single-family dwelling on a single lot, containing 1,000 square feet or less, excluding any garage area or accessory buildings, and sharing a driveway with the primary dwelling unless from an alley. A recreational vehicle cannot be used as an accessory dwelling unit.

“Accessory dwelling unit occupant” means the renter of the ADU.

“Affordable ownership unit” means housing with a mortgage payment that does not exceed 30 percent of the qualifying annual net income.

“Affordable rental unit” means that the rent charged for the dwelling unit does not exceed 23 percent of the qualifying annual net income.

“Qualifying annual income” means annual net income that does not exceed 80 percent for ownership and 60 percent for rentals of the area median income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). [Ord. 08-O-620 § 2.]


17.180.030 Density bonus.

When applying to create a subdivision or planned unit development (PUD), the option of using a density bonus is available based on the following criteria:

Residential developments may devote 20 percent of the proposed lots to affordable housing pursuant to the following requirements:

A. In the following residential zones: SR, R-1, R-MH, a density bonus for up to 20 percent of the proposed lots would allow a minimum lot area for each dwelling unit of 4,000 square feet. No specific minimum lot width is required.

B. In the following residential zones: R-2, R-3, a density bonus for up to 20 percent of the proposed lots would allow a minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet for the first two dwelling units and for each additional unit the lot area shall increase by 1,000 square feet. No specific minimum lot width is required.

C. All other provisions and requirements of the zoning district shall apply.

D. Any lots created using the density bonus lesser square footage requirement must site a dwelling unit in compliance with one of the following options:

1. Affordable Housing for Purchase. Dwelling units designated as affordable housing available for purchase shall:

a. Only be sold to individuals or families whose annual net income does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income as determined by HUD; and

b. Have a mortgage payment not to exceed 30 percent of the monthly net income as outlined below:

i. Studio apartment: One-person qualifying monthly income;

ii. One bedroom: Two-person qualifying monthly income;

iii. Two bedrooms: Four-person qualifying monthly income;

iv. Three bedrooms: Six-person qualifying monthly income;

v. Four bedroom: Seven-person qualifying monthly income; and

c. Have a deed restriction signed and recorded establishing a period of affordability of not less than 15 years. In no event will a purchaser be required to sell the unit subject to this agreement for less than the purchase price plus any applicable closing costs and realtor fees. If an owner of a dwelling unit subject to this deed restriction decides to rent the unit, subsection (B) of this section is applicable.

2. Affordable Housing for Rent. Dwelling units designated as affordable housing available for rent shall:

a. Only be rented to individuals or families whose annual net income does not exceed 60 percent of the area median income as determined by HUD; and

b. Have the rent charged not exceed 23 percent of the qualifying family net income as outlined below:

i. Studio apartment: average of the one- and two-person qualifying monthly incomes;

ii. One bedroom: average of the two- and three-person qualifying monthly incomes;

iii. Two bedrooms: average of the three-, four-, and five-person qualifying monthly incomes;

iv. Three bedrooms: average of the four-, five-, six-, and seven-person qualifying monthly incomes;

v. Four bedrooms: average of the five-, six-, seven-, and eight-person qualifying monthly incomes; and

c. Have a deed restriction signed and recorded establishing a period of affordability of not less than 15 years.

d. An annual registration fee, set by resolution of the city council, must be paid and a copy of the current rental agreement provided to the city. Beginning January 1st of each year the city will conduct an annual review of registered affordable rentals to ensure compliance. Properties determined to be noncompliant shall be subject to abatement pursuant to BMC 8.15.090.

e. With any change of tenants new qualifying information must be provided to the city. [Ord. 08-O-620 § 2.]


17.180.040 Accessory dwelling unit.

The site plan committee shall authorize an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) only if it is found that all of the following general requirements are and will be met by the applicant:

A. An ADU may be created within, or detached from, any single-family dwelling, whether existing or new, as an accessory use.

B. Only one ADU may be created per parcel accessory to the single-family dwelling.

C. Only the property owner may apply for an ADU. The property owner must occupy the primary dwelling as their primary residence. A “primary residence” shall be the residence where the owner is registered to vote, used as the primary residence for tax purposes, or with other proof that the residence is primary. The owner shall sign an affidavit before a notary affirming that the owner occupies the primary dwelling. A deed restriction shall be recorded and a copy provided to the city declaring the accessory dwelling unit status of the subject property.

D. The rental of an ADU must comply with BMC 17.180.030(D)(2), Affordable Housing for Rent.

E. An owner may convert an ADU to another lawful accessory use. If the owner wishes to re-convert the space to a dwelling unit, it may only be used in compliance with the ADU requirements.

F. One off-street parking space shall be provided for the ADU in addition to the two off-street parking spaces required for the primary dwelling pursuant to Chapter 17.92 BMC.

G. ADUs shall contain 1,000 square feet or less.

H. All other applicable standards for the zone, including but not limited to setbacks, must be met with the exception of requiring a garage.

I. An annual ADU registration fee set by resolution of the city council must be paid. Upon sale of the property, the new owner shall be required to reregister the ADU.

J. If a garage or detached structure does not currently meet setbacks, it may not be converted to an ADU.

K. The owner of the property shall pay system development charges (SDC) for the additional dwelling unit and accept full responsibility for sewer and water bills.

L. Neither the ADU nor the primary dwelling may be used as a short-term rental.

M. Beginning January 1st of each year the city will conduct an annual review of registered ADUs to ensure compliance. Properties determined to be in noncompliance shall be subject to abatement pursuant to BMC 8.15.090. [Ord. 08-O-620 § 2.]


17.180.050 System development charge (SDC) deferrals.

The city of Brookings will offer SDC deferrals to developers of housing projects that contain affordable units as defined in BMC 17.180.020 pursuant to the following requirements:

A. SDC deferrals will be offered for a period of two years at a zero percent interest rate. Developers utilizing this incentive will be required to sign a promissory note and system development charge deferral agreement with the city of Brookings. The SDC deferral agreement must be recorded and a copy provided to the city.

B. SDCs will be due in full or will need to be financed with the city of Brookings prior to transfer of ownership or at the end of the two-year deferral period.

C. The rental of a dwelling unit with an SDC deferral must comply with BMC 17.180.030(D)(2), Affordable Housing for Rent. [Ord. 08-O-620 § 2.]


Title 18 ENGINEERING REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION1

Chapters:

18.05    General Information1

Prior legislation: Ords. 91-O-484 and 98-O-527. 


Chapter 18.05 GENERAL INFORMATION1

Sections:

18.05.001    Scope.

18.05.002    Standards and specifications committee.

18.05.003    Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction adopted by resolution.


18.05.001 Scope.

The purpose of the Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction is to establish correct procedures and outline acceptable standards of workmanship and required specifications for any work or projects being accomplished within city of Brookings jurisdictional rights-of-way that involve additions to, amendments, or repairs to city infrastructures, or infrastructure that is being constructed with intention to be dedicated to the city and accepted into the inventory of city infrastructure.

The standard specifications also include construction details. The specifications and details complement each other and both must be reviewed and adhered to. Generally, the specifications will include more information on parts and ordering information while the details depict graphics on how to construct the improvements. [Ord. 14-O-726 § 2.] 


18.05.002 Standards and specifications committee.

A standards and specifications committee is hereby established. The committee will be comprised of two appointed city council members and at least one member of the public works staff as authorized by the city manager. The committee’s purpose will be to review updates to the Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction document and make recommendations to the city council for adoption by resolution. [Ord. 14-O-726 § 2.] 


18.05.003 Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction adopted by resolution.

Engineering Requirements and Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction are adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city council upon recommendation of the standards and specifications committee. [Ord. 14-O-726 § 2.] 

 1

Prior legislation: Ord. 12-O-705. 


Ordinance Table

	Ordinance Number	Code Location	Subject

	51-O-004	2.20	City attorney

	91-O-004.A	2.20	

	51-O-008	2.25	Municipal court

	52-O-012.A	Repealed by 06-O-572	Coin-operated music box licenses and regulations; repeals Ord. 51-O-012

	51-O-013	8.15, 9.10	Offenses against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare

	52-O-025	Repealed by 06-O-572	Gambling equipment prohibitions

	52-O-031	2.10	Filing for candidacy

	53-O-049	13.05	Water

	53-O-052	Repealed by 06-O-572	Television and radio antenna masts and towers

	54-O-056	12.05	Street system

	55-O-070	Repealed by 06-O-572	Alcoholic liquor regulations; repeals Ord. 51-O-013 § 22

	55-O-073	12.10	Sidewalks

	57-O-105	Repealed by 06-O-572	Watchmen, merchant patrolmen and special police officer licenses

	57-O-106	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 52-O-012.A, Coin-operated music box licenses and regulations

	58-O-112	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 51-O-013 § 48, offenses

	58-O-115	Repealed by 06-O-572	Trailer coaches

	90-O-115.A	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 58-O-115 § 15, trailer coaches

	97-O-115.B	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 58-O-115, trailer coaches

	59-O-123	2.10	Filing for candidacy

	59-O-134	8.05, 8.15	Fire hazards

	93-O-134.A	8.15	

	59-O-140	2.10	Filing for candidacy

	60-O-146	Repealed by 92-O-486

	60-O-150	9.10	Offenses against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare

	61-O-157	10.05, 10.10, 10.15, 10.20,	Traffic

		10.25, 10.35	

	62-O-168	2.10	Filing for candidacy

	64-O-175	2.25	Municipal court

	64-O-178	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 61-O-157, traffic control

	66-O-184	9.10	Offenses against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare

	66-O-185	Repealed by 06-O-572	Dance hall licences

	66-O-186	12.10	Sidewalks

	66-O-190	13.05	Water

	90-O-190.A	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 60-O-190 § 10, water fees

	91-O-190.B	13.05	

	91-O-190.C	13.05	

	02-O-190.D	13.05	

	71-O-221	12.15	Street excavations

	74-O-252	9.10	Offenses against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare

	78-O-303	12.20	Fire hydrants

	79-O-309	2.35	Fire department

	79-O-315	Repealed by 06-O-572	Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public premises

	79-O-324	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 61-O-157, truck routes

	80-O-342	3.10	Transient occupancy tax

	93-O-342.A	3.10	

	93-O-342.B	3.10	

	80-O-343	2.75	Disposal of unclaimed, bailed, and stolen property

	80-O-348	Repealed by 06-O-572	Social games

	81-O-349	15.05	Building codes

	90-O-349.A	15.05	

	91-O-349.B	15.05	

	93-O-349.C	15.05	

	96-O-349.D	15.05	

	82-O-358	3.05	Reserve fund

	82-O-367	9.10	Offenses against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare

	84-O-387	5.10	Taxicabs

	90-O-387.A	5.10	

	90-O-387.B	5.10	

	93-O-387.C	5.10	

	97-O-387.D	5.10	

	85-O-389	Repealed by 12-O-701	Local contract review board

	92-O-389.A	Repealed by 12-O-701	

	99-O-389.B	Repealed by 12-O-701	

	85-O-390	9.05	Adoption of state criminal statutes

	86-O-406	8.15	Nuisances

	93-O-406.A	8.05, 8.15	

	94-O-406.B	8.15	

	86-O-408	9.05, 9.10, 15.05	Offenses against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare

	91-O-408.A	9.05	

	87-O-412	Repealed by 15-O-743	Flood damage prevention

	87-O-419	13.20	Systems replacement charges

	88-O-429	Repealed by 13-O-713	Watercourses

	88-O-430	13.10	Sewer use regulations

	91-O-430.B	13.10	

	91-O-430.C	13.10	

	93-O-430.D	13.10	

	88-O-431	13.15	Sewer service charges

	02-O-431.A	13.15

	88-O-432	13.05	Water

	89-O-437	13.15	Sewer service charges

	89-O-439	Repealed by 06-O-572	Amends Ord. 88-O-432 § 10, water system

	89-O-446	17.01 – 17.104, 17.116 –	Land development code

		17.144, 17.152 – 17.168	

	90-O-446.A	17.04	

	90-O-446.B	17.20, 17.120	

	91-O-446.C	17.168	

	91-O-446.D	17.20, 17.24	

	91-O-446.E	17.24	

	91-O-446.F	17.08, 17.128, 17.172	

	91-O-446.G	17.144	

	92-O-446.H	17.52, 17.124	

	92-O-446.J	17.08, 17.116, 17.136,

		17.172	

	92-O-446.K	17.04	

	93-O-446.L	17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28,

		17.32, 17.52

	93-O-446.M	17.64	

	93-O-446.N	17.80, 17.116, 17.132,

		17.136, 17.140, 17.172

	93-O-446.O	17.84	

	93-O-446.P	17.40, 17.52, 17.80	

	94-O-446.R	17.64	

	94-O-446.S	17.124, 17.168	

	94-O-446.T	17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28

	94-O-446.U	17.168	

	94-O-446.V	17.08, 17.100	

	94-O-446.W	17.140, 17.172	

	95-O-446.X	17.16, 17.20, 17.24,

		17.28, 17.32	

	95-O-446.Y	17.08, 17.20, 17.24,

		17.28, 17.32	

	95-O-446.Z	17.100	

	95-O-446.AA	17.88	

	96-O-446.BB	17.04, 17.12, 17.68,

		17.88, 17.136, 17.140,

		17.152, 17.172	

	98-O-446.CC	17.28	

	98-O-446.DD	17.08, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24,

		17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.40,

		17.124

	99-O-446.EE	17.40	

	99-O-446.FF	17.100, 17.172	

	99-O-446.GG	17.40, 17.64, 17.68, 17.164	

	00-O-446.HH	17.88	

	00-O-446.II	17.52, 17.56, 17.64	

	00-O-446.JJ	17.36, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52,

		17.56, 17.64	

	01-O-446.KK	17.88	

	01-O-446.LL	17.40	

	01-O-446.MM	17.08, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28,

		17.32, 17.52, 17.124	

	03-O-446.NN	17.52	

	03-O-446.OO	17.56	

	03-O-446.PP	17.70	

	03-O-446.QQ	17.92	

	03-O-446.RR	Repealed by 08-O-617	

	03-O-446.SS	17.08, 17.20, 17.24,

		17.28, 17.32	

	05-O-446.UU	17.144	

	06-O-446.VV	17.80	

	89-O-450	13.05	Water

	89-O-454	17.88, 17.128, 17.168,	Land development code

		17.172

	89-O-456	13.10	Sewer use regulations

	89-O-457	2.15	City manager

	90-O-467	2.30	Police department

	91-O-474	2.05	Council procedures

	92-O-474.A	2.05	

	92-O-474.B	2.05	

	94-O-474.D	2.05	

	95-O-474.E	2.05	

	91-O-477	13.25	Systems development charges

	06-O-477B	13.25	

	91-O-482	2.50	Parks and recreation commission

	93-O-482.A	2.50	

	91-O-483	2.55	Planning commission

	98-O-483.A	2.55	

	91-O-484	Title 18	Engineering requirements and standard specifications

	92-O-486	3.15	Public improvement special assessments; repeals Ord. 60-O-146

	94-O-505	12.25	Public parks and recreational areas

	94-O-508	Repealed by 18-O-772	Employee contributions to PERS

	96-O-518	5.05	Business licenses

	97-O-523	Repealed by 14-O-733	Building code enforcement

	97-O-525	2.25	Municipal court

	98-O-527	Title 18	Engineering requirements and standard specifications

	00-O-535	2.05	Council procedures

	00-O-537	Repealed by 14-O-728	Tobacco products sales and distribution

	01-O-543	Repealed by 14-O-728	Vendor-assisted tobacco sales

	02-O-547	2.60	Urban renewal agency

	02-O-551	2.60	Urban renewal plan

	02-O-552	Repealed by 18-O-772	Traffic safety committee

	02-O-553	13.05	Adds new section to Ords. 66-O-190 and 88-O-432; repeals Ords. 66-O-190 § 7(E) and 88-O-432 § 7(E), water curtailment plan

	03-O-557	17.70	Master plan development zone

	04-O-566	Repealed by 08-O-603	Real property compensation

	06-O-571	8.15, 10.30	Motor vehicle nuisances

	06-O-572	1.01, 1.05, 2.05, 2.20, 8.15,	Code adoption, general penalty; repeals Ords. 51-O-004 § 4

		10.05, 10.10, 13.05, 17.08	(D), 52-O-012.A, 51-O-013 §§ 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 19, 29, 30, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 48, 51, 55, 56, 62, 64, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 86 and 92, 52-O-025, 52-O-031 § 6, 53-O-052, 54-O-056 § 9, 55-O-070, 57-O-105, 57-O-106, 58-O-112, 58-O-115, 90-O-115.A, 97-O-115.B, 59-O-134 §§ 4 and 11, 61-O-157 §§ 10(D), 12, 17, 41 and 64, 64-O-178, 66-O-184 (to the extent that it amends Ord. 51-O-013 § 19), 66-O-185, 66-O-190 §§ 10 and 28(C), 90-O-190.A, 79-O-309 §§ 14 and 16, 79-O-315, 79-O-324, 80-O-348, 84-O-387 §§ 5 and 12, 90-O-387.A § 3, 86-O-406 § 7(D), 88-O-432 §§ 10 and 28(C), 89-O-439, 89-O-446 §§ 1(1.010), 8 (definition of “condominium”), 128 and 132, 89-O-450 §§ 4 and 5, 91-O-477 § 15 and 00-O-535 § 22(C)(5)

	06-O-574	13.20	Systems replacement charges

	06-O-575	15.05	Buildings and construction

	06-O-577	13.30	Administrative services and charges

	07-O-580	Repealer	City manager; repeals § 2.15.060

	07-O-581	3.10	Transient occupancy tax

	07-O-582	17.100	Hazardous building site protection hillside development standards

	07-O-583	12.30	Skate park guidelines and rules

	07-O-584	17.160	Land development code enforcement and penalties

	07-O-585	17.171	Neighborhood circulation plans

	07-O-586	9.10	Offenses

	07-O-587	17.172	Land divisions; repeals Ch. 17.112, rear lot development

	07-O-588	15.05	Buildings and construction penalties

	07-O-589	8.15, 10.05	Nuisances; vehicles and traffic

	07-O-590	13.05, 13.10, 13.15, 13.20	Public services penalties

	07-O-591	8.05, 8.15, 10.30	Health and safety

	07-O-592	1.05	Code adoption

	07-O-593	17.80	Site plan approval improvement standards

	07-O-594	17.92	Off-street parking and loading regulations

	07-O-595	17.170	Street standards

	07-O-596	17.168	Public facilities improvement standards and criteria for utilities

	07-O-597		Number not used

	07-O-598	1.10	Fees and charges

	07-O-599	2.30	Police department

	08-O-600	17.04	Development permit procedures

	08-O-601	2.15	City manager

	08-O-602	10.10	Parking

	08-O-603	Repealer	Real property compensation; repeals Ch. 2.80

	08-O-604	Special	Rezone

	08-O-605	13.25	Systems development charges

	08-O-606	17.08	Land development definitions

	08-O-607	2.63	Urban renewal advisory committee

	08-O-608	17.88	Sign regulations

	08-O-609	17.16	Suburban residential district

	08-O-610	13.35	Storm water

	08-O-611	2.05	Council procedures

	08-O-612	17.20	Single-family residential district

	08-O-613	17.24	Two-family residential district

	08-O-614	17.28	Multiple-family residential district

	08-O-615	17.32	Manufactured home residential district

	08-O-616	17.124	Conditional uses

	08-O-617	17.128	Interpretations and exceptions

	08-O-618	12.40	Alcohol on public premises

	08-O-619	13.40	Storm water fees

	08-O-620	17.180	Workforce housing

	08-O-621	17.88	Sign regulations

	08-O-622	17.52	General commercial district

	08-O-623		Number not used

	09-O-624	12.10	Sidewalks

	09-O-625	Special	Annexation

	09-O-626	Special	Comprehensive plan

	09-O-627	17.64	Industrial park district

	09-O-628	17.68	General industrial district

	09-O-629	17.104	Home occupations

	09-O-630	Repealed by 18-O-772	Traffic safety committee

	09-O-631	17.140	Comprehensive plan, land development code amendments

	09-O-632	17.04	Development permit procedures

	09-O-633	17.28	Multiple-family residential district

	09-O-634	Repealed by 15-O-743	Flood damage prevention

	09-O-635	17.94	Landscaping

	09-O-636	17.116	Planned community

	09-O-637	17.120	Nonconforming uses

	09-O-638	17.08	Animal definitions

	09-O-639	Special	Comprehensive plan

	09-O-640	17.124	Conditional uses

	09-O-641	17.136	Conditional use permits

	09-O-642	8.15	Temporary use of recreational vehicle or travel trailer

	09-O-643	8.05	Fire hazards

	09-O-644	1.05	General penalty

	09-O-645	17.152	Appeal to city council

	09-O-646	17.156	Appeal to planning commission

	09-O-647	Special	Rezone

	09-O-648	Repealed by 15-O-743	Flood damage prevention

	09-O-649	17.12	Establishment of zoning districts and zoning map

	09-O-650	17.100	Hazardous building site protection hillside development standards

	10-O-651	17.56	Tourist commercial (C-4) district

	10-O-652	17.70	Master plan development

	10-O-653	2.63	Urban renewal advisory commission

	10-O-654	17.04	Development permit procedures

	10-O-655	17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28	Manufactured housing siting requirements

	10-O-656	15.05	Building codes

	10-O-657	17.36	Professional office district

	10-O-658	17.144	Annexations

	10-O-659	17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.120	Development code

	10-O-660	13.10	Sewer use regulations

	10-O-661	17.04	Development permit procedures

	10-O-662	12.25	Public parks and recreational areas

	10-O-663	9.10	Air guns

	10-O-664	12.25	Dogs in public parks

	10-O-665	17.36	Lot width, lot coverage and yard requirements

	10-O-666	17.08	Planned communities

	10-O-667	12.25	City park rules and regulations

	10-O-668	2.05	Council procedures

	10-O-669	Special	Comprehensive plan

	10-O-670	Repealed by 15-O-743	Flood damage prevention

	10-O-671	8.05, 8.15	Hazardous and nuisance vegetation

	10-O-672	17.144	Annexations

	10-O-673	2.63	Urban renewal advisory commission

	10-O-674	8.15	Noise prevention

	10-O-675	17.170	Street standards

	10-O-676	Special	Transportation system plan

	10-O-677	17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28	Manufactured home standards

	10-O-678	Special	Public facilities plan

	11-O-679	2.01	Committee and commission membership

	11-O-680	2.55	Planning commission

	11-O-681	2.50	Parks and recreation commission

	11-O-682	17.172	Subdivision replatting

	11-O-683	17.88	Sign regulations

	11-O-684	Special	Transportation system plan

	11-O-685	2.50	Parks and recreation commission

	11-O-686	8.05, 8.15	Health and safety

	11-O-687		(Number not used)

	11-O-688	Special	Street vacation

	12-O-689	17.92	Vision clearance for parking areas

	12-O-690	12.25	Smoking in park areas

	12-O-691	Special	Right-of-way vacation

	12-O-692	17.172	Land divisions

	12-O-693	17.136	Conditional use permits

	12-O-694	17.116	Planned communities

	12-O-695	2.50	Parks and recreation commission

	12-O-696	17.170	Reverse frontage

	12-O-697	13.05, 13.15	Water and sewer fees

	12-O-698	2.05, 2.15, 2.25, 2.35,	Administration and personnel

		2.55	

	12-O-699	2.67	Budget committee

	12-O-700	2.85	Sale of city owned real property

	12-O-701	Repealer	Local contract review board; repeals Ch. 2.45

	12-O-702	Special	Street vacation

	12-O-703	12.45	Public rights-of-way

	12-O-704	12.10, 12.15, 12.20	Work in public right-of-way

	12-O-705	18.05	Engineering requirements and standard specifications for public works infrastructure

	13-O-706	Special	Franchise

	13-O-707	17.40	Public open space district

	13-O-708	12.25	City park rules and regulations

	13-O-709	13.05	Water service

	13-O-710	Special	Rezone

	13-O-711	12.50	Vacations

	13-O-712	Special	Annexation

	13-O-713	8.15	Nuisances; repeals Ch. 8.10

	13-O-714	13.35	Storm water

	13-O-715	Special	Franchise

	13-O-716	12.40	Alcohol regulations for city premises

	13-O-717	8.05	Fire hazards

	13-O-718	12.25	Smoking prohibited in designated park areas

	13-O-719	Special	Vacation

	13-O-720	Special	Annexation

	14-O-721	17.88	Sandwich board signs

	14-O-722	17.08, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.32, 17.124	Cottage industries

	14-O-723	17.124	Conditional uses

	14-O-724	13.05	Water service

	14-O-725	13.10	Sewer use regulations

	14-O-726	18.05	Engineering requirements and standard specifications for public works infrastructure

	14-O-727	17.52, 17.56	Light manufacturing and fabricating

	14-O-728	Repealer	Tobacco sales; repeals Ch. 9.15

	14-O-729	8.15	Control of domestic animals

	14-O-730	13.25	Systems development charges

	14-O-731	17.40	Public open space district

	14-O-732	2.57	Tourism promotion advisory committee

	14-O-733	15.05	Building codes; repeals Ch. 15.10

	14-O-734	Special	Public facilities plan

	14-O-735	8.20	Unlawful disposal of solid waste and littering; repeals § 8.15.060

	14-O-736	8.15	Nuisances

	14-O-737	8.05	Fire hazards

	14-O-738	Special	Annexation

	14-O-739	3.20	Tax on sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products

	14-O-740	8.15	Deteriorated condition of property as nuisance

	14-O-741	17.168	Public facilities improvement standards and criteria for utilities

	15-O-742	3.25	Motor vehicle fuel sales tax

	15-O-743	17.98	Flood damage prevention; repeals Ch. 15.15

	15-O-744	Special	Annexation

	15-O-745	4.05	Adds Ch. 4.05 and names Title 4, communications infrastructure

	15-O-746	12.25	Smoking prohibited in designated park areas

	15-O-747	17.88	Sandwich board signs

	15-O-748		Pending

	15-O-749	Special	Annexation

	15-O-750	13.25	System development charges

	16-O-751	13.05	Water

	16-O-752	17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56, 17.64, 17.68, 17.124	Amateur radio facilities

	16-O-753	3.20	Tax on sale of marijuana

	16-O-754	9.10, 10.20	Offenses; vehicles and traffic

	16-O-755	Special	Waste water facilities plan; public facilities plan

	16-O-756	1.15	Citizen citations

	16-O-757	3.10, 5.05, 5.10, 9.10,	General penalties

		12.30, 13.05

	16-O-758	10.10	Parking

	16-O-759	12.25	Public parks and recreational areas

	16-O-760	Special	Public facilities plan

	16-O-761	8.15	Nuisances

	16-O-762	17.104, 17.124	Home occupations; bed and breakfast facilities

	16-O-763	9.10	Offenses

	16-O-764	5.10	Taxicabs

	16-O-765	13.10	Sewer use regulations

	16-O-766	17.124	Short-term rentals

	16-O-767	5.15	Transportation network companies

	16-O-768	5.10	Taxicabs

	17-O-769	5.05, 5.20	Transient businesses

	17-O-770	17.170	Street standards

	18-O-771	3.25	Motor vehicle fuel sales tax

	18-O-772	2.01, 2.05, 2.10, 2.15, 2.20, 2.25, 2.30, 2.35, 2.50, 2.55, 2.57, 2.60, 2.63, 2.67, 2.75, 2.85	Administration and personnel

	18-O-773	8.15	Nuisances

	18-O-774	9.10	Offenses

	18-O-775	17.98	Flood damage prevention

	19-O-776	17.74	Riparian protection overlay zone

	 



-----------------------------

The Brookings Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 19-O-776, passed April 22, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Brookings Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.brookings.or.us/ City Telephone: (541) 469-2163

Code Publishing Company