


CHARTER  FOR THE  CITY OF BEAVERTON

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter I Name and Boundaries

1.    Title of Enactment.

2.    Name.

3.    Boundaries.

Chapter II Powers

4.    Powers of the City.

5.    Construction of Charter.

Chapter III Form of Government

6.    Where Powers Vested.

7.    The Council.

8.    Mayor.

9.    Other Officers.

10.    Salaries.

11.    Qualification of Elective Officers.

Chapter IV The Council

12.    Meetings.

13.    Quorum.

14.    Record of Proceedings.

15.    Proceedings to Be Public.

16.    Mayor’s Function at Council Meetings

17.    President of the Council.

18.    Exception

Chapter V Powers and Duties of City Officers

19.    Mayor.

20.    Other Mayor-Related Provisions.

21.    Other City Officers.

Chapter VI Elections

22.    Regular City Elections.

23.    Special Elections.

24.    Qualifications of Electors.

25.    Canvass of Election Returns.

26.    Certificate of Election.

27.    Commencement of Terms of Office.

28.    Oath of Officer.

29.    Nominations, Numbered Council Positions and Non-artisan Primary and General Elections.

30.    Voter’s Pamphlet.

31.    Write-in Votes.

Chapter VII Vacancies in Office

32.    Vacancies in Office.

33.    Filling of Vacancies in Elective Offices.

Chapter VIII Ordinances

34.    Ordaining Clause.

35.    Mode of Adoption; Attestation and Approval; Veto; Overriding of Veto.

36.    When Ordinances Take Effect.

Chapter IX Public Improvements

37.    Condemnation.

38.    Public Improvements and Special Assessments.

39.    Bids for Public Contracts.

Chapter X Miscellaneous Provisions

40.    Limitation on Indebtedness.

41.    Existing Ordinances Continued.

42.    Initiative and Referendum.

43.    Zone Change Notice.

44.    Limitation of Powers of the Governing Body of the City of Beaverton in Regards to Urban Renewal.

45.    Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions.

46.    Time of Effect of Charter.

PREAMBLE

To provide for the government of the City of Beaverton, Washington County, Oregon, and to repeal all charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this charter takes effect.

Be it enacted by the people of the City of Beaverton, Washington County, Oregon:


Chapter I NAME AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1. TITLE OF ENACTMENT.

This enactment may be referred to as the Beaverton Charter of 1981.


Section 2. NAME.

The City of Beaverton, Washington County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation, with the name, “CITY OF BEAVERTON”.


Section 3. BOUNDARIES.

The boundaries of the City of Beaverton shall remain the same as existed on the effective date of this act or as hereafter increased or decreased pursuant to law. There shall be maintained and available for public inspection at the repository of city records at least two copies of this charter containing an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries.


Chapter II POWERS


Section 4. POWERS OF THE CITY.

The city shall have all powers which the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5. CONSTRUCTION OF CHARTER.

In this charter no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the city would have if the particular power were not mentioned. This charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the city may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to state laws and the municipal home rule provisions of the state constitution. 


Chapter III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


Section 6. WHERE POWERS VESTED.

Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council.


Section 7. THE COUNCIL.

The council shall be composed of five councilors elected at large to serve a four year term. If this charter is adopted, the councilors in office at the time of the effective date of this charter shall continue in office, each until the end of the councilor’s term of office as fixed by the charter of the city in effect at the time this charter is adopted. Following adoption of this charter the four councilors in office at the time this charter is effective shall appoint the fifth councilor who shall serve from the effective date of this charter until a successor, elected to a four year term at the 1982 biennial November general election, takes office.


Section 8. MAYOR.

The mayor shall be elected at the regular biennial general November election every four years for a term of four years to begin on the first day of January following the election, but the mayor in office at the time this charter is effective shall continue in office until December 31, 1984, and until a successor is elected and qualified.


Section 9. OTHER OFFICERS.

A. The council, by majority vote of the entire council, shall appoint and may remove a municipal judge, city attorney and auditor for the city.

B. The mayor shall appoint and may remove an assistant to the mayor and such other officers as the mayor deems necessary. The assistant to the mayor is the principal managerial aide to the mayor and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the mayor.


Section 10. SALARIES.

Except that the salary for the mayor shall not be set at less than eighty percent (80%) of the salary of a District Court Judge for the State of Oregon, compensation for the services of city officers and employes shall be fixed as the council may direct.


Section 11. QUALIFICATION OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS.

No person may fill an elective office of the city unless at the time of the election or appointment the person is a qualified elector of the state and has resided continuously in the city during the six months immediately preceding the election or appointment. A person, after taking office, must remain a resident of the city and qualified elector of the state in order to continue to hold the office. The council is the final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members.


Chapter IV THE COUNCIL


Section 12. MEETINGS.

The council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month in the city at a time and at a place which it designates. It shall adopt rules for the government of its proceedings. The mayor or two or more members of the council may call special meetings of the council in a manner prescribed by general ordinance adopted by the council.


Section 13. QUORUM.

A majority of the incumbent members of the council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of the absent members in a manner provided by ordinance. Every member of the council who is present shall be counted for the purpose of constituting a quorum, even if the member does not vote on one or more issues.


Section 14. RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.

The council shall keep a record of its proceedings and the ayes and nays upon a question before it shall be taken and entered in the record.


Section 15. PROCEEDINGS TO BE PUBLIC.

Except as state law may provide otherwise, the deliberations and proceedings of the council and other deliberative bodies of the city shall be public.


Section 16. MAYOR’S FUNCTION AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.

The mayor shall preside at council meetings. Except in case of a tie, the mayor shall not vote on matters before the council. In case of a tie, the mayor shall cast the deciding vote. The mayor shall preserve order, enforce the rules of the council and determine the order of business under the rules of the council.


Section 17. PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL.

At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each succeeding year, the council shall elect a president from its membership. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, when the mayor is absent from the city or unable for any reason to function as mayor, the president shall:

A. Preside at council meetings;

B. Have a vote on all questions before the council, except that he or she shall not possess or exercise the mayor’s vote to break a tie as set forth in section 16 of this charter; and

C. Possess, with the exception of the veto power vested in the mayor by section 35 of this charter and the powers of the mayor pro tem provided in section 20 of this charter, the legal powers and be subject to the legal limitations incident to the office of mayor.


Section 18. EXCEPTION

Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the council present who vote is necessary to determine a question before the council.


Chapter V POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS


Section 19. MAYOR.

Except as provided to the contrary in this charter, the mayor is the executive and administrative head of the government of the city. In exercising this power the mayor shall:

A. Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties and, except when circumstances necessitate otherwise, attend all meetings of the council;

B. At the beginning of each calendar year, and may at other times, report to the council as to the affairs and needs of the city and recommend legislation the mayor considers necessary and desirable;

C. Appoint the committees provided by the rules of the council; appoint and remove all members of boards or commissions, subject to confirmation by the council; and, except as provided to the contrary in this charter, appoint and remove other appointive officers and employes; subject to the further requirements that:

1. An appointment or removal made by the mayor to any board or commission does not take effect unless a majority of the members of the entire council confirm the appointment or removal or the council fails to act upon appointment or removal within fifteen (15) calendar days after the council’s notice of the mayor’s action; and

2. Unless waived by a majority vote of the entire council, a member of any committee, board or commission shall be a resident of the city;

D. Have, with the exception of the council, city attorney, city auditor or over the judicial activities of the municipal judge, general supervision and control over appointive city officers and employes and their work with power to transfer an employee from one department to another, to the end of obtaining the utmost efficiency in each of them;

E. Sign all records of proceedings approved by the council and all authorized writings;

F. See that all ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are observed;

G. Act as the purchasing agent for all departments of the city under his supervision and control;

H. Prepare and submit to the budget committee the annual budget estimates and such reports as that body requests;

I. Supervise the operation of all public utilities owned or operated by the city and have general supervision over all city property.


Section 20. OTHER MAYOR-RELATED PROVISIONS.

A. Mayor Pro Tem. Except as provided to the contrary by this charter, whenever the mayor is absent from the city, is unable to act as mayor, or whenever the office becomes vacant, the assistant to the mayor shall act as mayor pro tem and possess the administrative powers and duties of the mayor. Although the mayor pro tem shall not preside at council meetings, vote on questions before it, nor possess a veto, the mayor pro tem is entitled to sit with the council and take part in all council discussions. No mayor pro tem, however, may appoint or remove a city officer or employee except with the approval of a majority of the entire council.

B. Ineligible Persons. The mayor may not appoint or employ with the city his or her spouse nor any person related to him or her by consanguinity or affinity within the third degree.


Section 21. OTHER CITY OFFICERS.

A. Municipal Judge. The municipal judge is a judicial officer of the city and at all times shall be admitted to practice law in the State of Oregon. There shall be a municipal court of the City of Beaverton, Washington County, Oregon. The council, by intergovernmental agreement, may have some or all of the duties and responsibilities of the municipal judge or the functions of the municipal court performed by and through a branch of the state judicial system. The court shall be open for the transaction of business at times specified by the council. All area within the city is within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The municipal judge has jurisdiction over all infractions and offenses, whether civil or criminal in nature, defined and made punishable by ordinances of the city and over all actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or penalties defined or authorized by ordinances of the city. The municipal judge may issue process for the arrest of any person accused of an offense against the city, commit any such person to jail or admit such person to bail pending trial, issue subpoenas, compel witnesses to appear and testify in any cause before the court, compel obedience to such subpoenas, issue any process necessary to carry into effect the judgments of the court, and punish for contempt of court. Except as otherwise provided by ordinances or this charter all proceedings in the municipal court shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the state governing district courts.

B. City Attorney. The city attorney shall at all times be admitted to practice law in the State of Oregon.

C. Auditor. The auditor shall at all times be licensed to practice as an auditor under the state municipal audit law. The auditor shall perform the annual audit and examination required by the state municipal audit law and such other audit duties as may be designated by the council.


Chapter VI ELECTIONS


Section 22. REGULAR CITY ELECTIONS.

Regular city elections shall be held at the same time and places as biennial elections for electing state and county officers, in accordance with applicable state election laws. At each regular city election all elective officers to be nominated or elected and all matters submitted to the electors at that time shall be voted upon.


Section 23. SPECIAL ELECTIONS.

The council, by resolution, may call and provide the time, manner and means for holding a special election. Notice of such special election shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the election in the manner provided by the action of the council ordering the election.


Section 24. QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS.

Every person who is a resident of the city and who qualifies as a legal voter under state law may vote in city elections.


Section 25. CANVASS OF ELECTION RETURNS.

In all elections held in conjunction with state and county elections the state law governing the filing and canvassing of returns shall apply. The results of each election shall be entered in the record of the council. The record shall state the number of votes cast for and against each measure, the names of the officers elected, and the measures enacted or approved. In the event of a tie vote for candidates the election of a successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots.


Section 26. CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION.

Immediately after completion of the canvass the city elections officer shall issue a certificate of election to each person elected. The certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the facts which it states.


Section 27. COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS OF OFFICE.

The term of office of a person elected at a November general biennial election shall commence on the first day of January following the election.


Section 28. OATH OF OFFICER.

Each officer, upon entering office, shall take an oath or affirm that he or she will support the constitutions and laws of the United States and of Oregon and the charter and ordinances of the City, and that he or she will perform the duties of the office to the best of his or her ability.


Section 29. NOMINATIONS, NUMBERED COUNCIL POSITIONS AND NONPARTISAN PRIMARY AND GENERAL ELECTIONS.

A. Nominations. The name of any elector qualified for elective office as provided in Section 11 of this charter may be placed on the primary ballot for an elective office of the city. The name of such an elector shall be submitted to the county clerk to be printed upon the city ballot whenever a petition containing said candidate’s nomination, written acceptance and signatures of not fewer than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) qualified electors has been filed with the city elections officer. Said petition shall be in a form to be prescribed by the city council.

B. Primary Elections. A non-partisan primary election shall be held in each even numbered year, or as hereafter provided by the constitution or general laws of Oregon regulating state partisan primary elections, and on the day and month fixed for such state partisan primary elections.

C. Numbered Council Positions. The nomination of mayor and councilors shall be non-partisan and shall be made in conformity with methods hereinafter provided. Council positions shall be numbered in consecutive order. Each councilor shall be designated by the same position as the councilor whom he or she has succeeded or will succeed in office. In all proceedings for the nominations of candidates for the office of councilor, every petition for nomination, nominee’s acceptance and certificate of election, ballot or other document used in connection with nominations for councilors shall state the official number of the position as councilor to which such candidate aspires. His or her name shall appear on the ballot only for such designated position. At all elections each such office of councilor to be filled shall be separately designated on the ballot by official position number as herein provided, in addition to other matter required by law to appear thereon. In case no nomination is made at the primary election, nominations may be made for the general election by position in the same manner as herein set forth for primary elections. An incumbent councilor may not file for nomination for or election to any councilor position except the one he or she presently fills.

D. Limited Filing. A candidate may not file for more than one numbered position in any one year nor can a candidate file for another council position in the same year after withdrawing the original filing.

E. Majority of Votes Required. In all primary elections the two persons having the highest number of votes to any municipal office shall be deemed nominated for the run-off election for that office unless one candidate receives a majority of all votes cast at said primary election, in which event that person alone shall be deemed to have been nominated. If two persons have been nominated for any office and the nomination of one of those persons is disqualified for any reason, then the person receiving the third highest number of votes at the primary election for that office shall be deemed nominated for the run-off election for that office to replace the person who was disqualified. 


Section 30. VOTER’S PAMPHLET.

A. All candidacies and measures submitted to the voters of the city in a primary, special, or general election shall be publicized by voter’s pamphlet, in accordance with city ordinance. No voter’s pamphlet shall be prepared for any election for which no city measures are submitted to the voters and not more than one person has filed or been nominated for any city office.

B. If the council finds that there was a material misstatement of fact published in the city voter’s pamphlet which was submitted by or in behalf of a person nominated or elected to the council, the nomination or election of that person is nullified. 


Section 31. WRITE-IN VOTES.

The ability of the voters of the city to nominate or elect a candidate by write-in vote shall be provided on all ballots.


Chapter VII VACANCIES IN OFFICE


Section 32. VACANCIES IN OFFICE.

A. An office becomes vacant:

1. Upon the incumbent’s death; adjudicated incompetence; conviction of a crime pertaining to the office or unlawful destruction of public records; resignation; recall from office; or ceasing to possess the qualifications for the office;

2. Upon the failure of the person elected or appointed to the office to qualify therefor within ten (10) days after the time for the term of office to commence; or

3. In the case of a councilor, upon that person’s absence from meetings of the council held within any consecutive sixty (60) days period without the consent of the council, and upon a declaration by the council of the vacancy.

B. Upon request of a majority of the members of the council, the municipal judge shall determine and find in writing whether under the provisions of this section a vacancy exists in the office of mayor.


Section 33. FILLING OF VACANCIES IN ELECTIVE OFFICES.

Vacancies shall be filled as follows: 

A. If less than one year remains in the term of the person who held that vacant office, the vacancy shall be filled by majority vote of the remaining members of the council. The appointee shall serve the unexpired term of the predecessor to the office; or

B. If one year or more remains in the term of the person who held the vacant office or if the office is not filled and no person takes office under Section 27 of this charter for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled at a special election called and provided for by resolution of the council. The resolution of the council shall provide that the person:

1. Shall be elected at the first election date that meets all requirements of state and city election laws; 

2. Shall serve the unexpired term of office of the predecessor to the office, or if no person has taken office, then the remaining term of office;

3. Is required to receive a majority of the votes cast for candidates for the office at the election at which the office is filled; if no candidate receives a majority at the first election, then a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the first state election date available thereafter; and 

4. Shall serve until a successor to the office is duly elected and qualified therefor.

C. Until a vacancy is filled by the special election and a person takes office in accordance with subsection B of this Section, the remaining members of the council shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy for the interim period of time.


Chapter VIII ORDINANCES


Section 34. ORDAINING CLAUSE.

The adopting clause of all ordinances hereafter adopted shall be, “The City of Beaverton Ordains as Follows:”.


Section 35. MODE OF ADOPTION; ATTESTATION AND APPROVAL; VETO; OVERRIDING OF VETO.

A. Mode of Adoption.

1. Except as provided to the contrary in subsections 2., 3., and 4. of this section, every ordinance of the council, before being finally adopted, shall be read fully and distinctly in open council meeting on two different days, provided that the second reading must be at least six days after the first reading.

2. Both readings may be by title only by unanimous vote of all councilors present and voting on the question, provided that, prior to first reading, a copy of the ordinance is provided for each councilor and three copies are filed for public inspection at the repository for city records.

3. An ordinance adopted after being read by title alone has no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was thus filed prior to such reading, unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open council meeting as finally amended prior to being adopted by the council.

4. An ordinance may be adopted at a single meeting of the council by unanimous vote of all councilors present and voting on the question upon being first read in full and then by title.

B. Attestation and Approval. Upon adoption of an ordinance by the council, the keeper of the record of proceedings shall endorse it with the date of council adoption, the attestor’s name and title of office. Thereafter the ordinance shall be delivered to the mayor by personally serving a duplicate original upon the mayor as soon as practicable. The mayor, within ten (10) days of the date of actual receipt of the ordinance, shall return it to the keeper of the record of proceedings with or without the mayor’s approval, or with a veto.

C. Veto. The mayor may veto an ordinance or other legislative enactment adopted by the council by endorsing the duplicate original as such and attaching a written statement to it explaining the reasons for the veto. If the ordinance is returned without approval or veto, the ordinance shall have legal effect as if approved.

D. Overriding of Veto. At the next regular meeting of the council after the mayor returns an ordinance vetoed, the council shall consider the ordinance and may adopt the ordinance over the veto of the mayor by a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote of all members of the council, and the ordinance then takes effect in accordance with Section 36 of this charter.


Section 36. WHEN ORDINANCES TAKE EFFECT.

An ordinance takes effect thirty (30) days after its adoption by the council and approval by the mayor or passage over the mayor’s veto. When the council deems it advisable, an ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect. In the event of any emergency, where the reasons for the emergency have been expressly stated, an ordinance may take effect immediately upon its adoption by the council and approval by the mayor or passage over a veto, or at any other designated time within thirty (30) days thereof.


Chapter IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 37. CONDEMNATION.

The necessity for taking property by condemnation shall be determined by the council and declared by a resolution describing the property and stating the use to which it is to be devoted.


Section 38. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.

The procedures for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement, and levying, collecting and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property, shall be governed by ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable state laws. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a water or sewer improvement declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be abandoned and not reinitiated for six (6) months upon a remonstrance thereto by the owners of land which bears sixty percent (60%) of the estimated assessed cost of the improvement. In this section “owner” means the record holder of legal title or, where land is being purchased under a land sale contract recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land, the purchaser is deemed the “owner.”


Section 39. BIDS FOR PUBLIC CONTRACTS.

As defined and except as otherwise provided, governed or exempted by ordinance, any public contract in excess of $5,000.00 may be let only to the lowest responsible bidder.


Chapter X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 40. LIMITATION ON INDEBTEDNESS.

A. Voluntary Floating Indebtedness. Except by consent of a majority of the voters at an election, the city’s voluntary floating indebtedness shall not exceed $25,000.00 at any one time. For purposes of calculating the limitation, the legally authorized debt in existence at the time this charter takes effect shall not be considered. All city officials and employees who create or officially approve any indebtedness in excess of this limitation shall be jointly and severally liable for the excess.

B. Bonded Indebtedness. Except as authorized by state law, the city shall not issue and sell general obligation or revenue bonds unless authorized by the consent of a majority of the voters at an election.


Section 41. EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED.

All ordinances and other enactments of the city consistent with this charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.


Section 42. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.

The Initiative and Referendum powers, which are reserved to the qualified voters of each municipality, shall be exercised under Article IV, Section 1(5) of the Oregon Constitution.


Section 43. ZONE CHANGE NOTICE.

Before initially hearing any proposed quasi-judicial amendment to the zoning map (hereafter “zone change”) pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Beaverton, the council, or any board, commission or person delegated by the council to conduct the initial evidentiary hearing, shall cause the owners of record of the real property which is the subject of the proposed zone change to be notified of the date, time and place of the initial hearing. The notice shall be in writing, sent by certified mail, postmarked at least thirty (30) days before the date of the initial hearing, and shall inform the property owner of the right to testify for or against the proposed zone change.


Section 44. LIMITATION OF POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF BEAVERTON IN REGARDS TO URBAN RENEWAL.

Section 1. The Governing Body of the City of Beaverton shall not approve any Urban Renewal Plan unless approved by a majority vote in the City of Beaverton at a November or May election. Further, any urban renewal agency shall not be comprised exclusively of members of the City Council. (Amendment approved by the voters November 4, 2008)


Section 45. REPEAL OF PREVIOUSLY ENACTED PROVISIONS.

All charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this charter takes effect are hereby repealed.


Section 46. TIME OF EFFECT OF CHARTER.

This charter shall take effect January 2, 1981.


Title 1 GENERAL

Chapters:

1.01    General

1.02    Mayor

1.03    Violation Provision

1.04    Criminal Offense Provision

1.05    City Attorney

1.06    Referential Adoption of State Laws, Rules and Regulations

1.07    Returned Checks

1.08    Municipal Court Security


Chapter 1.01 GENERAL

Sections:

1.01.010    Code Designated.

1.01.020    Definitions.

1.01.030    Rules of Construction.

1.01.040    Acts of Substitute Officers.

1.01.050    Continuation of Existing Ordinances.

1.01.060    Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations Previously Accrued.

1.01.070    Exclusions.

1.01.080    Amendment and Repeal of Code Sections.

1.01.090    Severability of Parts of Code.

1.01.100    Catchlines of Sections.

1.01.110    Service of Notice.

1.01.120    Alternative Manner of Service.


1.01.010 Code Designated.

All ordinances included in this and the following chapters constitute and are designated “The Beaverton Code, 1982” and will hereafter be referred to as “this Code” or the “Code”. When referring to specific sections of the Code, the letters “BC” should precede the numerical designation.


1.01.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, unless inconsistent with the intent of the Council, or the context clearly requires otherwise, or unless a different meaning is defined and directed to the use of such words or phrases, mean:

City – The City of Beaverton, if the provision involves a duty owed the City in its governmental or corporate capacity; the officer, department, or agency of the City indicated by the context, or where the context does not clearly indicate a specific officer, department or agency, then the mayor or the mayor’s designee. “City” also includes, depending upon the context, the area within the territorial city limits of the City and territory outside the City over which the City acquires jurisdiction or control by any constitutional or Charter provision or by any law.

City lien docket, lien docket – The record keeping device or instrumentality used for maintaining the principal balance, interest and other obligations, certified as accurate by the City’s finance director, which are or have been owing to the City, and which device includes, but is not limited to, ledger books, microfilm, microfiche, computer memory storage and computer printouts.

Council – City Council of Beaverton, as defined by City Charter.

County – Washington County, Oregon.

Day – The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

Days – A calendar day, except when “working days” is used. [Added by Ordinance No. 3323, 5/24/83]

Daytime; nighttime – “Daytime” is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

Department, board, commission, office, officer or employee – A department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the City.

Development Code – Ordinance No. 2050, as now or hereafter amended or replaced by comparable provisions.

Interest – Interest accrued at the rate set by resolution of the Council which shall be the legal rate of interest established by Oregon Revised Statutes at the time the resolution is passed.

Joint authority – All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers comprising a board or commission shall be construed as giving authority to a quorum of the board or commission members unless the ordinance specifically provides otherwise.

Minor – A person under the age of 18 years.

Month – A calendar month, except where otherwise provided.

Number – The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

Office – The use of the title of an officer, employee, or an office, or ordinance or Charter shall mean the officer, employee, office, ordinance or City Charter, unless otherwise specifically designated.

Oath – Includes affirmation.

Official time – When certain hours are specified in the Code, they mean the United States standard of time as established by the Congress of the United States for the State of Oregon under the Act of March 19, 1918, (15 USC 261) except that from 2 a.m. on the last Sunday in April until 2 a.m. on the last Sunday in October the standard of time shall be one hour in advance of the standard established for the State of Oregon by the Congress under the Act of March 19, 1918.

Or, and – “Or” may be read “and”, and “and” may be read “or,” if the Council determines that the sense requires it.

ORS – Oregon Revised Statutes.

Owner – A fee title owner, part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of the building or land, or vendee in possession under a land sale contract; but owner does not include tenant.

Peace officer – A member of the Oregon State Police, a sheriff, constable, marshal, or municipal police officer or other municipal officer or employee charged with the responsibility of enforcing municipal ordinances.

Person – Individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies, joint ventures, club, company, business trust, governmental subdivision, State of Oregon, or public or private organization of any kind, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them.

Personal property – Every species of property, except real property as defined in this section.

Preceding, following – Next before and next after, respectively.

Process – A writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

Property – Both real and personal property.

Real property – Lands, tenements and fixtures to land.

Recorder, city recorder – The person(s) designated by the mayor to be the custodian of the City’s records.

Shall, must and may – “Shall and must” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

Signature or subscription by mark – “Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses sign their own names to it, or when notarized.

State – The State of Oregon.

Tenant or occupant – A person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, the building or land, either alone or with others, regardless of the term of the lease.

To – “To” means “to and including” when referring to a series of sections of this Code or the Oregon Revised Statutes.

Week – Seven consecutive days.

Working days – The days the City is officially open for business: Monday through Friday, excluding official holidays. [Added by Ordinance No. 3323, 5/24/83]

Writing – When notice in writing is given, writing means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photographing, and every means of recording including letters, words, pictures, sounds or symbols or combinations of them, and all papers, maps and photographic films and prints.

Year – A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.


1.01.030 Rules of Construction.

The following rules of construction shall be observed unless inconsistent with the intent of the Council or the context clearly requires otherwise.

A. Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last unless the last day falls upon a legal holiday as defined in ORS 187.010 and 187.020 or on Sunday, in which case the last day is also excluded.

B. Gender. Any gender includes the other genders.

C. Singular and Plural. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

D. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa.

E. Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases used in this Code that are not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved use of the language.

F. Construction. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed to effect its objects and to promote substantial justice.

G. Service by Mail. Whenever this Code requires or authorizes service by mail, it shall be sufficient if the document or notice is:

1. Delivered personally to the person to be served;

2. Delivered at the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served to any person over 14 years of age residing in the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served;

3. Delivered to an office maintained for the conduct of business by the person to be served during normal working hours and left with the person who is apparently in charge.


1.01.040 Acts of Substitute Officers.

Unless this Code or the Charter provides to the contrary, the authorized representatives or deputies of City department heads, may exercise any power granted by this Code to the department head. The department heads remain responsible for the performance of the acts.


1.01.050 Continuation of Existing Ordinances.

The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments.


1.01.060 Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations Previously Accrued.

The adoption of this Code or the repeal of an ordinance of this City shall not: (1) affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances committed prior to the effective date of this Code; (2) be construed as a waiver of a license or penalty due under an ordinance, at the effective date of this Code; (3) be construed as affecting the provisions of the ordinance relating to the collection of the license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to a violation of the ordinance; (4) to affect the validity of a bond or cash deposit in lieu of a bond, required to be posted, filed or deposited under an ordinance; (5) affect rights and obligations under these ordinances.


1.01.070 Exclusions.

Notwithstanding inclusion within this Code of the general subject matter pertaining to the ordinances listed below in whole or in part, unless specifically listed, this Code does not repeal or amend: (1) any special ordinance affecting less than the general public; (2) any ordinance affecting the general public on a temporary basis; (3) any ordinance relating to or resulting from annexation, naming of streets and public places, property acquisition or disposal of property, vacation of streets, public places or plats; (4) any ordinance relating to waiver of fees or Code provisions, bids or contracts; (5) any ordinance fixing or changing a zone classification of property; (6) any ordinance relating to budget; (7) any ordinance granting a permit; or (8) any franchise ordinance.


1.01.080 Amendment and Repeal of Code Sections.

This Code is the general and permanent law of the City. The Council may enact three types of general ordinances to affect this Code. Such ordinances may: (l) amend existing provisions; (2) add new provisions; or (3) repeal existing provisions. A general ordinance shall specifically amend or repeal a particular section of this Code, and a general ordinance creating a new Code section shall integrate the new section into the numbering system and organization of this Code.


1.01.090 Severability of Parts of Code.

The sections of this Code are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this Code shall not as a result of said section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase be held unconstitutional or invalid.


1.01.100 Catchlines of Sections.

The titles of the sections of this Code are intended as catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not part of the section.


1.01.110 Service of Notice.

When written notice is required to be given under a provision of this Code, the notice may be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by depositing it in the mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at that person’s last known business or residence address as it appears in the public records pertaining to the matter to which the notice is directed. Service by mail is considered completed at the time it is deposited in the post office. When a different method of serving notice is prescribed in the Code, the notice shall be given as prescribed. Proof of giving notice may be made by the signed statement of an officer or employee of the City or by affidavit of a person over the age of eighteen years showing service in conformity with the provisions of this Code or with any other law applicable to the subject matter. When notice is given by registered or certified mail, the United States postal card containing the signature of the recipient shall be sufficient proof of notice under this section.


1.01.120 Alternative Manner of Service.

In lieu of any manner of service or delivery specifically provided in this Code, and unless otherwise prohibited by law:

A. A notice, summons or other legal or administrative process required to be served on or delivered to a person by this Code may be served or delivered as allowed by Rule 7D of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure by:

1. Any person described in Rule 7E of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure; or

2. Any employee or officer of the City who has no personal interest in the underlying proceeding or its outcome. As used in this subsection, “personal interest” is an interest separate from the official interest a City employee or officer regularly has in a proceeding or its outcome.

B. If a notice, summons or other legal or administrative process is served or delivered pursuant to subsection A of this section, then proof of service, mailing or execution of process shall be made as provided in Rule 7F of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

C. If a notice, summons or other legal or administrative process is served or delivered pursuant to subsection A of this section, then any failure on the part of the City to comply with a provision of this section relating to service of notice, summons or other legal or administrative process shall not affect the validity of service or delivery or the existence of jurisdiction over the person if the court or administrative tribunal determines that the person actually knew of the substance of the notice, summons or other legal or administrative process. The court or administrative tribunal shall disregard any error in the content or service of notice, summons or other legal or administrative process that does not materially prejudice the substantive rights of a party. If service is made in any manner complying with Rule 7D(1) of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure, the court or administrative tribunal shall also disregard any error in the service that does not violate the due process rights of a party.

D. If a notice, summons or other legal or administrative process is served on or delivered to a person in accordance with this section, then any failure on the part of the City to comply with a specific section of this Code relating to the service of notice or other legal or administrative process shall not affect the validity of service or delivery or the existence of jurisdiction over the person. [BC 1.01.120, added by Ordinance No. 4356, 6/13/05]


Chapter 1.02 MAYOR

Sections:

1.02.010    Mayor Authorized to Adopt Rules.


1.02.010 Mayor Authorized to Adopt Rules.

The mayor is authorized to adopt any necessary administrative procedures, rules or regulations to administer and enforce the provisions of this Code and to carry out the mayor’s duties and responsibilities under the City Charter.


Chapter 1.03 VIOLATION PROVISION

Sections:

1.03.010    General Violation Provision.


1.03.010 General Violation Provision.

A violation of this Code for which the class of civil infraction is not specifically provided shall be considered a Class 2 Civil Infraction.


Chapter 1.04 CRIMINAL OFFENSE PROVISION

Sections:

1.04.010    General Criminal Offense Provision.

1.04.020    Municipal Court Proceedings.


1.04.010 General Criminal Offense Provision.

A violation of this Code for which a criminal penalty is not specifically provided for shall be considered a violation of BC 5.08.800, subsection A, unless a substantially similar offense is described by State law, then the penalty shall be equal to that provided by State law. [BC 1.04.010, added by Ordinance No. 3315, 4/5/83]


1.04.020 Municipal Court Proceedings.

Except as otherwise provided in this Code or in a provision of state law directly applicable to municipal courts, proceedings of the Beaverton Municipal Court shall conform to general laws of this state governing justices of the peace and justice courts. A defendant charged with an offense in the Beaverton Municipal Court does not have a right to have the matter transferred to the circuit court. [BC 1.04.020, added by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


Chapter 1.05 CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

1.05.010    City Attorney Authorized to Edit Code.


1.05.010 City Attorney Authorized to Edit Code.

In preparing the codified editions of ordinances for publication and distribution the City Attorney’s Office shall not alter the sense, meaning, effect or substance of any ordinance, but, within such limitations, may renumber sections and parts of sections of the ordinances, change the wording of headings, rearrange sections, change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters, sections or other parts, substitute the proper subsection, section or chapter or other division numbers, strike out figures or words which are merely repetitious, change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity, and correct manifest clerical or typographical errors. [BC 1.05.010, added by Ordinance No. 3444, 4/22/85]


Chapter 1.06 REFERENTIAL ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

1.06.010    Referential Adoption of State Laws, Rules and Regulations.


1.06.010 Referential Adoption of State Laws, Rules and Regulations.

Pursuant to ORS 221.330, all provisions of the State law as now constituted, including administrative rules and regulations, which are incorporated by reference throughout the Beaverton Code are adopted herein and shall be effective as though set forth in full. To the maximum extent constitutionally permissible, amendments occurring after passage of this section shall be adopted herein as hereafter constituted and shall be effective as though set forth in full. [BC 1.06.010, added by Ordinance No. 3465, 9/10/85]


Chapter 1.07 RETURNED CHECKS

Sections:

1.07.010    Checking Charges.


1.07.010 Checking Charges.

A check tendered for payment of any City fee, bill or otherwise, which is returned, is deemed failure to pay. Whenever a check is returned the City shall assess a service charge in an amount determined by the Finance Director to be the local commercially prevailing rate for each time the check is returned for non-sufficient funds or as a non-negotiable item. [BC 1.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 3472, 10/8/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3824, 8/3/92]


Chapter 1.08 MUNICIPAL COURT SECURITY

Sections:

1.08.005    Definitions.

1.08.010    Delegation of Authority to Presiding Judge.


1.08.005 Definitions.

“Local court facility” means the portion of the building in which the City’s municipal court conducts business, during the hours in which the court operates. [BC 1.08.005, added by Ordinance No. 4747, 12/4/18]


1.08.010 Delegation of Authority to Presiding Judge.

The presiding judge of the Beaverton Municipal Court may:

A. Define which items and weapons are prohibited from the local court facility; and

B. Establish and maintain procedures to conduct administrative searches for prohibited items and weapons before entry into the local court facility. [BC 1.08.010, added by Ordinance No. 4747, 12/4/18]


Title 2 GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

Chapters:

2.01    Emergency Management Code

2.02    Library and Records Management

2.03    Boards, Commissions and Committees

2.04    Trials and Search Warrants

2.05    Property and Revocation Procedures

2.06    Elections

2.07    Regulatory Claims Procedure

2.08    Inventory of Personal Property of Persons in Custody

2.10    Civil Infractions

2.11    City Council Rules of Procedure


Chapter 2.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT CODE

Sections:

2.01.010    Short Title.

2.01.011    Emergency Management Agency.

2.01.012    “State of Emergency” Defined.

2.01.020    Adoption of the National Incident Management System.

2.01.025    Emergency Management Plan.

2.01.030    Executive Responsibilities and Line of Succession.

2.01.040    Emergency and Disaster Declarations.

2.01.045    Ratification of Emergency and Disaster Declarations.

2.01.050    Declaration of Emergency – Authorized Procedures.

2.01.060    Violations; Penalties.


2.01.010 Short Title.

BC 2.01.010 to 2.01.060 shall be known and may be cited as the “Emergency Management Code” and also may be referred to herein as “this ordinance.” [BC 2.01.010, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.011 Emergency Management Agency.

Pursuant to ORS 401.305, related to the emergency management powers of local governments, the City’s Emergency Management Program is the Emergency Management Agency for the City of Beaverton. The Emergency Program Manager shall be responsible for the organization, administration, and operation of the Emergency Management Agency. [BC 2.01.011, added by Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.012 “State of Emergency” Defined.

A “state of emergency” exists whenever the City or an area therein is suffering or in imminent danger of suffering an event that may cause injury or death to persons, or damage to or destruction of property to the extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Such an event shall include but not be limited to the following: fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material as defined in ORS 466.605, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight, infestation, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage, terrorist attack and war. [BC 2.01.012, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4012, 7/7/98; Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.020 Adoption of the National Incident Management System.

The City adopts the principles and policies of the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the foundation for its incident command, coordination, and support activities.

A. A core component of NIMS is the Incident Command System (ICS). The City will utilize ICS to manage major emergencies and disaster operations within its jurisdiction.

B. City staff responsible for managing and/or supporting major emergency and disaster operations will be provided appropriate training on NIMS and its core components. [BC 2.01.020, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4309, 5/18/04; Ordinance No. 4366, 9/12/05; Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.025 Emergency Management Plan.

The Emergency Management Plan consists of the Emergency Operations Plan, Basic Plan, Functional Annexes, Hazard-Specific Annexes, and other corresponding hazard-specific plans and procedures. The Emergency Program Manager, in coordination with any affected departments, shall have the authority to amend other sections of, or documents associated with, the Plan. [BC 2.01.025, added by Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.030 Executive Responsibilities and Line of Succession.

The City Council is responsible for setting policy direction for emergency management through the adoption of the Basic Plan of the Emergency Management Plan. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee is responsible for ensuring emergency management functions assigned under the Emergency Management Plan are carried out.

A. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee is responsible for administering the implementation of policies contained in the Emergency Management Plan. 

B. The Mayor is the executive and administrative head of the City government and lines of succession need to be maintained for both functions to ensure continuity during emergencies and disasters. If the Mayor, for any reason, is unable or unavailable to perform the duties identified under this chapter, the duties shall be performed in the following order of succession:

	Executive	Administrative

	1. Council President	1. Chief Administrative Officer

	2. Immediate Past Council President*	2. Chief of Police

	3. First Councilor Reached	3. Finance Director

	  *Provided the person continues to hold office as a Councilor

C. The powers of the successor to the Mayor shall be limited to those granted under this chapter and the Charter; the duration of succession shall be until such time as the Mayor is able and available to perform the duties. [BC 2.01.030, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4012, 7/7/98; Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.040 Emergency and Disaster Declarations.

A. When the Emergency Program Manager, Emergency Management Officer, or designated Incident Commander reasonably believes that a state of emergency exists in the City of Beaverton, the Emergency Program Manager, Emergency Management Officer, or designated Incident Commander shall request that the Mayor make an emergency declaration or disaster declaration.

1. An emergency declaration is issued to implement specific local measures and emergency authorities necessary to protect life, public health, or property and/or to suspend rules or procedures in order to expedite response operations. The emergency declaration must specify the time, duration and area impacted by the incident.

2. A disaster declaration is used to request assistance from the next higher level of government (local-County-State-Federal), to include requesting a “state of emergency” declaration from the Governor and asking the Governor to seek a presidential emergency or major disaster declaration which would initiate actions necessary for local governments and individuals to receive federal disaster assistance.

B. If the Emergency Manager, Emergency Management Officer, or designated Incident Commander is unable to reach the Mayor in a reasonable amount of time, then the Emergency Manager, Emergency Management Officer, or Incident Commander shall attempt to contact the next person indicated in line of succession under BC 2.01.030. If the Mayor and the persons identified under BC 2.01.030 are unable to be reached in a reasonable amount of time, and a state of emergency exists within the City of Beaverton, then the Emergency Manager, Emergency Management Officer or designated Incident Commander shall issue the emergency declaration or disaster declaration.

C. The emergency declaration and disaster declaration by the Mayor of a local emergency shall state the following:

1. The nature of the emergency; and

2. Location or geographic area affected; and

3. Description of emergency conditions or threat; and

4. Description of damage or potential damage, if any; and

5. Specific measures to be taken to further protect lives and properties.

D. A disaster declaration shall also include:

1. Resources committed and actions initiated by the City to alleviate the situation; and

2. A statement requesting the Governor to consider the City an “emergency area” and declare a state of emergency and request a presidential declaration if warranted by the situation; and

3. The type of County/State assistance and/or resources required. [BC 2.01.040, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4012, 7/7/98; Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.045 Ratification of Emergency and Disaster Declarations.

A. The City Council shall convene as soon as practical to ratify the emergency or disaster declaration. 

B. The ratification by the City Council of a state of emergency shall:

1. Provide the duration of time during which the area so designated shall remain an emergency area; and

2. Approve or modify specific emergency measures recommended by the Mayor for the duration of the emergency period set forth in the declaration.

C. The state of emergency issued through a declaration shall exist for the period set forth in the declaration, but shall not exceed two weeks in duration. However, the state of emergency may be extended for additional periods of two weeks, with Council action. [BC 2.01.045, added by Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


2.01.050 Declaration of Emergency – Authorized Procedures.

Whenever a state of emergency has been declared to exist within the City, one or more of the following measures may be taken to further protect life or property:

A. Establishment of a curfew for the area designated as an emergency area which fixes the hours during which all persons, other than officially recognized personnel, may not be upon the public streets or other public places;

B. Prohibition or limitation of the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public area, or any outdoor place within the area designated as an emergency area;

C. Barricading of streets and other areas; and vehicular and pedestrian traffic may be prohibited or regulated on streets leading to areas designated as emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances;

D. Mandatory evacuation of persons from designated emergency areas;

E. Restricting or prohibiting the sale of products deemed dangerous, including but not limited to alcohol, flammable liquids and explosives; 

F. Prohibiting or restricting the possession of any weapons to the extent permitted by law on public streets, in public places, or at any outdoor place;

G. Curtailment or suspension of commercial activity;

H. Interruption or termination of water, gas, or electrical service;

I. Redirection of City funds for emergency use and implementation of City emergency procurement procedures;

J. Use of nonfranchised contractor(s) for the management and removal of debris;

K. Other measures which are imminently necessary for the protection of life or property, including entering into or upon private property to prevent or minimize danger to lives or property. [BC 2.01.050, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4012, 7/7/98; Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15; Ordinance No. 4745, 10/17/18]


2.01.060 Violations; Penalties.

A violation of the lawful restrictions imposed by BC 2.01.050 is a Class 1 Civil Infraction, punishable as provided in BC 2.10.010 to 2.10.045. [BC 2.01.060, added by Ordinance No. 3847, 5/3/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4658, 6/9/15]


Chapter 2.02 LIBRARY AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

Sections:

I. CITY LIBRARY

2.02.050    City Library Department Continued.

2.02.052    City Librarian.

2.02.054    City Library Fund.

2.02.056    Donations to Fund.

2.02.058    Use of Fund.

2.02.060    Segregation and Investment of Fund.

II. RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF RECORDS

2.02.100    Records Management Program.

2.02.102    Modification.

2.02.104    Destruction of Records.

I. CITY LIBRARY


2.02.050 City Library Department Continued.

There is hereby continued a city library department for the purpose of maintaining a public library to be known as the Beaverton City Library.


2.02.052 City Librarian.

The city library department shall be under the direction of the city librarian who shall be accountable to the mayor. The city librarian shall:

A. Formulate and recommend to the mayor for approval policies and procedures in connection with the management, operation and control of the Beaverton City Library and the activities connected with it; administer such policies and procedures when approved by the mayor; and conduct such activities for the City.

B. Formulate for approval plans and programs pertaining to the growth, use, and development of programs that will meet the reading and information needs of the inquiring public and residents of the community.

C. Supervise the selection of all books, periodicals and other materials used in the library.

D. Perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor.


2.02.054 City Library Fund.

There is hereby continued as a separate fund of the City a fund to be designated “Library Trust Fund”.


2.02.056 Donations to Fund.

The City may accept gifts, devises or bequests of money or property, hereafter called donations, to the Library Trust Fund. Donations to the City for the city library or for library purposes shall be considered given to the Library Trust Fund unless a contrary intent of the donor is evidenced. All donations shall be subject to approval by the Council. Donations may be accepted on such conditions as may be approved by the Council. Without limiting the lawful conditions which may be approved by the Council, donations may be accepted on the condition that the principal amount be retained and invested and only the income expended for the benefit of the Beaverton City Library.


2.02.058 Use of Fund.

The Library Trust Fund and the income from it shall be used exclusively for the benefit of the Beaverton City Library for books, library materials, and other property used by the library for capital improvements, but not including salaries of library personnel. Subject to any other requirements of law, all expenditures and disbursements from the Library Trust Fund shall be as approved by the Council following an opportunity for review and comment by the library board.


2.02.060 Segregation and Investment of Fund.

Assets of the Library Trust Fund may be segregated into separate accounts, and the separate accounts may, for convenience or in order to comply with the conditions or requests of the donor, be designated by separate names. Assets of the various accounts may be commingled for investment or accounting purposes. Assets of the fund, including all separate accounts, may be invested and reinvested from time to time by the City in such depositories or securities as may be lawful for investment of other City funds.

II. RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF RECORDS


2.02.100 Records Management Program.

The mayor or the mayor’s designee shall establish a program to control the retention and disposition of the records and files of the City and its departments. A copy of the program shall be maintained by the city recorder. The program shall include:

A. a schedule of City documents;

B. a schedule of retention periods;

C. a procedure for annual purge of documents;

D. a report to the Council of the program established.


2.02.102 Modification.

The mayor or the mayor’s designee may modify the schedules and procedures. A copy of all modifications shall be maintained by the city recorder.


2.02.104 Destruction of Records.

Records that have been retained beyond the retention period shall not be destroyed without prior written authorization of the mayor, the city recorder and the city attorney. As a part of the records management program, the mayor or the mayor’s designee shall prescribe a form of “certificate of records authorized to be destroyed”. The original certificate shall be filed permanently with the city recorder. A copy of the certificate shall be permanently retained by the department whose records have been destroyed.


Chapter 2.03 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES

Sections:

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

2.03.002    General Provisions Applicable to Boards and Commissions.

II. BEAVERTON CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

2.03.010    Continued.

2.03.012    Membership.

2.03.014    Powers and Duties.

III. BOARD OF CONSTRUCTION APPEALS

2.03.030    Continued.

2.03.032    Membership.

2.03.034    Qualifications.

2.03.036    Presiding Members.

2.03.038    Conflict of Interest.

2.03.040    Powers and Duties.

2.03.042    Composition; Quorum; Voting.

IV. COMMITTEE FOR COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT

2.03.050    Beaverton Committee for Community Involvement Established.

2.03.052    Membership.

2.03.054    Powers and Duties.

2.03.056    Bylaws.

V. TRAFFIC CONTROL BOARD

2.03.070    Repealed.

2.03.072    Repealed.

2.03.074    Repealed.

2.03.076    Repealed.

VI. TRAFFIC COMMISSION

2.03.080    Traffic Commission Established.

2.03.082    Powers and Duties.

VII. PLANNING COMMISSION

2.03.090    Continued.

2.03.092    Repealed.

2.03.093    Repealed.

2.03.094    Repealed.

2.03.096    Repealed.

2.03.098    Repealed.

VIII. FACILITIES REVIEW COMMITTEE

2.03.110    Continued.

2.03.112    Repealed.

2.03.114    Repealed.

2.03.130    Repealed.

2.03.132    Repealed.

2.03.134    Repealed.

2.03.136    Repealed.

2.03.138    Repealed.

2.03.140    Repealed.

IX. HISTORIC RESOURCE REVIEW COMMITTEE

2.03.141    Repealed.

2.03.142    Repealed.

2.03.144    Repealed.

2.03.146    Repealed.

2.03.148    Repealed.

X. BUDGET COMMITTEE

2.03.150    Budget Committee Established.

XI. URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY

2.03.160    Need Declared.

2.03.161    Title.

2.03.162    Membership.

2.03.163    Powers.

2.03.164    Limitation on Action.

XII. AUDIT COMMITTEE

2.03.170    Audit Committee Established.

2.03.172    Membership.

2.03.174    Term of Office; Vacancy.

2.03.176    Meetings.

2.03.178    Powers and Duties.

XIII. CITY LIBRARY BOARD

2.03.190    Continued.

2.03.192    Membership.

2.03.194    Term of Office.

2.03.196    Powers and Duties.

XIV. LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD

2.03.210    Local Contract Review Board Established.

2.03.212    Membership; Role of Mayor.

2.03.214    Powers and Duties.

XV. BEAVERTON ARTS COMMISSION

2.03.230    Established.

2.03.235    Membership.

2.03.240    Powers and Duties.

2.03.245    Public Art.

XVI. DISABLED CITIZENS’ ADVISORY COMMITTEE

2.03.250    Established.

2.03.251    Membership.

2.03.252    Term of Office.

2.03.253    Presiding Members.

2.03.254    Staff Liaison.

2.03.255    Voting, Meetings.

2.03.256    Powers and Duties.

XVII. HUMAN RIGHTS ADVISORY COMMISSION

2.03.260    Established.

2.03.265    Membership.

2.03.270    General Powers and Duties.

XVIII. BEAVERTON COMMITTEE ON AGING

2.03.300    Beaverton Committee on Aging Established.

2.03.305    Membership.

2.03.315    General Powers and Duties.

XIX. VISIONING ADVISORY COMMITTEE

2.03.330    Visioning Advisory Committee Established.

2.03.332    Term of Office.

2.03.334    General Powers and Duties.

2.03.336    Bylaws.

XX. SISTER CITIES ADVISORY BOARD

2.03.350    Board Created.

2.03.352    Functions of Advisory Board and Program.

2.03.354    Program Funding.

2.03.356    Bylaws.

XXI. SOCIAL SERVICES FUNDING COMMITTEE

2.03.360    Formal Recognition of Social Services Funding Committee.

2.03.365    Powers and Duties.

2.03.370    Membership.

2.03.375    Term of Office.

2.03.380    Staff Liaison.

2.03.385    Council Liaison.

XXII. DIVERSITY ADVISORY BOARD

2.03.500    Diversity Advisory Board Established.

2.03.505    Powers and Duties.

2.03.510    Membership.

2.03.515    Term of Office.

2.03.520    Staff Liaison.

XXIII. BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE

2.03.550    Bicycle Advisory Committee Established.

2.03.555    Membership.

2.03.560    General Powers and Duties.

Prior legislation: Ord. 4080.

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS


2.03.002 General Provisions Applicable to Boards and Commissions.

Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or applicable law, all boards, commissions, and committees created by ordinance or statute shall be bound by the following general provisions:

A. The use of the word “board” in this section includes commissions and committees established within this chapter.

B. Each board that meets more than once a year shall make an annual report to the Council containing a summary of activities of the board for the preceding year.

C. Each board shall adopt written bylaws, which shall be reviewed by the City Attorney for legal sufficiency and ratified by resolution of the City Council. Any amendments to the written bylaws is not effective unless the City Attorney reviews them for legal sufficiency and City Council ratifies them by resolution. If the City Attorney or City Council does not approve of the bylaws or its amendments, then the bylaws or its amendments shall be sent back to the board with an explanation of why it was not approved. 

D. As provided in Section 19 of the Beaverton Charter, the Mayor shall appoint all members to a board, subject to confirmation by City Council. Members appointed by the mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, but any removal by the mayor is subject to confirmation by City Council. If there is a vacancy on a board, the Mayor shall appoint another member to the board through a process substantially similar to that used to appoint original members to the board. The member filling the vacancy shall serve on the board for the remainder of the unexpired term. As used in this subsection, “members” includes alternates. 

E. Any person may challenge the accuracy of proposed or approved minutes of a board, provided the person challenges the accuracy within six months of the date the board approves the minutes. To challenge the accuracy of proposed or approved minutes, the person must present to the board the section of the minutes that he or she disputes, and provide a recommended alternative, preferably with direct reference to the pertinent section of an audio recording of the meeting in question, if any. The board may then make a motion to reject, approve, or approve with modifications the recommended alternative. [BC 2.03.002, amended by Ordinance No. 4247, 3/17/03; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16]

II. BEAVERTON CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION


2.03.010 Continued.

There is hereby continued a commission to be known as the Beaverton Cable Communications Commission (hereafter commission) to oversee, administer and enforce the terms and provisions of BC 2.03.010 through 2.03.014, and any other City cable regulations or Code provisions and any franchise awarded under them. The Council may contract, jointly agree or otherwise provide with other local or regional governments, counties, special districts or commissions to perform some or all of the functions of the commission in lieu of proceeding pursuant to the above language and BC 2.03.012 and BC 2.03.014 below.

For the purposes of BC 2.03.010 through 2.03.014, the terms “system” or “cable communications system” shall have the same meaning given to those terms in BC 4.10.015.


2.03.012 Membership.

The commission shall consist of three persons appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the Council. Each member shall serve a term of three years and at the pleasure of the mayor subject to confirmation of the Council; except that appointments to the first commission shall be for one-, two- and three-year terms, respectively. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment to serve the remainder of the term. No person with ownership interest in a cable television franchise granted pursuant to this Code or any employee of such person shall be eligible for membership on the commission. The city attorney or the city attorney’s designee shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission, but shall not have voting power.


2.03.014 Powers and Duties.

The commission is hereby delegated the power to carry out any or all of the following functions:

A. Advise the Council on applications for franchises;

B. Advise the Council on matters that might constitute grounds for revocation or termination of a franchise pursuant to its terms;

C. Resolve disagreements among franchisees and public and private users of the system. The decisions of the commission shall be reviewable by the Council, in accordance with procedures adopted by Council resolution;

D. Act as the initial hearing board for all requests for rate settings or adjustments, except that all such decisions of the commission shall be reviewed and ratified by the Council;

E. Coordinate the franchisee’s consultant services to facilitate government, educational, community group and individual use of the public channels;

F. Determine general policy relating to the service provided subscribers and the operation and use of access channels, with a view to maximizing the diversity of programs and services to subscribers. The use of access channels shall be allocated on a first come, first served basis, subject to limitations on monopolization of system time, or prime time;

G. Encourage use of access channels among the widest range of institutions, groups and individuals within the City;

H. Submit an annual report to the Council, which contains, at a minimum, the total number of hours of utilization of access channels, a review of any plans submitted during the year by a franchisee for development of new services, and hourly subtotals for various programming categories. The annual report shall include the following programming categories:

1. Local educational uses including library, public and private schools;

2. Public access for local programming under public control;

3. Local government access such as fire, police, burglar alarms, and public announcements;

4. Channel time use for lease for pay television;

5. Channel time use for lease for business or municipal uses, including telemetry of information; and

6. Information retrieval and professional communication.

I. Act on behalf of and as the designee of the Council in intergovernmental matters relating to systems, cooperate with other systems, and supervise interconnection of systems;

J. Submit budget requests to the Budget Committee for requested appropriation of funds to carry out its functions;

K. Audit all franchisee records required by the franchise and, in the commission’s discretion, require the preparation and filing of information additional to that required by the franchise;

L. Conduct evaluations of the system at least every three years with the franchisee, and make recommendation to the Council for amendments to the Code provisions or the franchise agreement;

M. Employ, with the approval of the Council, the services of a technical consultant, to assist in the analysis of any matter relative to any franchise under this Code;

N. Propose regulations and procedures necessary to enforce franchises and to clarify their terms. The regulations and procedures shall be without force and effect until approved by the Council;

O. Develop a rules and procedures manual to define the commission’s functions and responsibilities, and adopt rules and procedures in relation to it. The manual, and any amendments shall be without force and effect until approved by the Council; and

P. Exercise any other power or perform any other function authorized by the Council.

III. BOARD OF CONSTRUCTION APPEALS


2.03.030 Continued.

The Board of Construction Appeals (hereafter board), established by Ordinance No. 1824 is hereby continued. All appeals and other matters pending before the board are continued, and the board continued in this section shall have jurisdiction over the pending appeals and other matters.


2.03.032 Membership.

The board shall consist of nine members who are not Council members, officers or employees of the City. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and the Council. [BC 2.03.032, amended by Ordinance No. 4027, 12/8/98]


2.03.034 Qualifications.

A. The nine members shall include:

1. One individual representing the general public;

2. One builder who has been actively engaged in the building business for at least two years immediately preceding the builder’s appointment;

3. One architect, registered under State laws, who has actively practiced the profession for at least three years immediately preceding the architect’s appointment;

4. One professional civil or structural engineer, registered under State laws, who has actively practiced the profession of engineering for at least three years immediately preceding the engineer’s appointment.

5. One individual specially qualified by education, training or experience to pass upon matters pertaining to fire protection;

6. One licensed journeyman plumber;

7. One contractor or installer of heating, ventilation, comfort cooling or refrigeration systems;

8. One person from the citizens with disabilities community;

9. One State certified building official employed by an Oregon political subdivision other than the City of Beaverton.

B. Unless otherwise specified, each board member shall have worked at the member’s respective profession or trade for at least five years immediately preceding the member’s appointment. [BC 2.03.034, amended by Ordinance No. 4027, 12/8/98]


2.03.036 Presiding Members.

The Board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson at its first meeting in each calendar year. The building official or his/her designee shall serve as secretary of the board according to the provisions of BC 8.06.035. The building official or his/her designee is entitled to sit with the board and take part in its discussions but does not have the right to vote. [BC 2.03.036, amended by Ordinance No. 4027, 12/8/98]


2.03.038 Conflict of Interest.

No member of the board shall sit in any matter in which that member has a personal or pecuniary interest. If any such matter comes before the board, the mayor shall appoint with Council confirmation an appropriate substitute.


2.03.040 Powers and Duties.

Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the board shall have all the powers and duties vested in the various boards of appeal as specified in the provisions of BC 8.01.010 through 8.01.090, BC 8.02.005 through 8.02.130 and BC 8.06.005 through 8.06.070, as now or hereafter amended or replaced comparable provisions.


2.03.042 Composition; Quorum; Voting.

A. For the purpose of adopting its rules of procedure and any matters relating to all codes, the board shall consist of nine members. Five members shall constitute a quorum.

B. All decisions of the board shall be by a majority vote of those members present and voting. [BC 2.03.042, amended by Ordinance No. 4027, 12/8/98]

IV. COMMITTEE FOR COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT


2.03.050 Beaverton Committee for Community Involvement Established.

There is established the Beaverton Committee for Community Involvement (“BCCI”). [BC 2.03.050, added by Ordinance No. 4624, 12/10/13]


2.03.052 Membership.

BCCI shall have the following members:

A. Eight at large members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The at large members serve three-year staggered terms and are selected after an open, well-publicized public interview process. To the extent possible, member appointments shall be broadly representative of the City’s geographic areas and shall have demonstrated interests related to land use and community involvement.

B. One member from each duly recognized neighborhood association committee (NAC) within the City, said member to be appointed by the NAC of which the member is a representative.

C. Subject to the confirmation of the City Council, the Mayor also may appoint alternate members at large for a one-year term to BCCI. Alternate members at large may participate in all activities and subcommittees of BCCI, except the Nominating Committee, and do not have voting rights.

D. Each duly recognized NAC also may appoint an alternate to serve on BCCI; provided, that the alternate shall have the same minimum qualifications for appointment as does that NAC’s primary representative and; provided further, that the alternate may vote only in lieu of and not in addition to that NAC’s primary representative when representing that NAC at BCCI. [BC 2.03.052, added by Ordinance No. 4624, 12/10/13]


2.03.054 Powers and Duties.

BCCI shall act in advisory capacity to the City Council. Its duties include:

A. To assist the City in developing, implementing and evaluating a community involvement program that ensures the opportunity for individuals to be involved in all phases of the City’s land use planning and civic decision making process.

B. To recommend to the City Council, City staff, and the various boards, commissions and committees of the City, program and practices intended to assure the continuous opportunity for the exchange of ideas and information between the City government and Beaverton-area residents, business owners and property owners.

C. To monitor and evaluate community involvement programs that the City Council may adopt and publicize.

D. To regularly report to the City Council through written or verbal communications, such as meeting minutes, annual meetings or reports, or periodic Council meeting presentations and work sessions.

E. To perform other related duties as directed by the Mayor or City Council. [BC 2.03.054, added by Ordinance No. 4624, 12/10/13]


2.03.056 Bylaws.

An amendment of the BCCI bylaws shall not take effect until approved by the City Attorney for conformance to applicable law and ratified by resolution of the City Council. [BC 2.03.056, added by Ordinance No. 4624, 12/10/13]

V. TRAFFIC CONTROL BOARD


2.03.070 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.070, repealed by Ordinance No. 4225, 9/9/02]


2.03.072 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.072, repealed by Ordinance No. 4225, 9/9/02]


2.03.074 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.074, repealed by Ordinance No. 4225, 9/9/02]


2.03.076 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.076, repealed by Ordinance No. 4225, 9/9/02]

VI. TRAFFIC COMMISSION


2.03.080 Traffic Commission Established.

The Traffic Commission hereby is established, to consist of seven city residents who are not City officials or employees who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and for a three-year term, except that the initial appointments to the Commission shall be for one-year and two-year terms for two commissioners each. The Mayor, the City Attorney and other city employees as the Council may designate from time to time may sit with the Commission and take part in its discussions but shall not have the right to vote. The Mayor shall designate a city engineer to serve as secretary to the Commission and keep an accurate record of all commission proceedings. [BC 2.03.080 added by Ordinance No. 3875, 1/10/94]


2.03.082 Powers and Duties.

The Commission has only those powers and duties as are now or hereafter granted and imposed on it by the City Charter, ordinances and directives of the Council. The Commission shall advise the Council on traffic safety issues of a neighborhood or greater significance, assist in promulgating standards and policies relating to neighborhood traffic management, and review and comment upon changes to traffic patterns and programs proposed by the city, county or state. The Commission otherwise shall consider only those matters referred to it by the Council or by the city engineer who acts as its secretary. All actions of the Commission shall be deemed advisory to the Mayor and Council and shall have no legislative or judicial effect unless and until formally adopted by the City Council. [BC 2.03.082 added by Ordinance No. 3875, 1/10/94]

VII. PLANNING COMMISSION


2.03.090 Continued.

The Planning Commission (hereafter commission) established by Ordinance No. 1810 is hereby continued. [BC 2.03.090, amended by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.092 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.092, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.093 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.093, added by Ordinance No. 3985, 6/24/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.094 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.094, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.096 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.096, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.098 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.098, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]

VIII. FACILITIES REVIEW COMMITTEE


2.03.110 Continued.

The Facilities Review Committee (hereafter committee) established by Ordinance No. 2058 is hereby continued. [BC 2.03.110, amended by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.112 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.112, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.114 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.114, amended by Ordinance No. 3625, 7-25-88; repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.130 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.130, amended by Ordinance No. 3626, 7-25-88; repealed by Ordinance No. 4533, 3/1/10]


2.03.132 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.132, amended by Ordinance No. 3626, 7/25/88; repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.134 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.134, amended by Ordinance No. 3727, 6/11/90; repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.136 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.136, amended by Ordinance No. 3626, 7/25/88; repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.138 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.138, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]


2.03.140 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.140, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02]

IX. HISTORIC RESOURCE REVIEW COMMITTEE


2.03.141 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.141, repealed by Ordinance No. 4352, 5/2/05]


2.03.142 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.142, repealed by Ordinance No. 4352, 5/2/05]


2.03.144 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.144, repealed by Ordinance No. 4352, 5/2/05]


2.03.146 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.146, repealed by Ordinance No. 4352, 5/2/05]


2.03.148 Repealed.

[BC 2.03.148, repealed by Ordinance No. 4352, 5/2/05]

X. BUDGET COMMITTEE


2.03.150 Budget Committee Established.

There is established the Budget Committee, the composition and duties as established by the State of Oregon’s Local Budget Law. [BC 2.03.150, added by Ordinance No. 4623, 12/10/13]

XI. URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY


2.03.160 Need Declared.

Pursuant to ORS 457.035, the City Council declares that blighted areas now exist in the City and that there is currently a need for an urban renewal agency to function in the City. [BC 2.03.160, added by Ordinance No. 4530, 3/1/10]


2.03.161 Title.

The urban renewal agency created by this chapter shall be known as the Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency. [BC 2.03.161, added by Ordinance No. 4530, 3/1/10]


2.03.162 Membership.

The Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency Board shall be comprised in part by the Mayor and the members of the City Council as it lawfully exists from time to time. Any change in membership of the City Council and Mayor shall automatically, and without need for further legislative action, constitute an identical change in the membership of the Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency. The membership of the Board of the Agency shall also include three additional members. The appointment of three additional members shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. [BC 2.03.162, added by Ordinance No. 4530, 3/1/10]


2.03.163 Powers.

Subject to the limitations imposed by BC 2.03.164, the Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency shall have authority to exercise all powers available to the Agency under ORS chapter 457, including, but not limited to, the power of eminent domain. The powers conferred to this agency by ORS chapter 457 are in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. [BC 2.03.163, added by Ordinance No. 4530, 3/1/10]


2.03.164 Limitation on Action.

Any act of the Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency shall be considered the act of the Urban Renewal Agency only and shall not be considered an act of the City Council. The Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency shall not exercise any power which, by Charter, requires voter approval. [BC 2.03.164, added by Ordinance No. 4530, 3/1/10]

XII. AUDIT COMMITTEE


2.03.170 Audit Committee Established.

There is established the Audit Committee of the City of Beaverton, a subcommittee of the City’s Budget Committee. [BC 2.03.170, added by Ordinance No. 4623, 12/10/13]


2.03.172 Membership.

A. The Audit Committee shall be composed of three members, one of whom shall be a member of the Council and two of whom shall be current or previous citizen members of the Budget Committee. If a previous citizen member of the Budget Committee is appointed to serve on the Audit Committee, the citizen member must remain an elector of the City during the appointed term.

B. The chair of the Budget Committee shall appoint the Audit Committee’s two citizen members.

C. The City Council, by majority vote if not by unanimous consent, shall nominate one of its members to serve on the Audit Committee. The nomination shall occur at a regular or special meeting of the City Council at which a quorum of the Council is present. The chair of the Budget Committee shall promptly appoint the nominated Council member to the Audit Committee. [BC 2.03.172, added by Ordinance No. 4623, 12/10/13]


2.03.174 Term of Office; Vacancy.

A. The term of office for Audit Committee members is three years. There is no limit on the number of terms a member of the Audit Committee may serve. The members’ terms shall be staggered such that only one member’s three-year term concludes each year.

B. If a citizen member’s position on the Audit Committee becomes vacant, the Chair of the Budget Committee shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the vacated term. 

C. If a Council member’s position on the Audit Committee becomes vacant, the City Council, by majority vote if not by unanimous consent, shall nominate one of its members to serve on the Audit Committee. The nomination shall occur at a regular or special meeting of the City Council at which a quorum of the Council is present. The chair of the Budget Committee shall promptly appoint the nominated Council member to the Audit Committee. [BC 2.03.174, added by Ordinance No. 4623, 12/10/13]


2.03.176 Meetings.

The Audit Committee shall meet at least once per year with the auditor to independently review the audit report and to review the plan, scope and approach of the next audit cycle. Additional meetings may be held as needed, including for the purpose of making additional inquiries of the auditor and the auditor’s performance. [BC 2.03.176, added by Ordinance No. 4623, 12/10/13]


2.03.178 Powers and Duties.

The powers and duties of the Audit Committee include:

A. To review with the auditor the financial statements relied upon by the auditor following submission of the annual audit report to the Council. The purpose of this review is to receive comments concerning the adequacy and content of the financial statements and to facilitate an analysis of the annual audit report which has been submitted to the Council;

B. To make an appraisal of the effectiveness of the overall audit effort. Such an appraisal may include a discussion of the overall approach to and scope of the audit examination with emphasis on specific areas of concern the Committee or the auditor deems important;

C. To review financial or audit reports prepared by the auditor and the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee for financial matters;

D. To make recommendations to the Council concerning the appointment of the auditor for the ensuing year and the fee for services. Although the Council appoints the auditor, the Committee may allow input from the Finance Director of the City as to recommendations for the appointment of the auditor;

E. To request to the Council that it instigate a special inquiry or investigation if the Committee is made aware of financial transactions that may be fraudulent or otherwise improper. [BC 2.03.178, added by Ordinance No. 4623, 12/10/13]

XIII. CITY LIBRARY BOARD


2.03.190 Continued.

The City Library Board (hereafter Board) established by Ordinance No. 1809 is hereby continued.


2.03.192 Membership.

The Board shall consist of seven members who are not Council members, officers or employees of the City and who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Council.


2.03.194 Term of Office.

Appointments shall be for a term of three years or until successors are appointed. Terms of office shall begin on the first day of the calendar year. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term as provided in BC 2.03.192. The mayor, with the approval of the Council, may remove any member of the board for cause. Members of the board holding office at the time of enactment of this Code chapter shall hold office for the terms for which they were appointed and until their successors are appointed.


2.03.196 Powers and Duties.

The board shall:

A. Consult with the city librarian on all matters pertaining to the Beaverton City Library, including those matters set forth in BC 2.02.052 of this chapter.

B. Make recommendations to the mayor and the Council regarding all matters pertaining to the Beaverton City Library.

C. Perform such other related duties as directed by the mayor or the Council.

XIV. LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD


2.03.210 Local Contract Review Board Established.

There is established the Local Contract Review Board. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4637, 5/14/14]


2.03.212 Membership; Role of Mayor.

The Local Contract Review Board shall be comprised of five members. Each member of the City Council is automatically a member of the Local Contract Review Board for so long as the person remains a member of the City Council. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Local Contract Review Board. Except in the case of a tie, the Mayor shall not vote on matters before the Local Contract Review Board. In case of a tie, the Mayor shall cast the deciding vote. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4637, 5/14/14]


2.03.214 Powers and Duties.

The powers of the Local Contract Review Board are those established or permitted by the State of Oregon Public Contracting Code, including the adoption by resolution of local rules of procedure for public contracting. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4637, 5/14/14]

XV. BEAVERTON ARTS COMMISSION


2.03.230 Established.

There is hereby created a commission known as the Beaverton Arts Commission (BAC). [BC 2.03.230, added by Ordinance No. 3313, 3/22/83; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16]


2.03.235 Membership.

The BAC shall consist of 15 members and up to two alternates, who shall be nonvoting members. [BC 2.03.234, added by Ordinance No. 3313, 3/22/83; amended by Ordinance No. 3510, 5/13/86; Ordinance No. 4028, 12-15-98; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16. Formerly 2.03.234]


2.03.240 Powers and Duties.

The BAC shall act in an advisory capacity to City Council and its duties shall include advising the City on arts and culture strategies that strengthen connections among diverse community groups and the City. [BC 2.03.038, added by Ordinance No. 3313, 3/22/83; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16. Formerly 2.03.238]


2.03.245 Public Art.

A. As used in this section:

1. “Public art” means original artwork placed on public property or on public right-of-way or on private property visible from public property and for which the City owns an easement allowing for such placement and that has been approved by the Beaverton Arts Commission.

2. “Selection panel” means a group responsible for reviewing proposed public art and making recommendations to the Beaverton Arts Commission on the selection of public art. 

B. Public art that is displayed pursuant to this section may be sited in, on or about any project or other property owned, leased, or rented by, donated to, or otherwise made available to and accepted by the City of Beaverton under such additional terms and conditions as may be required by the BAC.

C. All interests in public art acquired pursuant to this section shall be acquired in the name of the City of Beaverton. Title to any easements for display of such art on private property shall be granted to and are subject to written acceptance by the City of Beaverton acting through its Mayor for the use and benefit of the public. 

D. A decision by the BAC, upon a recommendation by the selection panel, as to the acquisition, fabrication, installation, deaccessioning, management, community education and registration of public art shall be the City’s final decision. 

E. The BAC shall adopt rules and guidelines for the selection, acquisition and display of all public art in a form to be approved by the City Attorney. [BC 2.03.239, added by Ordinance No. 4481, 4/21/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16. Formerly 2.03.239]

XVI. DISABLED CITIZENS’ ADVISORY COMMITTEE


2.03.250 Established.

There is hereby established a Disabled Citizens’ Advisory Committee; its powers and duties are described in the following sections. [BC 2.03.250, added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]


2.03.251 Membership.

A. The committee shall consist of seven members as follows:

1. At least four members with disabilities (as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act).

2. The remaining members qualified by knowledge of or interest in issues faced by disabled citizens, or a combination thereof.

B. The members of the committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. When possible, the Mayor shall appoint individuals who are either property owners, residents, or actively engaged in business or employment in the City. [BC 2.03.251 added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]


2.03.252 Term of Office.

Appointments shall be for a term of three years or until successors are appointed. Terms of office shall begin the first day of the calendar year. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner provided for in BC 2.03.251. Committee members serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and removal shall be confirmed by the Council. [BC 2.03.252, added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]


2.03.253 Presiding Members.

The Committee shall elect a chairperson who shall be elected annually to serve a one year term. In the absence of the chairperson, the chairperson shall designate a member of the committee to serve in that capacity as the chairperson’s designate. [BC 2.03.253, added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]


2.03.254 Staff Liaison.

The Mayor shall appoint a staff liaison to the Committee. [BC 2.03.254, added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]


2.03.255 Voting, Meetings.

A. The concurrence of a majority of the members of the committee present and voting is necessary to determine any question before the committee.

B. The committee shall meet at least quarterly, but may meet more often if a majority of the committee concurs. [BC 2.03.255, added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]


2.03.256 Powers and Duties.

The committee’s duties shall be those assigned them by the Mayor and/or Council. [BC 2.03.256, added by Ordinance No. 3783, 8/26/91]

XVII. HUMAN RIGHTS ADVISORY COMMISSION


2.03.260 Established.

There is hereby established a Human Rights Advisory Commission (HRAC). [BC 2.03.260, added by Ordinance No. 3841, 4/12/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16]


2.03.265 Membership.

The commission shall consist of 13 members and up to two alternates, who shall be nonvoting members. [BC 2.03.265, added by Ordinance No. 3841, 4/12/93; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16; amended by Ordinance No. 4740, 9/11/18]


2.03.270 General Powers and Duties.

HRAC promotes the integration of human rights values and principles throughout the Beaverton community. HRAC shall act in an advisory capacity and its duties shall include advising the City on strategies that strengthen those human rights values and principles. [BC 2.03.275, added by Ordinance No. 3841, 4/12/93; amended by Ordinance No. 3878, 2/7/94; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16. Formerly 2.03.275]

XVIII. BEAVERTON COMMITTEE ON AGING


2.03.300 Beaverton Committee on Aging Established.

There is hereby established a Beaverton Committee on Aging (BCOA). [BC 2.03.300, added by Ordinance No. 4002, 12/29/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16]


2.03.305 Membership.

The BCOA shall consist of 11 members and up to two alternates, who shall be nonvoting members. [BC 2.03.305, added by Ordinance No. 4002, 12/29/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16]


2.03.315 General Powers and Duties.

The BCOA shall discover and examine the issues and concerns of the aging population in the City of Beaverton and offer representation, information and education regarding these issues. [BC 2.03.315, added by Ordinance No. 4002, 12/29/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4680, 3/22/16]

XIX. VISIONING ADVISORY COMMITTEE


2.03.330 Visioning Advisory Committee Established.

There is hereby established a Visioning Advisory Committee (VAC). The VAC shall consist of 13 members. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. To be eligible to be appointed, members shall reside, own property, own a business, or work within the City limits of Beaverton. As much as possible, the members of the VAC shall be varied in experience and representative of the City as a whole. A diversity of membership is encouraged among seniors, youth, neighborhood and/or civic leaders, business representatives, minorities, and members of the community-at-large. [BC 2.03.330, added by Ordinance No. 4625, 12/10/13]


2.03.332 Term of Office.

Appointments shall be made for a term of three years or until successors are appointed, except the terms of the first appointments shall be staggered. Terms of office shall begin the first day of the calendar year. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner provided for in BC 2.03.330. VAC members serve at the Mayor’s pleasure. [BC 2.03.332, added by Ordinance No. 4625, 12/10/13]


2.03.334 General Powers and Duties.

The purpose of the VAC shall be to promote the City’s visioning process. The VAC is responsible for the oversight and management of the Beaverton Community Vision by: engaging the community to ascertain shared priorities and aspirations; connecting and supporting partner organizations; maintaining and updating an action plan; and reporting successes, challenges, and opportunities to the community and the City Council. The VAC shall be advisory and shall have powers, duties, and functions as follows:

A. To work with community members and staff to develop, maintain, and update, a Vision Action Plan that embraces the goals of the visioning process and identifies suggested strategies and actions to achieve the stated goals. The plan must be adopted by the City Council prior to implementation. Any changes to the plan must be approved by the City Council prior to implementation.

B. To promote the City’s visioning process and sponsor opportunities to promote the visioning process to the public. To assist in informational opportunities, presentations, open houses, or other public initiatives providing information about the visioning process to the public.

C. To actively review the goals of the visioning process and recommend to the City Council updating the goals, strategies, or action recommendations as needed.

D. To present an annual update on the Vision Action Plan to the City Council for review.

E. To support and promote the activities of the partners of the Beaverton Community Vision.

F. To perform other related duties as directed by the Mayor or the City Council. [BC 2.03.334, added by Ordinance No. 4625, 12/10/13]


2.03.336 Bylaws.

An amendment of the VAC bylaws shall not take effect until approved by the City Attorney for conformance to applicable law and ratified by resolution of the City Council. [BC 2.03.336, added by Ordinance No. 4625, 12/10/13]

XX. SISTER CITIES ADVISORY BOARD


2.03.350 Board Created.

The Beaverton Sister Cities Advisory Board is created to help guide the development and activities of a Sister Cities Program, whose mission is to encourage cross-cultural understanding and to promote educational and economic exchange between the citizens of Beaverton and our Sister Cities around the world. [BC 2.03.350, added by Ordinance No. 4494, 11/17/08]


2.03.352 Functions of Advisory Board and Program.

A. The Board shall serve in an advocacy, fundraising, supporting and ambassadorial capacity and will assist in organizing events and promoting a positive image and good relations for the Sister Cities Program and the City of Beaverton with the community, the region, the state and internationally. Board members work to further advance the planning and implementation of initiatives that support the Sister Cities Program. The board membership will be comprised of nine to 15 persons with initial terms of one, two and three years. The successor term of each Board position shall be three years.

B. The Program Coordinator and Advisory Board will develop a strategic plan to confirm the Program mission and values and a two- or three-year plan of goals, objectives and activities. Such community-based activities may include cultural seminars and networking gatherings and a collaboratively planned multicultural festival, featuring, but not limited to, the countries and cultures of Beaverton’s Sister Cities. Delegation visits to Beaverton will highlight interaction and exchange with local businesses, education, City and community services and agencies and broad community engagement. International visits to Sister Cities will be organized upon invitation from each Sister City and initiated to recognize special events and anniversaries, with diverse business and community representation invited to join each delegation. [BC 2.03.352, added by Ordinance No. 4494, 11/17/08]


2.03.354 Program Funding.

The Sister Cities Program shall seek private additional funding in the form of in-kind donations and grants, multi-tiered corporate and organizational sponsorships, and individual and family memberships. The varying levels of sponsorship benefits will correlate with a portfolio of community-based and international activities planned by program staff and the advisory board. The program may offer community memberships with appropriate fees for individuals, families, students and seniors. The City shall hold any such private funding received in trust for Sister Cities Program purposes. [BC 2.03.354, added by Ordinance No. 4494, 11/17/08]


2.03.356 Bylaws.

The City Council hereby approves bylaws for the Sister Cities Advisory Board attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit A. These may be altered, amended or repealed upon 30 days’ notice at any meeting of the Sister Cities Advisory Board by a two-thirds majority vote of the incumbent Sister Cities Advisory Board members. Amendments shall not be effective until approved by the City Attorney for conformance to City Code and ratified by the City Council. [BC 2.03.356, added by Ordinance No. 4494, 11/17/08]

XXI. SOCIAL SERVICES FUNDING COMMITTEE*

*    Editor’s note: Ordinance 4621 adds the provisions of this article as Sections 2.03.340 through 2.03.365. The sections in the article have been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


2.03.360 Formal Recognition of Social Services Funding Committee.

The Social Services Funding Committee is hereby recognized to exist. [BC 2.03.340, added by Ordinance No. 4621, 10/8/13]


2.03.365 Powers and Duties.

The committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the Council and its primary duty shall be to review annual social service grant applications and make funding recommendations to Council, and to perform such other duties as the Council may request from time to time. [BC 2.03.345, added by Ordinance No. 4621, 10/8/13]


2.03.370 Membership. 

The committee shall consist of seven members who are not elected officials or employees of the City. The Mayor shall appoint committee members, subject to confirmation by the Council. A vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the member’s term as soon as practical through a process substantially similar to the process used for the original appointments. [BC 2.03.350, added by Ordinance No. 4621, 10/8/13]


2.03.375 Term of Office. 

Members shall serve for a three-year term, starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st, with the exception that the first appointments shall be staggered such that two members shall initially have a one-year term and two other members shall initially have a two-year term, and the remaining members shall have a three-year term. A person may serve on the committee for an unlimited number of terms. [BC 2.03.355, added by Ordinance No. 4621, 10/8/13]


2.03.380 Staff Liaison. 

The Mayor shall assign a City employee as a staff liaison to the committee. The staff liaison is not a member or an officer of the committee. [BC 2.03.360, added by Ordinance No. 4621, 10/8/13]


2.03.385 Council Liaison. 

A Council Liaison shall not be assigned or appointed to the Social Service Funding Committee. [BC 2.03.365, added by Ordinance No. 4621, 10/8/13]

XXII. DIVERSITY ADVISORY BOARD


2.03.500 Diversity Advisory Board Established.

The Diversity Advisory Board is hereby established. [BC 2.03.500, added by Ordinance No. 4620, 10/8/13]


2.03.505 Powers and Duties.

The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Council and its duties shall include advising the City on diversity and equity strategies that strengthen connections among diverse community groups and with city government. [BC 2.03.505, added by Ordinance No. 4620, 10/8/13]


2.03.510 Membership.

The Board shall consist of 13 members. The Mayor shall appoint and the Council shall confirm Board members. A Board vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the member’s term as soon as practical through a process substantially similar to the process used for the original appointments. [BC 2.03.510, added by Ordinance No. 4620, 10/8/13]


2.03.515 Term of Office.

Members shall serve for a three-year term, starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st, with the exception of the first appointments that shall be staggered. A person may serve on the Board for an unlimited number of terms. 

Seven members of the Board must be present to constitute a quorum to transact any business that requires a vote. The concurrence of a majority of the Board members present and voting is necessary to determine any question before the Board. [BC 2.03.515, added by Ordinance No. 4620, 10/8/13]


2.03.520 Staff Liaison.

The Mayor shall assign a City employee as a staff liaison to the Board. The staff liaison shall ensure Board notices, agendas and minutes of all Board meetings are prepared, published and maintained as part of the City’s records. The staff liaison is not a member or an officer of the Board. [BC 2.03.520, added by Ordinance No. 4620, 10/8/13]

XXIII. BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE


2.03.550 Bicycle Advisory Committee Established.

There is hereby established a Bicycle Advisory Committee. [BC 2.03.550, added by Ordinance No. 4740, 9/11/18]


2.03.555 Membership.

The Bicycle Advisory Committee shall consist of nine members and up to two alternates, who shall be nonvoting members. The Bicycle Advisory Committee may also include up to two ex officio nonvoting members, one from a Washington County active transportation interest group and one from a Metro-area active transportation interest group. [BC 2.03.555, added by Ordinance No. 4740, 9/11/18]


2.03.560 General Powers and Duties.

The Bicycle Advisory Committee shall provide recommendations to City Council on bicycle and related active transportation uses in and around the City of Beaverton, and provide City staff with general recommendations on bicycle and related active transportation circulation, access, and general use. [BC 2.03.560, added by Ordinance No. 4740, 9/11/18]


Chapter 2.04 TRIALS AND SEARCH WARRANTS

Sections:

I. JURY TRIALS

2.04.010    Jury Number.

2.04.012    Jury Demand.

2.04.014    Term of Court.

2.04.016    Competency and Qualifications of Jurors.

2.04.018    Preparation of Preliminary Jury List.

2.04.019    Juror Questionnaire; Eligibility to Serve as Juror; Discharge From Jury Service.

2.04.020    Jury Panel Selection.

2.04.021    Postponement of and Excuse from Jury Service.

2.04.023    Term Jury List.

2.04.025    Jury Selection for Trial.

2.04.027    Exhaustion of Jury Panel.

2.04.029    Unanimous Verdict.

2.04.030    Compensation.

2.04.031    Application of District Court Procedure to Municipal Court Proceedings.

2.04.032    Summoning of Jurors.

2.04.034    Court Hours.

2.04.036    Preservation of Jury Orders, Records and Papers.

2.04.040    Court of Record.

II. SEARCH WARRANTS

2.04.100    Criminal Searches and Seizures.

2.04.101    Nuisance Abatement Warrants.

2.04.102    Administrative Warrants.

I. JURY TRIALS


2.04.010 Jury Number.

A jury trial in the municipal court, shall consist of six persons, sworn to try and determine the question or questions of fact, selected and drawn as provided in this Code.


2.04.012 Jury Demand.

Every person charged with an offense defined and made punishable by imprisonment by the charter, ordinances, or Code provisions of the city has the right to trial by jury. [BC 2.04.012, amended by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.014 Term of Court.

The terms of municipal court shall be for a period of three months, beginning on January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each year.


2.04.016 Competency and Qualifications of Jurors.

A. A person is competent to act as a juror if the person:

1. is a citizen of the United States;

2. is a resident of the city;

3. is over 18 years of age; and

4. has not had rights and privileges withdrawn and not restored under ORS 137.281.

B. A person is not disqualified from jury duty if, at the time the person appears for jury service, the person is no longer a resident of the city; and

1. the person’s name properly appeared on the voters list or other lists described in BC 2.04.018; and

2. the person is otherwise qualified under this section. [BC 2.04.016, amended by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.018 Preparation of Preliminary Jury List.

A. The municipal judge or court clerk shall cause to be prepared a preliminary jury list prior to the first day of each new court term. The preliminary jury list shall contain the names and addresses of individuals selected at random from the most recent voting list of the city, or any other pool of names relating to the city that represents a fair cross section of the community.

B. The number of names placed on the preliminary jury list shall be sufficient to meet the projected need for jurors in the municipal court for one term, but the total number shall not be less than one-half percent of the population of the city according to the latest decennial census.

C. If the preliminary jury list becomes exhausted or in the opinion of the presiding judge is likely to become exhausted, the presiding judge may order the court clerk to select at random an additional number of names from the source lists described in subsection A of this section. A person whose name is so selected shall be summoned or notified to serve as a juror as provided in this section and BC 2.04.019. [BC 2.04.018, amended by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.019 Juror Questionnaire; Eligibility to Serve as Juror; Discharge From Jury Service.

A. A person whose name is included on the preliminary jury list shall be notified that he or she has been selected for jury service. Before or at the time a person is scheduled to appear for jury service, a judge or court clerk shall question the person as to the person’s competency to act as a jury under BC 2.04.016. If a judge or court clerk determines that a person so questioned is incompetent to act as a juror, the person shall be discharged from jury service.

B. A person may be questioned about the person’s competency to act as a juror either in person or by mail.

1. To question a person in person about the person’s competency to act as a juror, a judge or court clerk shall first require the person to declare by oath or affirmation that the answers to the questions about the person’s competency to act as juror shall be truthful.

2. To question a person by mail about the person’s competency to act as a juror, the presiding judge may cause to be mailed or delivered, with or without a juror’s summons, a juror questionnaire along with instructions for completion of the questionnaire and return of the completed questionnaire by mail or personal delivery to the court clerk. A completed juror questionnaire shall contain the questioned person’s signed declaration that the responses to the questions on the form are true to the best of the person’s knowledge. Notarization of a completed questionnaire shall not be required.

C. A person who knowingly makes a false statement of material fact in response to a question regarding the person’s competency to serve as a juror may be punished for contempt.

D. If a person fails to return a properly completed juror questionnaire as instructed, a judge of the court may direct the person to appear forthwith and properly complete a questionnaire. If the person fails to appear as directed, a judge of the court may order the person to appear and show cause for that failure. If the person fails to appear pursuant to the order or appears and fails to show good cause, the person may be punished for contempt.

E. Before or at the time a person reports for jury service, a judge or court clerk may discuss with the person any questions on the juror questionnaire and the grounds for any incompetency of the person to act as a juror. Any pertinent information so acquired may be noted on the form. [BC 2.04.019, added by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.020 Jury Panel Selection.

[BC 2.04.020, repealed by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.021 Postponement of and Excuse from Jury Service.

A. Postponement of a person’s jury service to a subsequent term may be granted by a judge or court clerk for good cause shown. Whenever possible, the postponement of a person’s jury service is to be preferred over the excuse of a person from jury service.

B. Excuse of a person from jury service may be granted by a judge or court clerk only upon a showing of undue hardship or extreme inconvenience to the person, the person’s family, the person’s employer or the public served by the person. In applying for this provision, the judge or court clerk shall consider both the public need for juries which are representative of the whole community and individual circumstances offered as justification for excuse from jury service. [BC 2.04.021, added by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.023 Term Jury List.

A. Prior to the first day of each new court term, the municipal judge or court clerk shall cause to be prepared a term jury list. The term jury list shall consist of all individuals included on the preliminary jury list who have been questioned as to their competency to act as a juror pursuant to BC 2.04.019 and have not been discharged or excused from serving as a juror or had their jury service postponed to a subsequent term.

B. No person shall be included on a term jury list more than once in a period of twelve months.

C. If at any time a jury panel for a court term becomes exhausted, or in the opinion of the presiding judge may become exhausted, additional names shall be selected at random from the preliminary jury list to serve as replacement jurors until the next panel is selected. [BC 2.04.023, added by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.025 Jury Selection for Trial.

A. For each jury trial date during a court term, the court clerk shall select, at random, at least 12 persons from the term jury list who are able to serve at the time required.

B. At the time of trial, the prospective jurors shall be examined as to their qualifications, first by the defendant and then by the city. After they have been passed for cause, peremptory challenges, if any, shall be exercised, as provided in subsection C of this section. Each party may take challenges for cause and three peremptory challenges, unless the judge grants additional challenges. When two or more defendants are tried together, each must join in any challenge or it cannot be taken, unless the judge grants additional challenges.

C. Peremptory challenges shall be taken in writing by secret ballot as follows:

1. The defendant may challenge one juror and the city may challenge one, alternating until the peremptory challenges are exhausted.

2. After each challenge, the panel shall be filled and the additional juror passed for cause before another peremptory challenge is exercised. Neither party shall be required to exercise a peremptory challenge unless the full number of jurors is in the jury box at the time.

3. The refusal to challenge by either party in order of alteration does not prevent the adverse party from exercising the party’s full number of challenges, and refusal of a party to exercise the party’s challenge in proper turn concludes the party as to the jurors once accepted by the party. If the party’s right of peremptory challenge is not exhausted, the party’s further challenges shall be confined, in the party’s proper turn, to such additional jurors as may be called.

D. Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the defendant and the city may stipulate to taking peremptory challenges orally.

E. If the peremptory challenges of the moving party are not already exhausted, the court may for good cause shown permit a challenge to be taken to any juror before the jury is complete and sworn, notwithstanding the juror challenged may have been previously accepted. [BC 2.04.025, amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.027 Exhaustion of Jury Panel.

If, at the time of a jury trial, the jury panel present for the trial becomes exhausted due to nonappearance or prospective jurors or challenges by each party, the court may order the police chief to summon persons who have the qualifications of jurors to serve in the court. [BC 2.04.027, amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.029 Unanimous Verdict.

All six of the jurors sworn to try the cause must concur to render a verdict, unless the parties, with permission of the court, stipulate to a lesser number. [BC 2.04.029, amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.030 Compensation.

Those jurors notified and who appear for jury trial duty shall receive compensation from the city in an amount set by Council resolution for each day, or part of a day, of attendance upon the municipal court.


2.04.031 Application of District Court Procedure to Municipal Court Proceedings.

Except as otherwise provided by this Code, by state law or by court rule, trials shall be conducted as trials in district courts. The rules of evidence shall be the same as in the state courts and shall include applicable state law regarding the introduction or admission of evidence. [BC 2.04.031, amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.032 Summoning of Jurors.

The police chief shall assist the municipal judge in the service of subpoenas, summons, notices of jury duty, and such other orders of the court necessary for its proper conduct. [BC 2.04.032, amended by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.034 Court Hours.

The Council shall, by resolution, specify the times during which the court shall be open for business.


2.04.036 Preservation of Jury Orders, Records and Papers.

After the end of a jury service term, all orders, records and papers prepared in connection with the selection and summoning of persons to serve as jurors for the terms as provided in BC 2.04.018 through 2.04.030 shall be preserved by the court clerk for the period prescribed by the state archivist. [BC 2.04.036, added by Ordinance No. 3517, 6/10/86]


2.04.040 Court of Record.

The Beaverton municipal court is hereby declared a court of record, effective November 8, 2007. A prosecution commenced in the Beaverton municipal court before that date shall be deemed a prosecution in a court not of record notwithstanding that part of the prosecution may occur in the Beaverton municipal court after the effective date of this declaration. [BC 2.04.040, added by Ordinance No. 4454, 10/9/07]

II. SEARCH WARRANTS


2.04.100 Criminal Searches and Seizures.

[BC 2.04.100, repealed by Ordinance No. 3516, 6/10/86]


2.04.101 Nuisance Abatement Warrants.

A. A nuisance abatement warrant is an order, in writing, in the name of the City, signed by a judge and directed to a City official or employee charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code, commanding the official or employee to conduct an abatement authorized by any provision of law or to enter onto private property to remove and abate any nuisance.

B. A nuisance abatement warrant shall be issued only upon reasonable cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant, the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the removal or abatement of the nuisance, the building or property to be entered, the basis upon which cause exists to remove or abate the nuisance, and a statement of the general types and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated. Before issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the judge may examine the applicant and any other witness under oath and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the removal or abatement of any nuisance exists and that the other requirements for granting the application are satisfied, the judge shall issue the warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered, and a statement of the general types and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night. In issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the judge may authorize any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or obstacle and to assist the representative of the City official or employee charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code in any way necessary to enter the property and remove or abate the nuisance.

C. A nuisance abatement warrant must be executed within 21 days of its issue and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within 10 days from its date of execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this subsection, the warrant unless executed or renewed is void. When executing a nuisance abatement warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry into an occupied premises, make a reasonable effort to present the person’s credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show the occupant or person in possession of the property the warrant or a copy thereof upon request; provided, however, that when executing a nuisance abatement warrant on unoccupied property, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person’s authority and purpose, but may promptly enter the designated property if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonably believed to be in such condition. In such case, a copy of the nuisance abatement warrant shall be conspicuously posted on the property. The City official or employee to whom a nuisance abatement ordinance is directed may make use of such labor and service as may be necessary or convenient in the furtherance of the objective of the nuisance abatement warrant, regardless of whether such labor or service is supplied voluntarily, at cost or for profit by an employee, agent or independent contractor of the City.

D. The return of a nuisance abatement warrant shall certify the day and time of execution of the warrant, the name of the City official or employee conducting the abatement and a list in reasonable particularity describing any nuisance items removed from the property. The City may cause any nuisance items removed pursuant to the nuisance abatement warrant to be disposed of as waste whenever the City official or employee charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code finds that the fair and reasonable value of the items at resale would be less than the cost of storing and selling the items. In making this determination, the official or employee may include in the costs of sale the reasonable cost of removing the items to a place of storage, of storing the items for resale, of holding the resale including reasonable staff allowances, and all other reasonable and necessary expenses of holding the sale.

E. Following the procedures set forth in this section, the City Council may issue, and the City may execute, a nuisance abatement warrant in conjunction with a proceeding brought under BC 5.05.145, except that the rights, powers and limitations applicable to a judge under this section are applied instead to the City Council. [BC 2.04.101, added by Ordinance No. 4506, 4/20/09]


2.04.102 Administrative Warrants.

The procedures in this section apply to administrative inspections and investigations made by officers and employees of the city relating to fire, sanitation and structural safety of property, existence of nuisances, and the improper use of property under codes for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public or for any purpose authorized by law. An administrative warrant is an order, in writing, in the name of the city, signed by the municipal judge, or other authorized judge, directed to a city official or employee charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code commanding the official or employee to conduct any inspection or investigation required or authorized by any provision of law. An administrative warrant shall not be deemed a criminal warrant within the meaning of ORS chapter 133.

A. Procedure. If an authorized officer or employee of the city is refused access to property for the purpose of making an inspection or investigation provided for in this section, the officer or employee shall not inspect the premises until the officer or employee has obtained an administrative warrant for the inspection from the municipal judge or other authorized judge.

B. Issuance.

1. Under the terms of this section, no administrative warrant shall be issued for the inspection of any property within the city until there has been filed with the municipal court an affidavit showing reasonable cause for the inspection. Reasonable cause to issue an administrative warrant exists if reasonable legislative, administrative or judicially prescribed standards for conducting an inspection or investigation are satisfied with respect to the particular property and the search is reasonable in time and scope.

2. The affidavit, shall described the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant, the Code provision or regulation requiring or authorizing the inspection or investigation, the premises to be inspected or investigated and the purpose for which the inspection or investigation is to be made including the basis upon which cause exists to inspect. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement that entry has been sought and refused, that the property is unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonably believed to be unoccupied, or facts or circumstances reasonably shown that the purposes of the inspection or investigation might be frustrated if entry were sought without a warrant.

3. Before issuing the warrant, the judge may examine, upon oath, the applicant and any other witnesses, and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for issuing such warrant. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection exists, the judge shall issue a warrant particularly describing the place to be inspected and designating the purpose and limitations of the inspection.

4. The warrant shall contain a directive that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or, if the judge has specially determined on a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.

5. An administrative warrant shall be effective for the time specified therein, but in no event for a period of more than 14 days unless extended or renewed by the judge who signed and issued the original warrant upon a showing of good cause why the warrant could not be served within the time provided.

C. Execution.

1. Except as provided in subsection 2 of this subsection, in executing an administrative warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry, make a reasonable effort to present the person’s credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and serve the person with a copy of the warrant.

2. In executing an administrative warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of this authority and purpose as prescribed in subsection l of this subsection, but may promptly enter the designated property if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonably believed to be unoccupied. A copy of the warrant shall be left in a conspicuous place if the property is unoccupied.

3. If any items are seized as specified by the warrant, a list of property taken shall be left in a conspicuous place.

4. A peace officer may be requested to assist in the execution of the administrative warrant.

5. An inspection pursuant to an administrative warrant shall not be made by means of forcible entry, except that the judge may, by an endorsement on the face of the warrant, expressly authorize execution of the warrant by forcible entry where the affidavit, or a supplemental affidavit after the warrant has once been issued, contains information sufficient to satisfy the judge that there are reasonable grounds to believe that any of the following situations exists:

a. a probable violation of any of the provisions of this Code which, if such violation in fact existed, would represent an immediate threat to health or safety; or

b. where prior attempts to serve a warrant or obtain consent have met with refusal of the owner or occupant of the place described in the warrant;

c. where reasonable attempts have been made to secure the cooperation of the owner of the property described in the warrant, which property is unoccupied and entry cannot be gained except with such owner’s cooperation or by force, and such cooperation has been refused or is not obtainable after reasonable efforts.

D. Execution By Forcible Entry.

1. In execution of a properly endorsed administrative warrant by forcible entry, any city official acting under the warrant shall be accompanied by a peace officer who shall execute the warrant as to the manner of gaining entry, and who shall stand by during the inspection to prevent any interference therewith.

2. In the execution of an administrative warrant by forcible entry the officer has the same power and authority, in all respects, to break open any door or window, to use all necessary and proper means to overcome any forcible resistance made to the officer or to call any other person to the officer’s aid that the officer has in the execution or service of a warrant of arrest.

E. Return of Warrant. An administrative warrant must be executed and returned to the issuing judge within 14 days from its date of issuance. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this subsection, the warrant is void unless executed. The return shall certify the day and time of execution of the warrant, the name of the city official conducting the inspection and a list of items seized, if any.

F. Emergency Inspection Without Warrant. Nothing in BC 2.04.102 shall be construed as prohibiting an inspection or investigation without a warrant in an emergency situation if immediate inspection is necessary to the protection of the public health or safety and if it would be impractical and represent an increased hazard to seek a warrant under BC 2.04.102. [BC 2.04.102, amended by Ordinance No. 3516, 6/10/86.]


Chapter 2.05 PROPERTY AND REVOCATION PROCEDURES

Sections:

I. DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY

2.05.010    Scope.

2.05.012    Definitions.

2.05.014    Storage of Personal Property.

2.05.016    Investigation and Notification.

2.05.018    Presale Procedure for Property Valued at over $250.00 When an Interested Person Has Not Been Found or Ascertained or No Claim Has Been Made by the Interested Person.

2.05.020    Sale Procedure for All Personal Property.

2.05.022    Certificate of Sale.

2.05.024    Places of Storage to File Monthly Inventories.

2.05.025    Transfer of Property.

2.05.026    Special Disposition of Other Personal Property.

2.05.030    Appraisal and Sale of Vehicle Nuisance.

2.05.032    Redemption of Vehicle Nuisance Before Sale.

2.05.034    Reduction of Lien Amount.

II. UNIFORM REVOCATION PROCEDURES

2.05.050    Scope of Provisions.

2.05.052    Definitions.

2.05.053    Violation of Development Agreement.

2.05.054    Grounds for Revocation of License.

2.05.056    Institution of Revocation Proceedings and Hearing.

2.05.058    Determination by Council; Effective Date.

2.05.060    Suspension Procedures When Serious Danger to Public Health or Safety Exists; Effective Date.

2.05.062    Appeal of the Council’s Decision.

2.05.064    Issuance or Renewal of License to Licensee or Applicant Who Has Had License Revoked or Suspended or Application Denied.

2.05.066    Violation.

I. DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY


2.05.010 Scope.

BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.028 govern the disposition of all personal property except motor vehicles towed pursuant to Chapter Six, weapons subject to ORS 166.280, property the disposition of which is governed by court order and personal intangible property presumed abandoned pursuant to ORS 98.306 through 98.432.


2.05.012 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.028 the following mean:

Department – The department, division or employee of the police department designated by the police chief to be responsible for the administration of this ordinance.

Interested person – The owner, conditional vendor, mortgagee or other person having a necessary or ownership interest in property, or a legal claim to property coming into the hands of a city representative.

Mayor – The mayor or the mayor’s designee.

Property – All personal property except motor vehicles towed pursuant to Chapter Six, weapons subject to ORS 166.280, property the disposition of which is governed by court order, or personal intangible property presumed abandoned pursuant to ORS 98.306 through 98.432.


2.05.014 Storage of Personal Property.

A. Unless State law otherwise provides, when personal property is found without an interested person claiming it or, by reason of abandonment, arrest, confiscation, impoundment, or seizure, or by any other means, comes into the hands of any city representative or department, the property shall be turned over to the department for inventory, further storage and disposition at the risk and expense of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the property.

B. The department shall place the property on city hall grounds or another authorized storage place pending investigation of ownership and disposition.


2.05.016 Investigation and Notification.

A. The department, on coming into possession of property valued at $25.00 or more, shall make diligent inquiry as to the name and address of any interested person, and shall examine it for a license, serial or other number and any other information on the property that will aid in the identification of an interested person.

B. Following the investigation, if under the circumstances the department is reasonably satisfied that an interested person has been found, the property may be released to that person on payment of any of the applicable costs provided in subsection D of this section. In all other cases, if the interested person is found and identified, the interested person shall be notified immediately by certified letter sent to the interested person’s last known address and containing the following information:

1. that the personal property is held by the department;

2. the date the property came into the possession of the department;

3. that the property will be sold at public auction at city hall, the place of storage, or any other designated location to the highest bidder for cash unless claimed by and released to the interested person before the date of the proposed sale;

4. that the sale will not be held earlier than 30 days from the date the personal property came into the possession of the department and, in any event, not until ten days have elapsed from the mailing of the certified notice.

C. No property shall be released to a claimant until the claimant submits to the department satisfactory evidence of the claimant’s interest and pays the costs of holding the property, except where the property is released pursuant to court order.

D. In cases of signs or other property confiscated pursuant to BC 5.05.010 through 5.05.260 the claimant must submit to the mayor or the department satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and payment of charges and expenses for storage, preservation and custody of the property.

1. The charges and expenses for storage, preservation and custody of signs or other property the mayor takes into possession shall be an amount set by resolution of the Council.

2. If the interested person desires a hearing to challenge the seizure of the property and, on appropriate application under BC 5.05.010 through 5.05.260 the municipal court shall hear the matter pursuant to the procedures provided for civil infractions and during the pendency of the hearing no daily storage charges shall accrue.

3. At any time after the 60 day period from confiscation of the sign or other property, the mayor shall cause to be disposed of or destroyed any sign or other property which has been seized, except the property shall be held as evidence in any legal or court proceeding. When the court proceedings are concluded, any owner shall have 20 days in which to reclaim the property by paying the appropriate charges for storage, preservation and custody of signs or other property. After the 20 days, the mayor may dispose of or destroy a sign or other property which has not been claimed by the owner or responsible person.

4. If the signs or other property are sold at auction as provided for in BC 2.05.020, no sign or other property shall be sold for less than $100.00 or the amount of charges, whichever is less.


2.05.018 Presale Procedure for Property Valued at over $250.00 When an Interested Person Has Not Been Found or Ascertained or No Claim Has Been Made by the Interested Person.

A. If after 30 days from the day property valued at $250.00 or more comes into the possession of the department, an interested person cannot be found, the department shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, once each week for two consecutive weeks, a notice generally describing the finding, the property found, and the final date before which the property may be claimed. The sale shall not take place until at least 10 days after the publication of the second notice.

B. If an interested person applies to the department for the return of the property before a sale has taken place, submits to the department satisfactory evidence of the person’s interest, and pays the costs of holding the property, the department shall surrender the property to the person.

C. If no person appears and establishes ownership of or interest in the property within six months after the property has come into the possession of the department, the mayor shall cause the property to be sold at auction as provided for in BC 2.05.020.


2.05.020 Sale Procedure for All Personal Property.

A. If no claim has been made or if all claims made have been rejected as not bona fide before the time set for the sale of personal property, the mayor shall offer the property for sale to the highest bidder for cash. In default of bids from others, the mayor may dispose of the property without the necessity of taking further bids according to the rules established by the mayor.

B. The mayor shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice generally describing the property to be sold at auction and giving the date, time and location of the auction. The notice shall be published at least 10 days prior to the auction.

C. All sales of such property shall be for cash to the highest and best bidder; provided, however, that any person appearing at or prior to the sale and proving ownership or right of possession shall be entitled to reclaim the property on the payment of the charges and expenses incurred by the city in storage, preservation and custody of the property and a proportionate share of the costs of advertising the property for sale. Any person who was notified pursuant to BC 2.05.016 and who does not claim the property within the time specified by BC 2.05.016, shall be deemed to have abandoned the property and may not claim the property under this section.

D. If no bids are entered for the property or if the highest bid entered is less than the costs incurred by the city, the mayor may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to the costs. If bid on by the city, the property shall become the property of the city as compensation for the costs incurred or, if of no use or value to the city, shall be disposed of in such manner as the mayor directs.

E. The proceeds of the sale shall be first applied to payment of the cost of the sale and the expense incurred in the preservation, storage and custody of the property and the balance, if any, shall be credited to the general fund of the city.

F. The sale shall be without the right of redemption.

G. No owner or operator of a place in which property has been stored by the city shall release property without first having obtained a written release from the department.


2.05.022 Certificate of Sale.

At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the mayor shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the purchaser and a copy to be kept on file in the office of the finance director. The certificate shall contain the date of sale, the consideration paid, a brief description of the property and a stipulation that the city does not warrant the condition or title of the property other than the return of the purchase price in case the title is for any reason invalid. The certificate of sale shall be in a form prescribed by the city attorney.


2.05.024 Places of Storage to File Monthly Inventories.

The owner or operator of a place in which personal property has been stored by the city shall, at least 15 days before the date of the auction scheduled for the storage place, or on request of the mayor, provide to the mayor an inventory of all property currently held. The inventory shall include the date of impoundment, serial or other identifying numbers, and other description information which would identify the property.


2.05.025 Transfer of Property.

In lieu of sale of property under the provisions of BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.028, the mayor may transfer any portion of unclaimed property to the city for use by the city.


2.05.026 Special Disposition of Other Personal Property.

A. The mayor may have personal property in the custody of the city appraised by appropriate means. If the property is valued at $100.00 or less and is not suitable for sale pursuant to BC 2.05.016 or remains unsold at the auction, the mayor may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property as provided in the rules adopted by the mayor.

B. Property that has been seized without a search warrant may be sold at auction if a judge has ordered the property delivered to the mayor in accordance with the provisions of ORS 133.623 as it now exists or is hereafter amended.

C. Property seized under authority of a search warrant shall be disposed of in accordance with ORS 133.633 to 133.663.

D. Property seized by a peace officer without a warrant shall be disposed of in accordance with ORS 133.623.

E. The officer may destroy weapons and firearms that are not considered suitable for sale pursuant to BC 2.05.020 or transferable pursuant to this section, or that were not disposed of pursuant to subsections B, C or D.

F. Perishable property coming into the possession of the mayor may be disposed of immediately, without notice, in the manner prescribed by the rules authorized in BC l.02.010.


2.05.030 Appraisal and Sale of Vehicle Nuisance.

A. Appraisal. After removing the vehicle, the city shall cause it to be appraised by an appraiser qualified under rules promulgated by the mayor.

B. Sale of Vehicle Appraised At or Below $750.00.

1. If the vehicle is appraised at $750.00 or less, the mayor shall file with the Department of Motor Vehicles an affidavit describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle, that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled, and that notice of intent to junk or dismantle the vehicle was given to the owner in the notice of abatement or, thereafter, by mail at least seven days prior to disposal of the vehicle. [BC 2.05.030 B1, amended by Ordinance No. 3367, 4/24/84]

2. On completion and forwarding of the affidavit, the mayor may, without notice and public sale, dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale in the form prescribed by the city attorney.

C. Sale Where Vehicle Is Appraised At Over $750.00. If a vehicle is appraised at a value of more than $750.00, the mayor shall sell the vehicle at a public sale pursuant to BC 2.05.020. However, the published notice of sale describing the property to be sold shall include the type and make of the vehicle, the license plate, and the identification number.


2.05.032 Redemption of Vehicle Nuisance Before Sale.

A. A vehicle abated under the provisions of BC 5.05.150 through 5.05.165 may be redeemed by the owner or by the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed, before sale or disposition has taken place. To redeem the vehicle, the owner or person in charge shall:

1. submit to the mayor satisfactory proof of the owner’s or person in charge’s ownership or right of possession;

2. pay the costs and expenses incurred in the removal, storage, preservation or custody of the vehicle; and

3. provide satisfactory proof that the nuisance character of the vehicle will not be resumed.

B. On compliance with subsection A, the mayor shall execute a receipt and cause the vehicle to be returned.


2.05.034 Reduction of Lien Amount.

After disposing of the discarded vehicle, the amount of the lien placed on the property pursuant to BC 5.05.215 shall be reduced by the amount of money received from sale of the vehicle.

II. UNIFORM REVOCATION PROCEDURES


2.05.050 Scope of Provisions.

BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066 shall govern the revocation, suspension, issuance, or modification of any license, permit, franchise, or privilege granted by the city, except where the Code or ordinance governing the issuance of the license, permit, franchise, or privilege provides otherwise.


2.05.052 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066 the following mean:

Issuing officer – The department head, officer, or employee authorized to grant, revoke, or administer the terms of any license, the Council when so authorized or, if none is so authorized, the mayor or the mayor’s designee.

License – Any permit, privilege, franchise or license issued by or on behalf of the city.

Licensee – The person applying for, holding, or possessing a license or the person’s authorized representative, agent, or employee, or a person conducting activities for which a license or permission from the city is required.


2.05.053 Violation of Development Agreement.

If the city has entered a development agreement with any party concerning the development of land within the city and has mailed or delivered a written notice that the party is in breach or default of the development agreement, the city may deny any application for any permit or license, including land use or building permits, or revoke permits or licenses on such property because of the breach or default of the development agreement. [BC 2.05.053, added by Ordinance No. 4286, 2/3/04]


2.05.054 Grounds for Revocation of License.

The issuing officer is authorized to initiate proceedings to revoke the license held by any person if the issuing officer has probable cause to believe that:

A. The licensee deliberately made a false statement in connection with the issuance, renewal or exercise of a license;

B. The licensee deliberately omitted information requested in connection with the issuance, renewal or exercise of a license;

C. The license granted is being or has been exercised contrary to the terms and conditions of the license or in violation of city, State or Federal law, regulation, or statute; or

D. The activity, use or privilege authorized under the license is being or has been exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

E. The licensee has taken an action or failed to act and the action or failure to act is specifically listed in this Code as cause for revocation.


2.05.056 Institution of Revocation Proceedings and Hearing.

A. On a showing of sufficient cause to believe that possible grounds exist for revocation, the issuing officer may institute proceedings for revocation of any license within the scope of BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066 by notifying the licensee to whom the license was issued or the licensee’s successor in interest by certified mail, return receipt requested, by personal service, or by substituted service at least ten days before the effective date of revocation. The notice shall contain:

1. a statement of the proposed revocation, the grounds for the revocation including reference to the applicable Code section or regulation, and the effective date of the revocation;

2. a statement that the licensee has the right to a hearing concerning the revocation and must request one in writing within five working days of receipt of this notice; and

3. a statement that if the licensee requests a hearing, the revocation shall be stayed until the hearing is held.

B. The licensee must file the licensee’s written notice of appeal with the city recorder within five working days of receipt of notice of suspension. The notice must include:

1. the name and address of the appellant;

2. the nature of the determination being appealed;

3. the reason the determination is incorrect; and

4. what the correct determination should be.

C. The appeal is limited to the issues raised in the appellant’s written notice of appeal. Any issue not raised is waived by the appellant and may not be raised at a later time in the proceedings.

D. The failure to file a notice of appeal within the five working day period also waives any objections that the licensee might have to the revocation or suspension.

E. Failure to actually receive a notice sent or served shall not invalidate the revocation proceedings.

F. The hearing shall be held within 14 days of receipt of the notice.

G. The hearing shall be held before the Council. However, if the Council cannot be assembled for a hearing within 14 days, then the hearing shall be before a hearings officer appointed by the mayor, but the issuing officer shall not be appointed as the hearings officer. When reference is made to the Council in its capacity as a hearing body, it shall also include a hearings officer appointed by the mayor.


2.05.058 Determination by Council; Effective Date.

A. Within 30 days of the hearing, the Council shall by written order:

1. revoke the license; or

2. allow the use of the license to continue under any conditions previously imposed; or

3. allow the use of the license to continue and impose conditions if none were previously imposed, or modify, delete, or add to conditions previously imposed.

B. In determining whether to revoke or suspend a license, the Council may consider any relevant prior conduct of the licensee, whether or not the conduct resulted in revocation or suspension of a license or a citation for a civil infraction or criminal offense.

C. The Council’s order shall include findings of facts to support its determination. The order shall be filed with the city recorder.

1. A revocation ordered after a hearing before the Council shall be effective on a date the Council determines, but it shall not be effective prior to the date the written order is approved by the Council.

2. Modification, addition, or deletion of conditions shall be effective on a date the Council determines, but shall not be effective prior to the date the written order is approved by the Council.


2.05.060 Suspension Procedures When Serious Danger to Public Health or Safety Exists; Effective Date.

The procedures in BC 2.05.056 do not apply when the issuing officer determines that conduct by the licensee or circumstances surrounding the use of the license constitutes a serious danger to the public health or safety. In that case, the issuing officer shall suspend the license and follow the procedures set forth below.

A. The issuing officer shall notify the licensee by phone, certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal or substituted service that the licensee must cease and desist all activity authorized by the license.

B. The notice shall include:

1. the fact of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the duration of the suspension;

2. a statement that the licensee has the right to a hearing before the Council within seven working days, and the date, time, and place of the hearing; and

3. a statement that the licensee must cease all activities under the license until the hearing is held and an order made by the Council.

C. If the issuing officer determines that the licensee has corrected or eliminated the conduct or circumstances constituting the serious danger to public health or safety, then the issuing officer may lift the suspension. However, the violation may still be presented to the Council as cause for revocation or the licensee may be cited for a violation of the law.

D. A suspension notice may also serve as notice of revocation, in which case the notice should state that fact and include all the information listed in BC 2.05.056.

E. In addition to the cease and desist order, the city attorney may pursue injunctive relief in the appropriate court.

F. The hearing provided for in subsection B of this section shall be conducted according to the procedures outlined in BC 2.05.056 through 2.05.058, except that, if the Council determines the suspension was proper and orders revocation of the license, the effective date of revocation shall be the date that the licensee received notice from the city to cease and desist activity.

G. If the Council determines that revocation is not necessary, then it may, in addition to the actions outlined in BC 2.05.058 A, order suspension of the license for a specified period of time or until the circumstances or conditions warranting suspension are rectified or corrected.

H. If the Council determines that the suspension should be terminated and that revocation is not necessary, the licensee may resume lawful activities under the license immediately. A written order shall be issued within 30 days according to the requirements of BC 2.05.058 B.


2.05.062 Appeal of the Council’s Decision.

The decision of the Council on suspension or revocation of a license or modification, deletion, or addition of conditions to a license shall be final unless the licensee files an action in the appropriate court having jurisdiction within the period of time prescribed by the State statute of limitations or if no time period is established by State law, within 30 days of the date of action taken by the Council.


2.05.064 Issuance or Renewal of License to Licensee or Applicant Who Has Had License Revoked or Suspended or Application Denied.

A. No license shall be issued to any person who has had a similar license revoked or suspended or whose application for a similar or the same license has been denied within a one year period from the date of application for the second or succeeding permit, unless the applicant can show that the applicant now meets qualifications for issuance or renewal of the license and the reasons for or the circumstances surrounding the revocation of the license are not likely to reoccur.

B. The issuing officer in determining whether to issue or renew a license may consider any proper suspensions or revocation of the same or similar license occurring in the previous five years. The written denial shall state the reasons for denial and the right to appeal. If the license issuance or renewal is denied by the issuing officer on account of prior suspensions or revocation, the issuing officer’s decision may be appealed if the licensee files a written notice or appeal within five days of the written denial of the license.

If an appeal is filed, the proceedings shall be governed by BC 2.05.056 and BC 2.05.058.


2.05.066 Violation.

Any person who operates a business or carries on an activity covered by a revoked, suspended, or expired license, until a new license is issued or the suspension ends, is guilty of a violation of this Code. Violation is a Class l Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.


Chapter 2.06 ELECTIONS

Sections:

I. NOMINATIONS

2.06.010    Repealed.

2.06.012    Repealed.

2.06.014    Repealed.

2.06.016    Repealed.

2.06.018    Repealed.

2.06.020    Repealed.

II. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

2.06.100    Repealed.

2.06.102    Repealed.

2.06.103    Repealed.

III. INITIATIVE

2.06.104    Repealed.

2.06.106    Repealed.

2.06.108    Repealed.

2.06.110    Repealed.

IV. REFERENDUM

2.06.112    Repealed.

2.06.114    Repealed.

2.06.116    Repealed.

2.06.118    Repealed.

V. PETITION

2.06.120    Repealed.

2.06.122    Repealed.

2.06.124    Repealed.

2.06.126    Repealed.

2.06.128    Repealed.

VI. BALLOT TITLE

2.06.130    Repealed.

2.06.132    Repealed.

VII. ELECTION

2.06.134    Repealed.

2.06.136    Repealed.

2.06.138    Repealed.

2.06.140    Repealed.

2.06.142    Repealed.

VIII. VOTERS’ PAMPHLET

2.06.152    Repealed.

2.06.154    Repealed.

IX. GENERAL PROVISIONS

2.06.160    Repealed.

2.06.162    Repealed.

2.06.164    Repealed.

2.06.166    Repealed.

2.06.168    Repealed.

X. VOTERS’ PAMPHLET

2.06.200    Repealed.

2.06.202    Repealed.

2.06.204    Repealed.

2.06.206    Repealed.

2.06.208    Repealed.

2.06.210    Repealed.

2.06.212    Repealed.

2.06.214    Repealed.

XI. ELECTIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS

2.06.305    Short Title.

2.06.310    Definitions.

2.06.315    State Law to Control in the Absence of Local Provision – Exception.

2.06.320    Documents and Forms.

XII. NOMINATIONS

2.06.325    Purpose.

2.06.330    Nomination Petition.

2.06.335    Requisite Number and Verification of Signatures.

XIII. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

2.06.400    Filing Signatures.

2.06.405    Certification of City Measure.

XIV. COUNCIL REFERRALS

2.06.410    Referring a Measure Proposed by Council.

XV. VOTERS’ PAMPHLET

2.06.415    Voters’ Pamphlet Contents.

2.06.420    Purchase of Space.

2.06.425    Submission of Material – Deadline.

2.06.430    Argument Authorship – Disclaimer.

2.06.435    Distribution of Voters’ Pamphlet.

2.06.440    Voters’ Pamphlet Submission Requirements.

2.06.445    Misstatement of Fact – Civil and Criminal Cause of Action.

2.06.450    Misstatement of Fact – Council May Nullify Election.

XVI. ELECTION RESULTS

2.06.455    Certification of Election Returns.

2.06.460    Effective Date of Measure.

2.06.465    Effective Date of City Ordinances Subject to Referendum.

2.06.470    Conflicting Measures.

2.06.475    Repealed.

2.06.480    Repealed.

2.06.485    Repealed.

2.06.487    Repealed.

2.06.488    Repealed.

2.06.489    Repealed.

2.06.500    Repealed.

2.06.505    Repealed.

2.06.510    Repealed.

2.06.515    Repealed.

I. NOMINATIONS


2.06.010 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.010 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.012 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.012 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.014 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.014 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.016 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.016 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.018 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.018 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.020 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.020 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

II. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM


2.06.100 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.100 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.102 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.102 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.103 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.103 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

III. INITIATIVE


2.06.104 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.104 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.106 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.106 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.108 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.108 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.110 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.110 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

IV. REFERENDUM


2.06.112 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.112 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.114 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.114 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.116 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.116 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.118 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.118 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

V. PETITION


2.06.120 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.120 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.122 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.122 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.124 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.124 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.126 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.126 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.128 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.128 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

VI. BALLOT TITLE


2.06.130 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.130 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.132 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.132 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

VII. ELECTION


2.06.134 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.134 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.136 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.136 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.138 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.138 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.140 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.140 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.142 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.142 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

VIII. VOTERS’ PAMPHLET


2.06.152 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.152 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.154 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.154 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

IX. GENERAL PROVISIONS


2.06.160 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.160 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.162 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.162 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.164 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.164 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.166 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.166 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.168 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.168 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

X. VOTERS’ PAMPHLET


2.06.200 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.200 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.202 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.202 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.204 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.204 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.206 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.206 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.208 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.208 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.210 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.210 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.212 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.212 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]


2.06.214 Repealed.

[BC 2.06.214 repealed by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97]

XI. ELECTIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS


2.06.305 Short Title.

BC 2.06.305 to 2.06.470 shall be known and may be cited as the “Beaverton Election Code” and may be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 2.06.305, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.310 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “City elector” means an individual who is qualified to vote under Section 2, Article II, of the Oregon Constitution, registered to vote, and a resident of the City.

B. “City Elections Officer” means the Beaverton City Recorder.

C. “City measure” includes any of the following submitted to City electors for their approval or rejection at an election:

1. A City charter, or any proposed amendment or repeal of a City charter;

2. A City ordinance, or any proposed amendment or repeal of a City ordinance; and

3. A proposition or question, including an advisory proposition or question. [BC 2.06.310, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.315 State Law to Control in the Absence of Local Provision – Exception.

A. City elections must conform to state law, except as the Beaverton Charter and City ordinances provide otherwise. The provisions of the City Charter and City ordinances relating to elections prevail over any conflicting state law relating to elections. 

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, if the City authorizes, by resolution or nonemergency ordinance, the issuance of revenue bonds for a public purpose pursuant to Oregon law, including ORS Chapter 287A, the terms and provisions of state law relating to how City electors may seek to refer the question of whether to issue the revenue bonds to a vote shall control over any conflicting term or provision of the Beaverton Charter or a City ordinance. [BC 2.06.315, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.320 Documents and Forms.

If a document prescribed by the City Attorney is required or mentioned in this chapter, and the appropriate document is not available from the City Attorney, or this chapter requires a form without specifying the form to be used, the appropriate document or form approved by the Oregon Secretary of State may be used. [BC 2.06.320, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]

XII. NOMINATIONS


2.06.325 Purpose.

All elections held in the City for the election of elective officers shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law, including the Beaverton Charter and the Beaverton Election Code. [BC 2.06.325, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.330 Nomination Petition.

Each candidate for an elective City office shall file a nomination petition for the office sought. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the City Attorney and may be obtained in the office of the City Elections Officer. [BC 2.06.330, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.335 Requisite Number and Verification of Signatures.

A nomination petition shall be signed by not less than 10 and not more than 20 City electors, and such signatures shall be verified by affidavit of a City elector. The affidavit shall be in a form prescribed by the City Attorney and may be obtained from the office of the City Elections Officer. [BC 2.06.335, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]

XIII. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM


2.06.400 Filing Signatures.

A. A petition to refer a City measure shall be filed with the City Elections Officer for signature verification within 30 days after the City legislation sought to be referred is adopted. However, City legislation is not subject to referendum on or after its effective date.

B. A petition to initiate a City measure shall be filed with the City Elections Officer for signature verification within 180 days after the City Elections Officer approves the initiative petition for circulation. [BC 2.06.400, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.405 Certification of City Measure.

A. If an initiative petition contains the required number of verified signatures, the City Elections Officer shall file the initiated measure with the Council within 15 days after the petition has qualified to the ballot. The initiated measure shall be deemed filed with the Council on the date the Council first reviews the initiated measure as an agenda item at a public meeting.

B. The Council may adopt or reject the measure no later than 45 days after the initiated measure is first reviewed by the Council as an agenda item at a public meeting. If the Council takes no action, the Council shall be deemed to have rejected the measure. If either the measure is not adopted, or the measure must be submitted to City electors under the Beaverton Charter or state law, then the measure shall be submitted to City electors on the next available election date pursuant to state law held not sooner than one hundred twentieth day after the measure was filed with the Council.

C. The Council may refer a competing measure to City electors at the same election an initiated measure is submitted to City electors. If the Council refers a competing measure to City electors, the Council shall prepare the measure not later than the sixtieth day after the initiated measure is filed. The Mayor shall not have the power to veto an initiated measure or a competing measure.

D. If a referendum petition contains the required number of verified signatures, the referred measure shall be submitted to City electors on the next available election date pursuant to state law held not sooner than the one hundred twentieth day after the referendum petition was filed with the City Elections Officer. [BC 2.06.405, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]

XIV. COUNCIL REFERRALS


2.06.410 Referring a Measure Proposed by Council.

A. The Council may adopt a resolution to refer a City measure to City electors. The resolution shall state the subject of the measure, call for an election on the measure, and state the date the election is to be held. City measures referred by the Council shall be submitted to the voters at such date as may be determined and declared by the Council. The resolution adopted by the Council to refer a City measure to City electors may include a ballot title for the measure.

B. The resolution shall be deemed filed with the City elections officer on the date the Council adopts the resolution prepared under subsection A of this section.

C. If a ballot title is prepared under subsection A of this section, the ballot title shall be deemed filed with the City Elections Officer on the date the Council adopts the resolution. If the ballot title is not prepared under subsection A of this section, then when the measure is filed with the City Elections Officer, the Officer shall send a copy of the resolution to the City Attorney within the next two business days. The City Attorney shall provide a ballot title for the measure and send a copy of the ballot title to the Council and the City Elections Officer no later than the fifth business day after receiving the copy from the City Elections Officer.

D. The Council shall submit an impartial, simple, and understandable statement explaining the Council-referred City measure and its effect no later than the date specified by the Oregon Secretary of State. The City Attorney shall prepare the explanatory statement of the measure and submit it to the Council to adopt by resolution. At a public meeting, the Council may discuss and revise the explanatory statement prepared by the City Attorney. The Council shall be deemed to have filed the explanatory statement with the City Elections Officer on the date the Council adopts a resolution containing the explanatory statement. [BC 2.06.410, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]

XV. VOTERS’ PAMPHLET


2.06.415 Voters’ Pamphlet Contents.

A. The City Elections Officer shall cause a voters’ pamphlet to be prepared and printed for all City candidacies and measures submitted to the voters of the City at a primary or general biennial election. If the Council causes a City measure to be submitted to the voters at an election other than a primary or general biennial election, Council shall provide a voters’ pamphlet through a resolution of the Council that sets forth its contents and the manner and means for its distribution consistent with this chapter.

B. The required voters’ pamphlet shall include, at a minimum:

1. For a Measure. The full text, ballot number, ballot title, explanatory statement and any arguments filed relating to each City measure submitted to the voters.

2. For a Candidate. The name of the candidate, office to which candidate seeks election and any statement of the reasons why the candidate should be nominated or elected.

C. Measures referred by the Council will be designated on the ballot: “Referred to the Voters by the Council.”

D. Measures proposed by referendum petition will be designated on the ballot: “Referred by Referendum Petition.”

E. Measures proposed by initiative petition will be designated on the ballot: “Proposed by Initiative Petition.” [BC 2.06.415, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.420 Purchase of Space.

Any individual candidate, person, or group opposing or supporting a measure may purchase not less than one half page and not more than one full page for their submitted material. The cost of the space shall be set by Council resolution. [BC 2.06.420, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.425 Submission of Material – Deadline.

All material to be included in the City’s voters’ pamphlet shall be submitted to the City Elections Officer by the times specified for the voters’ pamphlet for the equivalent state election. If there is no equivalent state election, all materials to be included in the City’s voters’ pamphlet shall be submitted to the city elections officer not later than 5:00 p.m. on the day that is the same number of days prior to the election that would apply if the election were held in conjunction with a statewide primary election. [BC 2.06.425, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.430 Argument Authorship – Disclaimer.

A. The City Elections Officer shall include in the City’s voters’ pamphlet on the page of a printed argument on a City measure: the name of the person or organization that submitted the argument; whether the argument supports or opposes the City measure; and a disclaimer in substantially the following form:

The printing of this argument does not constitute an endorsement by the City of Beaverton and the city does not warrant the accuracy or truth of any statement made in the argument.

B. The City Elections Officer shall include in the City’s voters’ pamphlet on the page of a printed candidate statement: the name of the person or organization that submitted the statement and a disclaimer in substantially the following form:

The above information has not been verified for accuracy by the city.

[BC 2.06.430, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.435 Distribution of Voters’ Pamphlet.

The City Elections Officer, no later than the thirtieth day before the election, shall cause a copy of the City’s voters’ pamphlet to be mailed to each household in the City in which at least one registered voter resides and shall cause additional copies to be made available at City Hall and at least one U.S. Postal Service office in Beaverton. The most recent voter registration records available from the Washington County Elections Office shall be used to determine the households to which the City will mail voters’ pamphlets. [BC 2.06.435, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.440 Voters’ Pamphlet Submission Requirements.

To accept a statement for publication in the City voters’ pamphlet, whether submitted by the candidate or on behalf of a candidate:

A. The candidate shall sign an affidavit that attests to the truthfulness of the voters’ pamphlet submission statement. 

B. The signed statement in subsection A of this section shall contain a provision that the candidate agrees to provide supporting information if requested by the City and shall release and authorize third parties to participate in an investigation under this chapter. [BC 2.06.440, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.445 Misstatement of Fact – Civil and Criminal Cause of Action.

A candidate who makes a material misstatement of fact in a City voters’ pamphlet is subject to civil and criminal causes of action as found in ORS 260.532 and 260.715. [BC 2.06.445, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.450 Misstatement of Fact – Council May Nullify Election.

If the Circuit Court enters a judgment finding that a candidate has made a material misstatement of fact published in the City’s voters’ pamphlet, the Council may nullify the election or nomination of that person after giving the person notice and an opportunity to be heard on the issue at a public hearing. The Council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of the Mayor and its own members. [BC 2.06.450, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]

XVI. ELECTION RESULTS


2.06.455 Certification of Election Returns.

A. In all elections held in conjunction with state and county elections the state law governing the filing and canvassing of returns shall apply. The results of each election shall be entered in the record of the proceedings of the Council by and through the adoption of a Council resolution. The resolution shall state the number of votes cast for each person and for and against each measure, the name of each person elected to office, the office to which the person has been elected, and each measure enacted or approved. In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the election of the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots.

B. The City Elections Officer shall prepare the resolution stating the result of an election. Council adoption of the resolution shall be considered at a duly noticed public meeting of the Council.

C. Immediately after adoption of the resolution stating the results of an election for an office, the City Elections Officer shall issue a certificate of election to each person elected, to be delivered to the elected person within a reasonable time thereafter. [BC 2.06.455, added by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.460 Effective Date of Measure.

A. City legislation approved by a majority of City electors who voted on the City measure takes effect 30 days after the City Elections Officer certifies that a majority of City electors who voted on the City measure approved it, or at a later date if specified in the measure. 

B. A proposition or question approved by a majority of City electors who voted on the City measure takes effect when the City Elections Officer certifies that the measure has passed, or at a later date if specified in the measure. [BC 2.06.460, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.465 Effective Date of City Ordinances Subject to Referendum.

An ordinance for which a prospective referendum petition has been submitted to the City Elections Officer does not take effect during the period of signature collection and signature verification. If petitioners collect the number of City elector signatures required under the Beaverton Election Code, the ordinance shall take effect only if a majority of the City electors who voted on the referral measure supported the ordinance. In that instance, the ordinance then takes effect when the City Elections Officer certifies that the measure has passed, or at a later date if specified in the ordinance. If a majority of the City electors who voted on the referral measure did not support the ordinance, the ordinance shall not take effect. [BC 2.06.465, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.470 Conflicting Measures.

If, at the same election, City electors approve two or more City measures on the same subject matter, or where two or more measures contain conflicting provisions, the City measure receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes is the law adopted. [BC 2.06.470, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.475 Submission of Material: Deadline.

[BC 2.06.475, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.480 Argument Authorship: Disclaimer.

[BC 2.06.480, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.485 Distribution of Voters’ Pamphlet.

[BC 2.06.485, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.487 Voters’ Pamphlet Submission Requirements.

[BC 2.06.487, added by Ordinance No. 4452, 9/17/07; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.488 Misstatement of Fact; Civil and Criminal Cause of Action.

[BC 2.06.488, added by Ordinance No. 4452, 9/17/07; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.489 Misstatement of Fact; Council May Nullify Election.

[BC 2.06.489, added by Ordinance No. 4452, 9/17/07; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.500 Proclamation of Elections Officer.

[BC 2.06.500, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.505 Effective Date of Measure or Proposed Charter Amendment.

[BC 2.06.505, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.510 Measures Subject to Referendum.

[BC 2.06.510, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


2.06.515 Conflicting Measures or Charter Amendments.

[BC 2.06.515, added by Ordinance No. 3980, 4/29/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4748, 1/8/19]


Chapter 2.07 REGULATORY CLAIMS PROCEDURE

Sections:

2.07.001    Short Title.

2.07.005    Purpose and Applicability.

2.07.010    Definitions.

2.07.012    Pre-Application Conference.

2.07.015    Application.

2.07.020    Notice of Application for Claim.

2.07.025    Review of Application.

2.07.030    City Council Hearing.

2.07.035    Burden of Proof.

2.07.040    Standards for Interpretation.

2.07.045    Waiving Enforcement of City Regulation.

2.07.050    Payment of Claim.

2.07.055    Record.

2.07.060    Conditions Related to Future Court Decisions.

2.07.065    No Reapplication.

2.07.070    Validity of City Council Action.

2.07.075    Measure 37 Claims.


2.07.001 Short Title.

BC 2.07.001 through 2.07.075 shall be known and may be cited as the “Regulatory Claims Procedure Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 2.07.001, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.005 Purpose and Applicability.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to:

1. Establish a process whereby claims under Oregon Revised Statute, Chapter 197 (November 6, 2007, amendment, hereafter “Measure 49”) may be properly submitted by claimants and evaluated by the City quickly, openly, thoroughly and consistently with the Oregon and U.S. Constitution;

2. Enable persons with legitimate claims an adequate and fair opportunity to present such claims to the City, while preserving and protecting limited public funds;

3. Authorize, where appropriate, limitations on the applicability of City regulations, which are shown to cause a significant reduction in property value;

4. Provide a record of decision capable of judicial review.

B. It is not the purpose of this chapter to amend, repeal or enforce the Comprehensive Plan, Development Code, statewide land use plan or any other land use statute, regulation or policy. [BC 2.07.005, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

Appraisal – An examination of and opinion about the fair market value of real property prepared by a person certifed under ORS Chapter 674 or a person registered under ORS Chapter 308.

Claimant or Applicant – The property owner for which a claim is made pursuant to this chapter.

Community Development Director or Director – The person designated by the Mayor as Community Development Director or such other person or persons as authorized to act in that capacity.

Enforcement – A land use regulation is enforced only after a property owner makes an application for a land use and a final decision is made by the City under the Beaverton Development Code. A land use regulation will also be “enforced” if a citation is issued to the property owner for a violation of the Beaverton Development Code. The denial of a site development permit is not the enforcement of a land use regulation.

Exempt Regulation – A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities commonly and historically recognized as public nuisances under common law; a regulation restricting or prohibiting activities for the protection of public health and safety; a regulation to implement a requirement of federal law to the extent required; a regulation enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the property by the owner or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first; or a regulation that prohibits selling pornography or performing nude dancing.

Fair Market Value – The price stated in terms of dollars that a willing buyer would pay for the property without any obligation to buy from a willing seller without any obligation to sell. “Reduction in fair market value” means the difference in the fair market value of the property one year before and one year after enactment of the regulation.

Federal Requirement – Any statute, code or regulation adopted by the U.S. Congress or any federal agency or state agency delegated to act in the name of a federal agency, which imposes upon the states or local governments or both an obligation to enact or enforce regulations over the use of real property.

Land Use Regulation – Shall include:

1. Any statute regulating the use of land or any interest therein;

2. Administrative rules and goals of the Land Conservation and Development Commission;

3. Local government comprehensive plans, zoning ordinances, land division ordinances, and transportation ordinances;

4. Metropolitan service district regional framework plans, functional plans, planning goals and objectives; and

5. Statutes and administrative rules regulating farming and forest practices.

Measure 37 – The amendment to Oregon Revised Statute 197, as approved by the Oregon electorate on November 2, 2004.

Measure 49 – The amendment to Oregon Revised Statute 197, as approved by the Oregon electorate on November 6, 2007, which supersedes Measure 37.

Nuisance – Any act, omission, structure or condition on property, which unreasonably interferes with a right common to members of the general public and not necessarily related to the use and enjoyment of land by any person other than the owner of property that is the site of the nuisance. Without limiting the foregoing, the City may consider whether a use of property is declared by the Beaverton Code or the Beaverton Development Code to be a nuisance.

Owner – Is the present or future owner of the property, or any interest therein.

Ownership Interest – A legally recognized interest in the proceeds of any sale of an interest in the property in question.

Public Entity – Shall include the state, a metropolitan service district, a city, or a county.

Real Property – All lots, parcels or tracts, or any combination thereof, that are owned by the claimant, including structures built or located on the property. “Real property” does not include public property, personal property or easements over, above or below real property. “Real property” does not include a franchise issued by the City to place or erect public or private utility facilities within or along public right-of-way.

Restricts the Use – A regulation that restricts the type of use of private real property, but does not include a regulation that affects either the extent of a use or a regulation that governs development or construction.

Single-Family Dwelling – A detached residential dwelling which is located on a single legally created parcel.

Transferability – A waiver or license issued by the City may be transferred to subsequent owners of property; provided, that the development of the property is consistent with the waiver or license issued by the City.

Use of Property – Any activity that a private property owner can undertake on their property without creating a nuisance, without violating federal law or any local ordinance designed to the minimum extent possible to implement requirements of federal law and without violating any City or county regulation in effect at the time the owner became owner of the property.

Waiver of Enforcement of a Regulation or License – A license issued by the City, pursuant to this chapter, suspending City enforcement of the requirements of a City regulation, which is determined to restrict the owner’s use of property, is not exempt from Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 197, and for which the City has elected not to pay compensation pursuant to Measure 49. Such a license will run with the property and may be transferable to subsequent owners of the property.

Zoned for Residential Use – Means that it has as its primary purpose single-family residential use. [BC 2.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.012 Pre-Application Conference.

A. Before submitting an application for a claim pursuant to this chapter, the claimant may schedule and attend a pre-application conference with the Director to discuss the application. The pre-application conference shall follow the procedure set forth by the Director. The applicant shall pay the applicable fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

B. To schedule a pre-application conference, the claimant must contact the Director. The pre-application conference is for the claimant to provide a summary of the claimant’s application for a claim and for the Director to provide information to the claimant about regulations that may affect the application, including this chapter. The Director may provide the claimant with a written summary of the pre-application conference within 10 days after it is held.

C. The Director is not authorized to settle any claim at a pre-application conference. Any omission or failure by staff to recite to a claimant all relevant applicable land use regulations will not constitute a waiver or admission by the City. [BC 2.07.012, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.015 Application.

A. An application for a claim may only be filed for residential use. An application for a claim under this chapter shall be filed by an owner or the owner’s authorized agent, along with such number of copies as the Director may require. The application shall be filed with the Director on an application form as approved by the Director, accompanied by documentation in support of the application, as listed in this subsection. Within 60 days following receipt of a claim, the Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete. If the Director determines the application is not complete, the Director shall, within that 60-day period, notify the claimant by sending via first-class mail of exactly what additional information is necessary to make the application complete.

B. The claim shall be deemed complete when the City receives:

1. The missing information, which may include the claim processing fee established by City Council resolution;

2. Part of the missing information and written notice from the claimant that the remainder of the missing information will not be provided; or

3. Written notice from the claimant that none of the missing information will be provided.

C. If the City does not notify the claimant within 60 days after a claim has been filed, the claim will be deemed complete as of the date the claim was filed.

D. If the claimant does not respond within 30 days of the date of the City notice stated in subsection (B) of this section, the claim shall be deemed withdrawn.

E. The application shall be signed by the property owner(s), including without limitation each person having an ownership interest (as defined herein) in the private real property.

F. Unless waived by the Director an application shall include the following information:

1. A description by street address, if any, and by Washington County Assessment and Taxation map and tax lot number of the property upon which the regulation is imposed;

2. A description by street address, if any, and by the county property tax assessor’s map and tax lot number of each parcel of land owned by the owner or owners of the private real property that is either directly contiguous to the property described in subsection (F)(1) of this section, or is indirectly contiguous through contiguity with another parcel under the same ownership, together with the following:

a. The date of acquisition of the property and each contiguous parcel;

b. Information showing the extent to which the owner has treated the private real property, as to which the owner is applying for compensation, and the directly or indirectly contiguous parcels as a unified use or as a single economic unit, for example in the purchase and financing of the land and in the owner’s or owners’ development of and economic planning for the land;

c. The extent to which application of the subject regulation that is being challenged enhances the value of the property and each contiguous parcel; and

d. The amount of any compensation previously paid by any unit of government under Measure 49 in relation to each such parcel;

3. Proof of Ownership. A copy of the instrument conveying the property to the claimant along with a title report issued within 30 days of the date of the application and by a property title insurance company authorized to conduct business within the State of Oregon and insuring to the City that the claimant is the property owner of the real property. Such report shall name all persons with legal, equitable and security interests in the property and the date and instrument showing the time and manner in which such property interest or interests were established. Claimant shall also submit a complete list of all other interests or encumbrances, including without limitation leases and encroachments, of which the claimant is aware or has reason to think may exist;

4. Identification of the regulation enacted after January 1, 2007, that has reduced the fair market value of claimant’s property;

5. Claimant’s desired specific use of the property and how that use is restricted by the land use regulation adopted after January 1, 2007;

6. That the claim has been filed within five years of the date of the enactment of the regulation;

7. Amount of Claim.

a. A statement of the amount of the claim in dollars based on claimant’s alleged reduction in fair market value resulting from application of the City regulation; and

b. An appraisal of the subject property showing the reduction in the fair market value of the property as that reduction is defined under Measure 49. The opinion of compensable reduction in fair market value shall be apportioned among each regulation such that the City may separately consider the alleged impact on fair market value of each regulation. The appraisal shall be prepared and signed by a person certified under ORS Chapter 674 or a person registered under ORS Chapter 308. The appraisal shall:

i. Show the fair market value of the property one year before the enactment of the land use regulation that is the basis of the claim;

ii. Show the fair market value of the property one year after the enactment of the land use regulation that is the basis of the claim;

iii. Calculate separately the fair market value of multiple land use regulations, if more than one land use regulation is the subject of the claim, in the same manner as identified in subsections (F)(7)(b)(i) and (ii) of this section. The values of the separate land use regulations shall be added together to calculate the total fair market value;

iv. Show the fair market value of each single-family dwelling to which the claimant is entitled, but in no case shall the number of detached dwellings exceed 10 dwellings;

v. Show evidence of any ad valorem property taxes not paid, any severance taxes paid and any recapture of additional tax liability that the owner has paid or will pay for the property if the property is disqualified from special assessment under ORS 308A.703;

vi. Comply with the Uniform Standards for Professional Appraisal Practice, as authorized by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989;

vii. Expressly determine the highest and best use of the property at the time the land use regulation was enacted;

c. An itemization of any prior payments made to the property owner relating to a claim on the property, including any contiguous parcels under substantially the same ownership;

d. Any other relief sought by the claimant from other governments;

e. Copies of all appraisals, market studies, economic feasibility studies, development schemes, environmental assessments or similar studies related to the property prepared within the two-year period prior to submittal of the claim;

8. A waiver of any claims for regulations not identified;

9. Exemptions. A statement, including analysis, as to why the regulations are not exempt from application for compensation under Measure 49, including:

a. Imposition, to the extent required, of a regulation to implement a federal requirement;

b. Regulation prohibiting the use of the property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing;

10. All other documents, information or argument to be relied upon by the claimant in support of the application;

11. An application fee as established by resolution and amended from time to time by the City Council;

12. A sworn statement that the information submitted is true and complete to the best knowledge and belief of the claimant. [BC 2.07.015, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.020 Notice of Application for Claim.

A. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Director shall cause notice of the filing of the claim to be given as follows, within 30 days from the date of determination of completeness.

B. Notice of the hearing under this chapter shall be made by regular first-class mail to:

1. The claimant and to owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll within 500 feet of where such property is located;

2. The Chair of the Neighborhood Association Committee in which the property is located;

3. The Directors of the following departments of Washington County: Land Use and Transportation and Assessment and Taxation;

4. The Director of Metro’s Growth Management Services;

5. The Director of the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development; and

6. Any local, state or federal agency, which the Director believes would be affected by a waiver of the regulation from the property. 

The failure of the Director to give notice as provided in this section, or the failure of any person to receive notice given under this section, shall not invalidate any action of the City Council under this chapter. The notice provisions of this subsection shall not restrict the giving of notice by other means, including the posting in public places, newspaper publication, radio, television or by posting on the City’s web site.

C. The notice provided by this section shall:

1. Explain the nature of the claim, including the name of the claimant and the amount of the claim;

2. List the applicable criteria from this chapter;

3. List the regulation(s) that is the subject of the claim;

4. Set forth the street address, if available, or other easily understood geographical reference to the claimant’s property;

5. State the date, time and location of the hearing at which the City Council will consider the claim as well as evidence bearing on such claim and determine whether compensation should be paid under this chapter or the subject regulation(s) should be waived as to the claimant;

6. State that failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals or other appropriate appeal tribunal based on that issue;

7. Be mailed at least 30 days before the hearing;

8. Include the name of the City staff to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

9. State that a copy of the claim, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the claimant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at a reasonable cost;

10. State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at a reasonable cost;

11. Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings.

D. All documents or evidence relied upon by the claimant shall be submitted to the City and be made available to the public. Any staff report shall be made available at least seven days in advance of the hearing. [BC 2.07.020, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.025 Review of Application.

The Director, following filing of a claim under this chapter that is deemed complete, and following consideration of the information included in the claim and any other evidence, shall determine whether a waiver of enforcement of the regulation may be necessary to avoid the owner or owners being entitled to compensation under Measure 49, and, if so, the extent of the waiver needed and the amount of compensation to which the owner or owners would be entitled without a waiver. If the Director determines that a waiver of enforcement of the regulation is or may be needed to avoid the owner being entitled to compensation, the Director, under the advice of the Finance Director and City Attorney, shall compare the public benefits from application of the regulation to the owner’s private real property to the public burden of paying the required compensation if a waiver of enforcement of the regulation is not granted, taking into consideration the financial resources of the City for the payment of such claims. Based on this comparison, the Director shall prepare a written report stating the result of his or her comparison. If the Director has determined that a waiver of enforcement of the regulation may be needed, the report also shall make a recommendation either to grant a waiver that will avoid the owner being entitled to compensation; grant a license waiving enforcement of the regulation that will either avoid compensation or not avoid compensation but will reduce the compensation to which the owner is entitled and pay the amount of reduced compensation to which the Director believes the owner is entitled; deny a waiver of enforcement of the regulation and pay the amount of compensation to which the Director believes the owner is entitled; or take some other appropriate action, such as acquiring the entire private real property or any portion thereof by condemnation. [BC 2.07.025, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.030 City Council Hearing.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the hearing shall be conducted by the City Council in accordance with the Council rules for the conduct of administrative and quasi-judicial hearings.

B. At the beginning of the public hearing under this section, the presiding officer or a member of City staff shall state:

1. The applicable substantive criteria;

2. That the hearing will proceed in the following general order: staff report, applicant’s presentation, testimony in favor of the application, testimony in opposition to the application, rebuttal, record closes, deliberation, decision;

3. That all testimony and evidence submitted, orally or in writing, must be directed toward the applicable approval criteria. If any person believes that other criteria apply in addition to those addressed in the staff report, those criteria must be listed and discussed on the record. The Mayor may reasonably limit oral presentations in length or content depending upon time constraints. Either the City or the claimant may require that the appraiser or other person relied on by the other party attend the hearing with all relevant materials and be available for questioning by the Council. If the person is not available, the Council may strike from the record any information provided by the person at any stage. Any party may submit written materials of any length while the public record is open;

4. Failure to raise an issue on the record, with sufficient specificity and accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the City and all parties to respond to the issue, may preclude appeal on that issue to the appropriate appellate tribunal;

5. Any party wishing a continuance or to keep open the record must make that request while the record is still open;

6. The City Councilors (and the Mayor, if a decision maker) must disclose any ex parte contacts, conflicts of interest or bias before the beginning of each hearing item and provide an opportunity for challenge. Advised parties must raise challenges to the procedures of the hearing at the hearing and raise any issue relative to ex parte contacts, conflicts of interest or bias, prior to the start of the hearing.

C. Any request made for an opportunity to continue the hearing, to present additional evidence or testimony or to make final written argument shall be subject to restriction or elimination, as the City Council determines convenient or necessary to assure that a written decision is made and sufficient administrative time remains thereafter to cause payment of compensation or waiving enforcement of the regulation within the required 180 days from the date the claim was deemed complete. The Council shall have sole discretion as to whether to admit evidence, but material required to be submitted as part of the claim or that the Director should have received and considered at the time of making his or her review and recommendation shall not be admitted unless the Council finds that extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the offering party prevented earlier submittal. The Council may condition receipt of new information from the claimant on the claimant stipulating to an extension of time for consideration of the material and a waiver of the 180-day deadline provided for under Measure 49.

D. The Council shall determine whether the following criteria have been met:

1. The application is complete;

2. The claimant is a qualifying property owner under Measure 49;

3. All owners of the property have consented in writing to the claim;

4. The subject property is located within the City;

5. The claimant was lawfully permitted to establish a residential use on the property on the date the claimant acquired the property;

6. One or more land use regulations prohibit establishing single-family dwellings on the property;

7. The establishment of single-family dwellings is not prohibited by a land use regulation described in ORS 197.352(3);

8. The land use regulation described in subsection (D)(6) of this section was enacted after the date of the property, or any portion of the property, was brought into the boundaries of Metro;

9. The land use regulation that is the basis of the claim was enacted after the date the property was annexed to the City;

10. The enactment of the land use regulation that is the basis of the claim caused a reduction in the fair market value of the property as determined by an appraisal consistent with the provisions of BC 2.07.015(F)(7)(b); and

11. The number of single-family dwellings identified by the claimant was the highest and best use of the property at the time of enactment of the land use regulation.

E. At the conclusion of the hearing the City Council shall announce its decision orally. Such decision shall not be considered the final City decision until the City Council has adopted written findings in support of its decision. The City Council shall determine whether the applying owner may be entitled to compensation under Measure 49 unless the City grants a waiver of the regulation and, if so, the amount of compensation that may be due and shall compare the public benefits from application of the regulation to the owner’s private real property to the public burden of paying the required compensation to the owner if a waiver of the regulation is not granted, taking into consideration the financial resources of the City for the payment of such claims. If the City Council has determined that either compensation or a waiver is or may be required, then based on this comparison:

1. If the City Council finds that the public burden of paying the required compensation, taking into consideration the City’s financial resources for the payment of such claims, is sufficient to justify denying the public benefit from application of the regulation to the owner’s private real property, the City Council may grant a waiver of the regulation to the extent necessary to avoid the owner or owners being entitled to compensation;

2. If the City Council finds that the public benefit from application of the regulation to the owner’s or owners’ private real property is sufficient to justify the public burden of paying the required compensation, taking into consideration the City’s financial resources for the payment of such claims, the City Council may deny a waiver of the regulation and identify a specified amount of compensation to be paid;

3. The City Council may find that the public benefit from application of the regulation to the owner’s private real property is sufficient to justify the public burden of paying some of the required compensation, taking into consideration the City’s financial resources for the payment of such claims, but that other of the public benefits are not sufficient to justify the public burden of paying the balance of the required compensation. If so, the City Council may grant a waiver of the regulation to the limited extent necessary to avoid the owner being entitled to compensation as to that part of the specified regulation providing public benefit and identify a specified amount of compensation to be paid as to that part of the regulation as to which a waiver from enforcement is not granted; or

4. The City Council may take some other appropriate action, including a resolution of intent to acquire an interest in the property by condemnation;

5. The City Council, in its discretion, may impose a condition that its decision will be effective only if the owner or owners of the private real property sign an agreement, in a form acceptable to the City, that waives any further claims in relation to application of the subject regulation to the private real property as to which a waiver or compensation is sought;

6. The City Council may take other appropriate action conditional on the City receiving a defined amount of contributions from others, such as persons who believe they would be negatively affected by an exemption, by a specified date. In the event the City Council makes such a conditional decision, then the Finance Department shall establish an account into which it shall deposit all contributions the City has received for the payment of compensation. On the date specified for receipt of the defined amount of contributions, the Finance Department shall certify whether the defined amount of contributions has been received. If the defined amount of contributions has been certified as received, then the compensation shall be paid and the license deemed denied or granted only to the limited extent approved by the City Council, as of the payment date. If the defined amount of contributions has been certified as not received, then the license shall be deemed granted as of the certification date and all contributions received by the City shall be returned to the persons who made the contributions.

F. If the Council finds the criteria set forth in subsection (D) of this section have been met, the Council shall adopt a written order (which may be combined with the written findings and conclusion) either directing that payment of just compensation be made to the property owner and to any other persons holding an interest in the property, in such manner as approved by the City Attorney, or issuing a waiver of the regulation in accordance with BC 2.07.045.

G. A copy of the findings, conclusion and order shall be mailed by first-class mail to:

1. The claimant and to all other interested persons who submitted written testimony or testified before the City Council;

2. The government agencies that were provided notice of the claim pursuant to BC 2.07.020(B)(3) through (5). [BC 2.07.030, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.035 Burden of Proof.

The burden of proof of any material element shall be upon the claimant for all matters required to show that the claimant is a qualifying property owner under Measure 49 and the amount of compensation for reduced property value caused by the cited regulation or regulations. The burden shall be upon the City to establish that the regulation is exempt from the obligation to pay compensation. [BC 2.07.035, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.040 Standards for Interpretation.

A. Applications for claims shall be interpreted consistently with statutory laws and judicial decisions under Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 197.

B. This chapter is not intended in any way to expand the rights or remedies available to property owners under Measure 49 or any other law. Neither shall it be construed so as to contravene the express terms of Measure 49.

C. Any City decision on a claim which is inconsistent with any appellate court ruling under Measure 49 issued after the City’s decision may be the subject of a revocation proceeding instituted by the City under BC 2.05.050 et seq. of the Beaverton City Code or any other appropriate remedy available by law. If the City Council has taken an action under BC 2.07.030 and the owner nevertheless files a court action seeking compensation or additional compensation from the City in relation to the specified regulation as it affects the owner’s private real property, and if a final court decision determines that the extent of the waiver provided in the City Council’s final order was not sufficient to avoid the owner(s) being entitled to compensation or additional compensation, then the extent of any waiver granted by the City shall be deemed to be the extent of any waiver necessary to avoid the owner(s) being entitled to compensation or additional compensation, effective as of the date of the City Council’s decision. [BC 2.07.040, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.045 Waiving Enforcement of City Regulation.

A. There is hereby established a City waiver, which waives City enforcement of one or more specified City regulations found by the Council to reduce the value of a claimant’s real property. Such waiver shall have the following characteristics:

1. It shall be signed by the Director on behalf of the City and issued only to a claimant pursuant to the process set forth in this chapter and only to the extent necessary to offset the reduction in fair market value;

2. It may be transferable;

3. It shall be presented to the City as part of any application for development of the subject property for which a waiver of the subject regulation is sought;

4. The City may record the waiver or a memorandum of the waiver in the deed records of the county.

B. Issuance of a waiver under this subsection shall not cause the repeal of the regulation(s) being challenged.

C. The City Attorney is authorized to prepare an appropriate form of waiver under this subsection. [BC 2.07.045, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.050 Payment of Claim.

A. If the Council determines that a valid claim has been presented and established under this chapter and sufficient funds are available and appropriated therefor, the Council may authorize payment to the claimant. The amount of payment shall be based on the Council’s determination of the diminution in property value attributed to the City regulation.

B. Payment shall be tendered upon claimant’s recordation in the Washington County Department of Records and Elections of a notice, covenant, or declaration in a form approved by the City Attorney that the cited regulation(s) are applicable to the property.

C. Any City payment of compensation under this chapter shall be to the owner or owners in proportion to their ownership interests in the private real property as to which a waiver of the regulation or compensation was applied for. If there is a dispute among owners as to their proportional interests in the private real property, or if the City otherwise deems it appropriate, the City shall make the payment to an escrow agent in trust for the benefit of the owners, or may interplead the payment in a legal action, for distribution to the owners based on their proportional interests as soon as the owners have resolved their dispute or agreed on the appropriate distribution. The City Council may make a decision to pay compensation under this chapter conditional on the owner providing title insurance to the City, insuring the City as to the identities of the current owners of all legal, equitable, and security interests in the private real property. [BC 2.07.050, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.055 Record.

A. The City Recorder shall maintain records of all monies paid and waivers issued pursuant to this chapter.

B. The Director shall cause a copy of any waiver issued under this chapter to be mailed to the Washington County Director of Assessment and Taxation with a request that such information be considered in determining the assessed value of the subject property. [BC 2.07.055, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.060 Conditions Related to Future Court Decisions.

If the City Council grants a waiver or limited waiver as a means to avoid having to compensate, or as a means to limit compensation to, an owner or owners under Measure 49, and if, based on a subsequent appellate court interpretation or invalidation of Measure 49, in the same or another case, the applying owner was not entitled to compensation in relation to the regulation from which the waiver waiving the regulation was granted, then the waiver or limited waiver shall be deemed to have been invalid and ineffective as of and after the date of the City Council’s order granting the waiver or limited waiver. Any such invalidity and ineffectiveness shall be limited as necessary to avoid the City being required to compensate the owner under Measure 49. [BC 2.07.060, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.065 No Reapplication.

If an application is denied or withdrawn prior to the issuance of a final written order by the City Council, no application for the same or substantially similar compensation claim may be made by the owner of the subject property. [BC 2.07.065, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.070 Validity of City Council Action.

No failure of any person or body to comply with a procedural requirement set out in this chapter shall invalidate any action of the City Council under this chapter. [BC 2.07.070, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


2.07.075 Measure 37 Claims.

Measure 37 claims before June 28, 2007, shall be processed as required under Measure 49. [BC 2.07.075, added by Ordinance No. 4472, 2/25/08]


Chapter 2.08 INVENTORY OF PERSONAL PROPERTY OF PERSONS IN CUSTODY

Sections:

2.08.010    Legislative Findings.

2.08.015    Definitions.

2.08.020    Purpose.

2.08.025    Duty to Inventory Personal Property of Persons in Custody.

2.08.026    Preliminary Safety Inspection.

2.08.030    Timing of Inventory.

2.08.035    Manner of Inventory.

2.08.040    Identification and Safekeeping of Property.

2.08.045    Return of Property upon Release or Transfer.

2.08.050    Distribution of Property Receipts.

2.08.055    Adoption of Administrative Policies or Procedures.


2.08.010 Legislative Findings.

The City Council observes, among other reasons, that the findings and policies listed below support an inventory of personal property of persons taken into custody:

A. Officers are often the first persons in contact with these persons, and typically place them into a police vehicle and transport them to the police station, another law enforcement agency, or to a facility.

B. A person in custody could introduce valuable personal property, or alternatively, dangerous personal property, into a police vehicle or the police station.

C. Officers currently face the risk that persons in custody may bear or carry dangerous items such as syringes, weapons, objects which could be used as a weapon, or toxic or flammable substances, on their persons or otherwise accessible. An inventory separates these persons from those dangerous items.

D. An inventory of valuable personal property and dangerous personal property provides mutual protection, accountability and safeguards when such items are brought into a police vehicle or the police station. [BC 2.08.010, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.015 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following mean:

Attached property – Personal property such as decorative personal objects in the manner of body art or body piercing jewelry, but not including containers, and the property appears reasonably securely fastened to or through the person’s skin.

Closed container – A container the contents of which are not exposed to view. 

Container – An item designed to hold other things, or an item which is used or may be used to actually hold other things. The term includes both open and closed containers. Some types of containers may be located within other containers.

Dangerous personal property – Any item of personal property that under the circumstances in which it is possessed is readily capable of causing physical injury, property damage, or providing a means of escape, including but not limited to weapons and toxic, flammable or explosive substances.

Facility – A correctional facility, a “facility” as defined in ORS 426.005, or such other lawfully approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons under State law.

Officer – A police officer employed by the City of Beaverton or acting on behalf of the City of Beaverton.

Open container – A container that is unsecured or incompletely secured such that the container’s contents are exposed to view, generally including, but not limited to, a sack, bag or folder.

Person in custody – A person under lawful custodial arrest or detention, including, but not limited to, a person taken into custody for violation of law; a mental health hold pursuant to ORS Chapter 426, including ORS 426.228; a person taken into custody for treatment of intoxication pursuant to ORS Chapter 430, including ORS 430.399; and a person taken into protective custody pursuant to ORS Chapter 419B, including ORS 419B.150. The term does not include a person issued a criminal citation and released under authority of ORS 133.055 to ORS 133.076 unless the citation and release occurs upon premises of the police station.

Personal property – Every kind of property except land, tenements and fixtures.

Pocket – An external or internal enclosure located on or within an item of clothing or other piece of property, in which items may be located or stored.

Police station – A building set aside for police use which contains the Police Department’s temporary holding facility.

Police vehicle – The secure portion of a Beaverton police vehicle.

Torso – The trunk of the body; the body exclusive of the head, arms and legs.

Valuable personal property – Any cash, check, money order or other negotiable instrument, in any amount; any earring, necklace, ring, watch, bracelet or other similar item of jewelry from the person’s body, or from a container, or other piece of the person’s property, regardless of the item’s apparent value; and any other item of personal property that the person examining the item reasonably believes has a fair market value of $500.00 or more. [BC 2.08.015, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.020 Purpose.

The inventory of personal property pursuant to this chapter is intended to:

A. Protect the personal property of persons in custody while they are in custody;

B. Protect the City, its employees and agents against claims or disputes over lost, stolen or damaged property; and

C. Protect City employees, persons in custody, and others nearby from potential danger due to items found on or in the possession of persons in custody.

D. This chapter is not intended to diminish any law enforcement activities presently authorized under law. [BC 2.08.020, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.025 Duty to Inventory Personal Property of Persons in Custody.

A. An officer shall inventory the personal property of every person in custody as provided in this chapter.

B. This chapter shall also apply when a person in custody is transported directly to another law enforcement agency, or to a facility. [BC 2.08.025, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.026 Preliminary Safety Inspection.

The purpose of this section is to identify readily apparent and highly dangerous substances which would normally be brought into the police station and discovered in an inventory upon those premises, but which should not be brought into the police station due to the extreme and obvious danger they present to persons and property. This section applies to containers listed in subsection A of this section which are inevitably destined for arrival at the police station. This section shall only be triggered when a person is taken into custody by an officer, the officer knows he or she will be transporting the person to the police station (or if to another facility, the officer retains custody of containers that the other facility has rejected), and the officer knows he or she will be conducting the manner of inspection set forth in BC 2.08.035.

A. The officer shall visually note any purse, sack, backpack, fanny pack, suitcase, or other container designed for, or actually used for, the purpose of carrying personal items, when it is inevitable that the container will be arriving at the police station.

B. Before entering the police station the officer shall conduct a preliminary safety inspection, which is defined as a cursory visual, smell, listen or feel of the personal property, to identify items such as:

1. Explosive devices such as bombs, hand grenades or other similar military ordnance, plastic explosive, or incendiary explosive devices.

2. Toxic or unstable chemicals such as gasoline, nerve gas or similar chemical weapons, or substances used in the manufacture of methamphetamine.

3. Biologic weapon substances, including material such as strains of anthrax, ebola, bubonic plague, or other biologic warfare agent.

C. Property described in subsection B of this section which is discovered in a preliminary safety inspection shall be noted on the inventory form in the course of the identification of property required by BC 2.08.040. The property shall be processed by a second officer according to existing orders or procedures of the Beaverton Police Department.

D. The officer shall not remove any items of personal property from containers during the preliminary safety inspection other than the dangerous items listed in subsection B of this section.

E. Closed containers which are opened pursuant to this section shall be immediately closed again after the preliminary safety inspection. [BC 2.08.026, added by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; amended by Ordinance No. 4612, 2/19/13; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.030 Timing of Inventory.

A. Except for the preliminary safety inspection or the inventory described in subsection B, C, D, or E of this section, an officer shall inventory personal property of a person in custody after the person is within the police station and before the person is released or transported to another law enforcement agency, or to a facility.

B. If the officer is transporting the person in custody directly to another law enforcement agency or to a facility, then the officer shall conduct the inventory before that person is transported to the law enforcement agency or facility.

C. If an officer is transporting the person in custody directly to a facility for treatment of intoxication pursuant to ORS Chapter 430, then the officer shall conduct the inventory before that person is transported to the facility.

D. If a person in custody is transported directly to a facility because of a mental health hold pursuant to ORS Chapter 426, and the officer retains the personal property of that person, then the officer shall conduct the inventory before that person is transported to the facility.

E. If exigent circumstances or safety concerns reasonably require that the inventories from subsections A through D of this section be delayed, the officer shall conduct the inventory as soon as practicable after the exigency or safety concern has passed. [BC 2.08.030, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15; Ordinance No. 4741, 10/3/18]


2.08.035 Manner of Inventory.

An officer shall conduct the inventory in the following manner:

A. Unless otherwise authorized by law, the officer shall not remove the person in custody’s blouse, skirt, dress, shirt, pants and/or underwear (including, but not limited to, underpants, T-shirt, bra, slip, nylons and/or pantyhose); provided, however, that if the person is wearing more than one blouse, skirt, dress, shirt or pair of pants, the officer shall remove the outer blouse, skirt, dress, shirt or pair of pants, but shall not remove the blouse, skirt, dress, shirt or pair of pants worn closest to the skin of the that person’s torso. Unless otherwise authorized by law, if a person in custody is wearing an article of clothing not described in this subsection, the officer shall not remove the article of clothing if it is worn next to the skin of that person’s torso.

B. The officer shall remove from the person in custody:

1. Footwear, including socks;

2. Headgear, including hats, caps, or helmets; and

3. Coats, jackets, vests or other clothing not described in subsection A of this section that is found on or in possession of the person in custody.

C. The officer shall separate the person in custody from closed containers found on or in the possession of that person. The officer shall not remove attached property unless the attached property is reasonably considered dangerous personal property.

D. The officer shall inspect the waistband and empty the pockets of the clothing worn by the person in custody. The officer shall perform an external patting of the clothing remaining upon the person in custody. An officer of the same sex, if reasonably available, shall visually inspect under the clothing covering the side and front abdominal area and back lumbar area above the waist of the person in custody.

E. The officer shall empty the pockets of clothing removed from the body of the person in custody.

F. Except for attached property, the officer shall remove all items of personal property from the removed and remaining clothing of the person in custody.

G. The officer shall remove from and inspect all items of personal property within any open container found on or in possession of the person in custody.

H. A closed container found on or in the possession of a person in custody shall not be opened by the officer unless the closed container is designed to or objectively likely to contain valuable personal property. A closed container designed to or objectively likely to contain valuable personal property includes wallets, purses, coin purses, fanny packs, backpacks, suitcases, or briefcases.

I. Footwear, including socks, may be returned to the person in custody after inspection, provided such return does not create an unreasonable risk of harm to the health or safety of the person in custody, the officer, or any other person, or the property of any of them, or the property of the City. [BC 2.08.035, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4612, 2/19/13; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.040 Identification and Safekeeping of Property.

As soon as is reasonably possible after the officer completes an inventory of personal property, an officer shall:

A. Segregate the valuable personal property and dangerous personal property, but not attached property, identified during the inventory, from the other personal property of the person in custody.

B. Make a written list of all valuable personal property and dangerous personal property found on or in the possession of the person in custody. The list shall not include attached property.

C. Note the disposition of each piece of valuable personal property or dangerous personal property, but not attached property, discovered during the inventory by recording who takes or keeps physical custody of each item so discovered.

D. Take reasonable steps to safeguard personal property removed from the person in custody. [BC 2.08.040, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.045 Return of Property upon Release or Transfer.

Personal property kept safe under this chapter, and not retained upon other grounds, shall be returned in accordance with the following provisions:

A. When the person in custody is released from law enforcement custody, kept property shall be released to the person forthwith, or as soon as practicable after the inventory document is drafted.

B. If a person in custody is transferred to another facility, the kept property and a copy of the inventory may be transferred to a responsible individual at the receiving facility, or retained by the City, whichever course seems safest and most expedient under the circumstances. In addition to the above, the officer shall observe any applicable department policies, procedures or practices then in effect.

C. This chapter shall not apply when persons are arrested, cited, and released at the scene of a crime. However, any property removed from a person during a stop, arrest or other detention, and which is not seized, should be timely returned to the person in conjunction with release.

D. Property which, for whatever reason, is not returned by operation of the subsections above shall remain with the Police Department for a minimum of 90 days, during which time any policies, procedures or practices currently in effect for property shall be followed. [BC 2.08.045, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.050 Distribution of Property Receipts.

The City shall maintain the original record of property and its disposition. A copy of such record shall be distributed as follows:

A. To the person in custody or included with the property of the person in custody.

B. To any person in custody to whom the officer must tender a copy pursuant to ORS 133.455. [BC 2.08.050, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


2.08.055 Adoption of Administrative Policies or Procedures.

The Beaverton Police Department may adopt administrative procedures, rules or regulations, or establish forms to carry out this chapter. [BC 2.08.055, added by Ordinance No. 4377, 12/5/05; amended by Ordinance No. 4385, 3/20/06; Ordinance No. 4670, 12/8/15]


Chapter 2.10 CIVIL INFRACTIONS

Sections:

2.10.005    Short Title.

2.10.010    Purpose.

2.10.015    Definitions.

2.10.020    Investigation – Voluntary Compliance Agreements.

2.10.021    Pre-Trial Procedures.

2.10.022    Trial Procedures.

2.10.023    Code Services Personnel to Prosecute Violations.

2.10.024    Attorney Barred from Appearing – Exception.

2.10.025    Enforcement and Penalties.

2.10.030    Lien Filing and Docketing.

2.10.040    Code Enforcement Officer Authorized to Promulgate Rules.

2.10.045    Schedule of Forfeitures – Enhancement.

2.10.050    Effect of New Ordinance.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 3449 and 3863.


2.10.005 Short Title.

This section through BC 2.10.050 shall be known and referred to as the “Civil Infractions Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 2.10.005, added by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.010 Purpose.

A. This chapter establishes a civil infraction procedure to decriminalize penalties for infractions of certain City ordinances, including ordinances in the Beaverton City Code and Development Code, and to provide a convenient and practical forum for the civil hearing and determination of cases arising out of violations of City ordinances.

B. Acts or omissions to act which are processed under this chapter or are designated a civil infraction by any City ordinance do not require a culpable mental state as an element of the infraction. [BC 2.10.010, amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.015 Definitions.

For the purpose of BC 2.10.005 through 2.10.050 the following mean:

Civil infraction – Commission of an act or omission to act in a manner prescribed by this code or other City ordinance that breaches or infringes on a section of a City ordinance or of this code.

Code enforcement officer – An employee of the City who enforces this chapter and any civil infraction established in the Beaverton Code or Development Code.

Complaint – Uniform infraction citation and complaint or uniform citation and complaint.

Forfeiture – A monetary penalty.

Person – See BC 1.01.020 (“Person”).

Responsible party – The person responsible for curing or remedying a civil infraction of City code. It includes:

A. The owner of the property or the owner’s manager or agent or other person in control of the property on behalf of the owner;

B. The person occupying the property including bailee, lessee, tenant or other person having possession;

C. The person who is alleged to have committed or authorized the commission of the infraction. [BC 2.10.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3332, 9/13/83; amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.020 Investigation – Voluntary Compliance Agreements.

A. Investigation. A code enforcement officer shall review all reports or complaints of infractions covered by this chapter and may investigate whether a violation of City ordinance has occurred.

B. Voluntary Compliance Agreement. The code enforcement officer may enter into a written agreement with the responsible party to resolve the problems which gave rise to the complaint. The agreement shall be known as a voluntary compliance agreement. A voluntary compliance agreement shall be binding on the responsible party.

1. If the responsible party enters into a voluntary compliance agreement, the responsible party’s signing of such agreement shall not be considered an admission of having committed an infraction for any purpose.

2. The City shall hold further processing of the alleged violation in abeyance for the responsible party to complete the necessary correction action during the time specified in the voluntary compliance agreement. If all terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are satisfied during the time specified, the City shall take no further action concerning the alleged violation other than the steps necessary to terminate the case. [BC 2.10.020, added by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.021 Pre-Trial Procedures.

A. Issuance of Complaint. A code enforcement officer may sign a complaint against a responsible party once he or she determines that the responsible party committed a civil infraction. The code enforcement officer shall prescribe the form of the complaint.

1. Filing. A code enforcement officer or any individual, with the consent of the code enforcement officer, may file a signed complaint with the Municipal Court charging the responsible party with a civil infraction. The complaint shall set a date for the responsible party to appear before the municipal court to answer the complaint.

2. Contents of Complaint – Requirements. The complaint shall contain at least the following information:

a. The name of the court; the City’s name; and the name of the person cited;

b. The civil infraction with which the person is charged; and the date, time and place the infraction occurred, or if the infraction is of a continuing nature, the date, time and place the infraction was observed by the code enforcement officer, or observed by the individual signing the complaint;

c. A certificate in which the person signing the complaint certifies that the person has sufficient grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person cited in the complaint committed the civil infraction specified in the complaint.

3. Summons – Requirements. The summons in the complaint is sufficient if it contains the following:

a. The name of the court; the name of the person cited; the date on which the complaint was issued; the name of the code enforcement officer issuing the citation, and the time and place the person cited is to appear in court.

b. The infraction with which the person is charged; and the date, time and place the infraction occurred, or if the infraction is of a continuing nature, the date, time and place the infraction was observed by the code enforcement officer, or observed by the individual signing the complaint.

c. A notice to the person cited that a complaint will be filed with the court based on the infraction.

d. The amount of the scheduled forfeiture for the alleged infraction.

e. A statement notifying the person that a monetary judgment may be entered against the person for up to the maximum amount of fines, restitution and other costs allowed by law for the infraction if the person fails to make all required appearances at the proceedings.

f. A statement notifying the person that, if the person pleads no contest and delivers to the court the amount of the scheduled forfeiture indicated on the complaint, and the court accepts the plea, the amount of the fine imposed against the defendant may not exceed the amount of the scheduled forfeiture indicated on the complaint.

g. A statement notifying the person that, if the person pleads no contest and delivers to the court the amount of the scheduled forfeiture indicated on the complaint:

i. The person may submit an explanation of the circumstances of the infraction; and

ii. The court may consider the explanation in establishing the amount of the forfeiture.

B. Service. Service to the responsible party may occur as follows:

1. The code enforcement officer or any authorized agent of the City may serve a responsible party, who is an individual, by any of the following means:

a. Mailing the summons and complaint by restricted or unrestricted certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.

i. For purposes of computing any time period prescribed by this chapter, service by mail shall be complete three days after such mailing if the address to which it was mailed is within the State, and seven days after mailing if the address to which it is mailed is outside the State.

ii. No default shall be entered against any responsible party served by mail under this subsection who has not either received or rejected the registered or certified letter containing a copy of the summons and complaint, unless otherwise authorized by the municipal judge based upon service procedures of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

b. Delivering the summons and complaint directly to the person to be served.

c. Delivering a copy of the summons and complaint at the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served, to any person over 14 years of age residing in the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served. If this substituted service option is used, the code enforcement officer, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which substituted service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, substituted service shall be complete upon mailing.

d. If the person to be served maintains an office for the conduct of business, office service may be made by leaving a true copy of the summons and complaint at such office during normal working hours with the person who is apparently in charge. Where office service is used, the code enforcement officer, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode or the responsible party’s place of business or such other place under the circumstances that is most reasonably calculated to apprise the responsible party of the existence and pendency of the action, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which office service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, office service shall be complete upon such mailing.

2. Service on particular responsible parties; minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the State, other public bodies, general partnerships and other entities, shall be on the persons named in the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

C. Answer.

1. Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) or (3) of this section, a person who receives a summons and complaint alleging an infraction shall answer such complaint by personally appearing to answer at the time and place specified therein.

2. If the person alleged to have committed a civil infraction admits the infraction, the person may complete the appropriate answer on the back of each summons and forward the summons to the municipal court. The person shall send it by mail or personal delivery and the municipal court shall receive it within 10 days of the date of the receipt of the summons. Cash, check or money order in the amount of the forfeiture for the infraction alleged as shown on the face of the summons shall be submitted with the answer. Upon receipt of the forfeiture, the municipal court shall enter an appropriate order in its records.

3. If the person alleged to have committed the civil infraction denies part or all of the infraction, the person may request a trial by completing the appropriate answer on the back of the summons and forwarding the summons, together with security for court fees. The person shall send it by mail or personal delivery and the municipal court shall receive it within 10 days of the date of the receipt of the summons. Upon receipt, the municipal court shall enter the answer and establish a trial date. The municipal court shall notify the person by return mail of the date of the trial. The security received shall be returned once the person appears for the trial, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. The municipal court may waive the security deposit, in whole or in part, if the person shows good cause and provides a written reason explaining his or her reason for requesting the waiver and certifying that the person alleged to have committed the civil infraction will attend the trial when scheduled. [BC 2.10.021, added by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.022 Trial Procedures.

A. The municipal court shall conduct a trial without a jury to determine whether the person cited in the complaint committed a civil infraction.

B. The defendant may be represented by legal counsel, but legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense. If legal counsel is to appear, the defendant shall provide written notice to the municipal court five days prior to the trial date.

C. The defendant shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses in the defendant’s favor, to cross-examine witnesses who testify against the defendant and to submit rebuttal evidence.

D. If the defendant desires that witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena, the defendant must make that request in writing from the court at the time the answer is returned, or subsequently by mail at any time at least five days prior to the scheduled trial. A deposit for each witness shall accompany the request, such deposit to be refunded if no forfeiture is assessed by the final order. The deposit shall be in the amount equal to the witness fee allowed by statute for witnesses in circuit court. Subject to the same five-day limitation, the code enforcement officer, the individual who signed the complaint or the City Attorney, as appropriate, may also request in writing that the court order certain witnesses to appear by subpoena. If a forfeiture is declared in the final order, the order shall also provide that the defendant shall pay any witness fees payable in connection with the trial.

E. The trial shall be limited to production of evidence only on the civil infraction alleged in the complaint.

1. Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.

2. Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State.

3. Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State.

4. Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

F. The code enforcement officer or City Attorney, if the defendant is represented by counsel, shall have the burden of proving the alleged civil infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.

G. After due consideration of the evidence and arguments presented at the trial, the municipal court shall determine whether the civil infraction as alleged in the complaint was committed.

1. If the municipal court determines that the civil infraction has not been proven, it shall enter an order dismissing the complaint. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the person named in the order personally or by mail.

2. If the municipal court determines that the responsible party committed the civil infraction:

a. The municipal court shall assess a forfeiture pursuant to the schedule established in accordance with this chapter, plus court costs and witness fees. A municipal court judge is authorized to set reasonable court costs including security for court fees by court order.

b. If a party to the trial provides a written request, the municipal court shall include a brief statement of the necessary findings of fact to establish the civil infraction alleged in its order.

H. The court shall maintain a record of its proceedings. An audio recording of the trial accompanied by any written documents, correspondence or physical evidence associated with the matter shall be sufficient to meet the requirement of this subsection.

I. The determination of the municipal court shall be final. Review of the court’s determination shall be to the circuit court by writ of review pursuant to ORS Chapter 34. [BC 2.10.022, added by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.023 Code Services Personnel to Prosecute Violations.

Notwithstanding ORS 9.160 and 9.320, in any trial of a violation, and in any administrative enforcement proceeding in which a City Attorney or district attorney is barred from appearing by statute or ordinance, the code enforcement officer who issued the citation for the offense may present evidence, examine and cross-examine witnesses and make arguments relating to:

A. The application of statutes and rules to the facts in the case;

B. The literal meaning of the statutes or rules at issue in the case;

C. The admissibility of evidence; and

D. Proper procedures to be used in the trial. [BC 2.10.023, added by Ordinance No. 4086, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.024 Attorney Barred from Appearing – Exception.

A district attorney or City Attorney may aid in preparing evidence and obtaining witnesses but, except for good cause shown to the appropriate tribunal, shall not appear in a violation proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought under this chapter unless legal counsel for the defendant appears. The tribunal with jurisdiction over the proceeding shall ensure that the district attorney or City Attorney is given timely notice if legal counsel for the defendant is to appear. [BC 2.10.024, added by Ordinance 4086, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.025 Enforcement and Penalties.

A. If a cited person fails to answer the summons or appear at a scheduled trial as provided in this chapter, the municipal court shall enter a default judgment for the scheduled forfeiture applicable to the charged civil infraction. In addition, when a person fails to appear for a trial, the municipal judge shall order the security posted, or an amount equal to the security waived, to be forfeited. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit in any way the contempt powers of the municipal judge granted by the Charter or State law, and the judge may exercise those powers as the judge considers necessary and advisable in conjunction with any matter arising under the procedures set forth in this chapter.

B. The forfeiture to be assessed for a specific infraction will be determined pursuant to specific provisions within the ordinance defining the civil infraction or the forfeiture schedule found in BC 2.10.045. The procedure prescribed by this chapter shall be the exclusive procedure for imposing a forfeiture; however, this section shall not be read to prohibit in any way any alternative remedies set out in ordinances which are intended to abate or alleviate ordinance violations, nor shall the City be prohibited from recovering, in a manner prescribed by law, any expense incurred by it in abating or removing civil violations pursuant to any ordinance.

C. Any forfeiture assessed is to be paid no later than 10 days after the receipt of the final order declaring that forfeiture. Such period may be extended upon order of the municipal judge.

D. Delinquent forfeitures and those brought to default judgment which were assessed for infractions may in addition to any other method be collected or enforced pursuant to ORS 30.310 or 30.315.

E. The failure to comply with any term of the voluntary compliance agreement constitutes a separate Class l civil infraction and shall be handled in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter. In addition to issuing a separate Class 1 civil infraction, the City may proceed with processing the alleged infraction giving rise to the voluntary compliance agreement.

F. When an infraction is of a continuing nature, except where specifically provided otherwise, a separate infraction will be deemed to occur on each calendar day the infraction continues to exist. A finding that a person has committed a violation of this chapter shall not act to relieve the person from the provisions of this chapter. [BC 2.10.025, amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.030 Lien Filing and Docketing.

A. When a judgment is given in municipal court in favor of the City for the sum of $10.00 or more, exclusive of costs or disbursements, the code enforcement officer may, at any time thereafter while the judgment is enforceable, file with the City’s Finance Director a certified transcript of all those entries made in the docket of the municipal court with respect to the action in which the judgment was entered.

B. Thereupon, the Finance Director shall enter the judgment of the municipal court on the City lien docket.

C. From the time of the entry of the municipal court judgment in the City lien docket, the judgment shall be a lien upon the real property of the person against whom judgment was entered in the municipal court. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, entry of the municipal court judgment in the City lien docket shall not thereby extend the lien of the judgment more than 10 years from the original entry of the judgment in the municipal court.

D. Whenever a judgment of the municipal court which has been entered pursuant to this section is renewed by the municipal court the lien established by subsection C of this section is automatically extended 10 years from the date of the renewal order.

E. The Finance Director may file the transcript of the judgment with the County Clerk for entry in the judgment docket of the circuit court. [BC 2.10.030, amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.040 Code Enforcement Officer Authorized to Promulgate Rules.

The code enforcement officer is authorized to promulgate any rules, procedures or guidelines the code enforcement officer considers advisable to enforce this chapter; however, final approval of any rules, procedures or guidelines must be by the Mayor. [BC 2.10.040, amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.045 Schedule of Forfeitures – Enhancement.

A. Infractions are classified for the purpose of determining forfeitures in the following categories:

1. Class 1 civil infractions.

2. Class 2 civil infractions.

3. Class 3 civil infractions.

B. An assessment of a forfeiture for an infraction shall be an assessment to pay an amount not exceeding:

1. Five hundred dollars for a Class 1 civil infraction;

2. Two hundred fifty dollars for a Class 2 civil infraction; and

3. One hundred dollars for a Class 3 civil infraction.

C. The municipal court may impose a fine of not more than $1,000 if it determines that (1) the defendant committed a civil infraction, and (2) the defendant had committed another civil infraction in the preceding 12 months. [BC 2.10.045, amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


2.10.050 Effect of New Ordinance.

The amendments to this chapter apply to conduct occurring on or after the effective date specified in the ordinance codified in this chapter. [BC 2.10.050, amended by Ordinance No. 4688, 6/21/16]


Chapter 2.11 CITY COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURE

Sections:

2.11.010    Authority and Purpose Statement.

2.11.020    Rules of the Council.


2.11.010 Authority and Purpose Statement.

The Charter of the City of Beaverton provides that the Council shall adopt rules for the governance of its proceedings. The following set of rules shall be in effect upon their adoption by the Council and until such time as they are amended or new rules adopted. To the extent these rules exceed the requirements of the state Public Meetings Law, these rules provide guidelines for Council procedures and may be varied by the Council as needed. [BC 2.11.010, added by Ordinance No. 3573, 7/28/87; amended by Ordinance No. 4543, 7/12/10]


2.11.020 Rules of the Council.

A. General Rules.

1. Meetings to Be Public. The deliberations and proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except as state law may provide otherwise (e.g., executive sessions).

2. Quorum. A majority of the incumbent members of the Council shall constitute a quorum and be necessary for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of the absent Councilors.

3. Compelling Attendance. When a quorum is not present at the time set for a meeting or when a quorum has been present and a meeting has commenced, but a quorum is no longer present, any Councilor may move for a call of the house. The motion shall be put in the following form: “I move for a call of the house.” That motion shall take precedence over all other business. The motion need not be seconded, but it is subject to discussion. At least two Councilors present must concur for the call of the house motion to pass. If the motion is passed, then all unexcused absent Councilors shall be escorted to or back to the meeting. The Mayor shall provide the administrative staff assistance deemed necessary by the Councilors voting for the motion to compel the attendance of the unexcused absent Councilors at the meeting. The Councilors voting for the motion are authorized to recess the meeting to a time certain while attendance is being compelled.

4. Minutes of Meetings.

a. Scope. This rule is designed to meet the requirements of the Beaverton Charter that the Council shall keep a record of its proceedings and it shall apply to minutes of all official meetings of the Council.

b. Purposes. The purposes of the minutes of the Council include the following:

i. To comply with the Oregon Public Meetings Law (ORS 192.610 through 192.690) and the Beaverton Charter (Section 14);

ii. To provide a historical record for information, future research and examination;

iii. To provide a record of directives, reports, and the like for use by the administration of the City; and

iv. To provide a record of the legislative intent of the actions of the Council.

c. Responsibility. The City Recorder or such other person the Mayor may designate shall have the responsibility for preparing minutes, correcting minutes to reflect Council amendments, retaining minutes, and furnishing copies of minutes to persons desiring a copy.

d. Content of Minutes. The minutes of meetings of the Council shall comply with provisions of ORS 192.650 and amendments thereto, which specifically contain the following requirements:

i. Minutes shall be taken for all meetings of the Council;

ii. Minutes shall accurately reflect the matters discussed and views of participants;

iii. Minutes shall be available to the public within a reasonable time after the meeting, subject to subsection (A)(4)(h) of this section, regarding a fee for copies;

iv. Minutes shall contain the following information at a minimum:

(A) The name of Councilors and staff present;

(B) All motions, proposals, resolutions, orders, ordinances, and measures proposed and their disposition;

(C) The result of any votes, including ayes and nays and the names of Councilors who voted;

(D) The substance of the discussion on any matter; and

(E) Reference to any document discussed at the meeting;

v. The form of executive session minutes shall be either written minutes or a sound recording.

e. Preparation. Minutes shall be prepared with sufficient detail to meet their intended uses. Specifically, the following guidelines shall be used:

i. Verbatim minutes are not required;

ii. Electronic recordings shall be made of each meeting. Equipment malfunction shall not be a reason to postpone the meeting and shall not negate the minutes. The City Recorder may temporarily interrupt Council proceedings in the event of equipment malfunction or other cause of short-term loss of recording;

iii. If a verbal staff report is a summary of an agenda bill and attachment, it may be so referenced in the minutes;

iv. Names of each person testifying shall be included in the minutes;

v. If a citizen’s verbal testimony is a summary of a written letter or other submission, it may be so referenced in the minutes;

vi. All exhibits submitted and received by the Mayor during hearings and all other documents submitted shall be incorporated into the record;

vii. Minutes are public records upon composition; however, if distributed to the public before prepared in final form for Council approval or if less than a full set is distributed before Council approval, “DRAFT” shall be noted on the cover page, unless the minutes are to be distributed piecemeal, in which case “DRAFT” shall be noted on each reproduced page.

f. Submittal to Council. After being prepared in final form by the City Recorder or designee, the City Recorder shall sign the minutes, and they shall be submitted to Council as part of the consent agenda in the Council’s next agenda.

g. Amendment and Approval. The Council may amend the minutes to more accurately reflect what transpired at a meeting. An individual Councilor may call for additions or corrections to the minutes during the consent agenda, and unless there is disagreement from other Councilors, the motion to approve the consent agenda shall include the minutes as amended. If the Council questions the minutes or is unsure they accurately reflect what transpired during a meeting, the Council may postpone approval of the minutes until a transcript of the portion of the meeting in question can be prepared. Information obtained subsequent to a meeting, which is relevant to discussions or action which occurred during that meeting, may be referenced into the record of the meeting at which the minutes are approved. The Council is the final authority as to amendment of the minutes. After Council approval, the City Recorder shall incorporate any amendments approved by the Council, the Mayor shall sign the minutes, and the City Recorder shall initial each page containing an amendment. Under no circumstances shall the minutes be changed following approval by the Council, unless the Council authorizes such a change.

h. Public Access and Copies. Both written minutes and recordings shall be available for public inspection during office hours. Copies of the written minutes shall be available to the public for cost which reflects the actual cost of reproduction by the City Recorder. Recordings shall be available to the public for use on City premises. Citizens may use their own equipment to make copies of recordings. The City Recorder may implement additional reasonable rules and procedures to assure the preservation of original recordings. The City is not required to cause a transcript to be made of Council meetings. Upon a citizen request, however, copies of transcripts made for other purposes shall be made available in the same manner and for the same cost as written minutes.

5. Right of Councilor to Be Heard. Any Councilor desiring to be heard shall be recognized by the presiding officer, but shall confine his or her remarks to the subject under consideration or to be considered.

6. Rules of Order. The table of rules of order at the end of this section shall govern the proceedings of the Council in all cases. “Robert’s Rules of Order Revised” shall govern in all other situations not specifically covered therein. The presiding officer shall be the parliamentarian for the Council.

B. Types of Meetings.

1. Regular Meetings. The Council shall meet in the designated Council chambers for regular meetings unless another facility is needed to accommodate an anticipated increase of attendance by the public at any meeting. The regular Council meetings are to commence at 6:30 p.m., the first four Tuesdays of each month, unless the Council cancels a specific meeting. The regular meetings can include all items listed under subsection D of this section, Order of Business and Agenda, or may be limited to study or work sessions in which no official action is taken.

2. Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by two or more Councilors. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the City Recorder in written form provided by the City Recorder, except that announcement of a special meeting during any regular meeting at which all members are present shall be sufficient notice of such special meeting. The call for a special meeting shall specify the day, the hour, and the location of the special meeting and shall list the subject or subjects to be considered. No special meeting shall be held until at least 24 hours after the call is issued, unless an emergency is declared by the caller(s). Only such business may be transacted at a special meeting as may be listed in the call for said meeting or as incident thereto.

3. Recessed Meetings. Any meeting of the Council may be recessed to a later time or date and time; provided, that no recess shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting.

4. Executive Sessions. Executive sessions or closed meetings may be held in accordance with the provisions of the state Public Meetings Law. During executive sessions, the Council may exclude all employees of the City from the meeting. Unless excluded, the City Recorder and City Attorney, or their designate, shall attend as well as staff members affected by the specific matter before the Council. The Mayor shall determine which members of the administrative staff shall attend, subject to some or all of them being excluded by the Council. All other persons, including other members of the administrative staff, shall not attend executive sessions unless specifically invited by the Council. Media representatives permitted by state law to attend shall be given an oral or written admonition by the presiding officer prohibiting disclosure of the substance of any discussion during executive sessions. Any individual representative of the media who violates this admonition may be barred by the Council from subsequent executive sessions.

C. Presiding Officer and Duties.

1. Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the president of the Council shall preside. In the absence of both the Mayor and the president of the Council, the Council shall elect a Councilor to preside at the meeting.

2. Call to Order. The meetings of the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, or in the Mayor’s absence, by the president of the Council. In the absence of both the Mayor and the president of the Council, the meeting shall be called to order by any Councilor for the purpose of electing a Councilor to preside at the meeting.

3. Preservation of Order. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, discourage attacks on personalities or the impugning of Councilors’ motives, and confine Councilor debate to the question under discussion. Persons in attendance at the meeting who become disorderly, abusive, or disruptive may be removed from the meeting. The presiding officer may summon the assistance of police or other administrative staff to assist in maintaining order, and if an arrest of a person(s) is deemed necessary by the presiding officer to restore or maintain order, the presiding officer may sign a complaint or citation on behalf of the City.

4. Points of Order. The presiding officer shall determine all points of order, subject to the right of any Councilor to appeal to the Council. If any appeal is taken, the question shall be, “Shall the decision of the presiding officer be sustained?”

5. Questions to Be Stated. The presiding officer shall state all questions submitted for a vote and announce the result. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any Councilor in the same manner as the final adoption of an ordinance.

6. Substitution for Presiding Officer. The presiding officer may call the president of the Council or, if absent, any other Councilor to temporarily preside over the meeting in order to take part in debate, to make a motion, or to cover a temporary absence, such substitution not to continue beyond adjournment.

D. Order of Business and Agenda.

1. Order of Business. The order of business may be varied by the Council. The general rule as to the order of business in regular meetings shall be as follows:

a. Call to order;

b. Roll call;

c. Visitors. Presentation of any City-related matter not on a land use or public hearing agenda, with discussion limited to five minutes and the total time on the agenda for this item shall be 30 minutes, unless Council extends the time;

d. Consent agenda, which includes approval of minutes;

e. Public hearings;

f. Action items, including unfinished and new business;

g. Special presentations to the Council;

h. Ordinances, including readings and/or adoption;

i. Council items;

j. Staff items or reports;

k. Adjournment.

2. Agenda. The order of business of each meeting shall be as contained in the agenda prepared by the City Recorder. The agenda shall be a listing by topic of subjects to be considered by the Council. The Mayor shall determine agenda items or cause any item requested by a Councilor to be placed on the agenda in a timely manner. The agenda shall be delivered to members of the Council at least 24 hours preceding the meeting to which it pertains, unless an emergency meeting is duly called.

3. Presentation by Councilors. The agenda shall provide a time when any Councilor may bring before the Council any business the Councilor feels should be deliberated upon by the Council. These matters need not be specifically listed on the agenda, but the Council may decline formal action on such matters or the matter may be deferred by the Council to a subsequent meeting.

E. City Attorney.

1. Office of the City Attorney.

a. The City shall have an office of City Attorney consisting of the City Attorney, and such additional staff as determined by the Council upon the recommendation of the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be appointed and removed from office by a majority vote of the entire Council.

b. The Council shall annually review the performance and salary of the City Attorney and any recommendations of the city attorney as to staff salaries.

c. The city attorney and city attorney staff shall receive retirement benefits, vacation, holiday and sick leave benefits, other fringe benefits and working conditions not less than those applicable to comparable City positions.

2. Duties. The city attorney shall be the full time chief legal officer of the city and have the following duties:

a. provide legal advice and opinions orally and in writing to the Council, mayor and any other person if authorized by the Council, or any administrative staff authorized by the mayor to obtain such advice and opinions;

b. review and approve as to form all written contracts, bonds, real property instruments and other legally binding documents to which the City is a party;

c. prepare or have final approval over all ordinances, resolutions, orders and other documents of Council decisions, prior to their submission to the Council for adoption or approval;

d. represent and defend the City and its board, commissions, committees, officers and employees. The city attorney shall not represent persons who the Council determines have acted outside the scope of their employment or duties, committed malfeasance in office, or willful neglect of duty;

e. institute legal actions for the City in any court or tribunal as directed by the Council. If approved by the Council, the city attorney shall institute appeals on behalf of the City in any case in which another party has first appealed. The city attorney shall institute other appeals as directed by the Council.

f. manage all legal aspects of the City’s self insurance program, including claims investigation, settlement and litigation;

g. coordinate, supervise and control services of legal counsel retained to represent the City as well as the attorneys and support staff of the office;

h. subject to prior approval by the Council, select and retain all outside legal counsel employed by the City. The City attorney shall coordinate and supervise all services performed by such counsel and shall approve all legal fees prior to payment;

i. present a copy of the proposed office of city attorney budget to the Council at the same time as submission to the mayor for internal staff review. Internal staff review changes, if any, shall be submitted to the Council for review and concurrence prior to submission to the budget committee.

j. submit written or oral reports to the Council as frequently as required by the Council concerning the status of all tort claims and legal actions in which the City is a party; and

k. such other duties as the Council shall, from time to time, assign to the city attorney.

3. Staff Attorneys. The city attorney is authorized to designate any staff attorneys as acting city attorney in the city attorney’s absence, and the acting city attorney shall have and exercise the power and authority of the city attorney. Whenever possible, the city attorney shall notify the Council in advance of any anticipated absence extending beyond five working days.

4. Records.

a. The city attorney shall have physical control of the office of city attorney and exclusive custody of all legal papers and records pertaining to that office.

b. The city attorney shall maintain a set of pleadings of all pending legal actions in which the City or any department, official, or city employee is a party. Where such actions are conducted by outside legal counsel retained by or for the City, the city attorney shall keep those records supplied to the office which the city attorney deems advisable.

c. The city attorney shall maintain records of all significant written opinions furnished to the City or to any department, official, or employee, and archive and index them within the office. To maintain complete confidentiality within the office, at least one system of word processing/computer equipment shall be document oriented, with full page viewing capacity, and be self contained with the ability to store and print materials exclusively within the office for retention, indexing and archiving. This system of equipment shall not be linked to the mainframe or any other system within the City unless consented to by the city attorney.

5. Attorney-Client Relationship. The City and the office of city attorney shall have an attorney-client relationship, and the City shall be entitled to all the benefits thereof.

6. Settlements. The city attorney may settle legal claims as follows:

a. tort claims under $10,000 pursuant to the City’s self insurance program;

b. tort claims in an amount of $10,000 or more, upon approval by the Council;

c. claims arising out of enforcement of any code requirement, including payment of any City fee, account receivable, or for the payment of any penalty or interest.

F. Committees. The Council may create committees to assist in the conduct of its charter duties with such assignments as the Council may specify. The mayor shall appoint members to such committees to serve until the special purpose for which the committee was created has been accomplished or the committee is abolished by the Council. All committees so created shall be advisory to the Council and shall conduct their meetings in accordance with the public meeting law.

G. Conduct of Hearings:

1. Scope of Rules. The rules contained in this section (G) shall govern the conduct of administrative, quasi-judicial hearings held by the Council including, but not limited to, those held pursuant to the Development Code of the City. The mayor may apply any of these rules, which are relevant, to any legislative public hearing, unless the codes of the City require otherwise or the Council does not concur.

2. Nature and General Conduct of Hearing.

a. The Council, when conducting any such hearing shall afford persons entitled under the codes of the City, such as the Development Code, notice of hearing, an opportunity to be heard, to present and rebut evidence to an impartial tribunal, to have the proceedings recorded, and to have a decision based on substantial evidence.

b. No person in attendance shall be disorderly, abusive or disruptive of the orderly conduct of the hearing and any person may be removed from the hearing for such conduct.

c. No person offering testimony shall speak more than once without obtaining permission from the presiding officer.

d. No person shall testify without first receiving recognition from the presiding officer and stating his or her name and residence or business address.

e. No person shall present irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence; provided, however, that reports and documents prepared by City personnel shall be deemed relevant, material and competent unless objected to by a party to the hearing with good cause and at the first available opportunity.

f. There shall be no audience demonstrations, such as applause, cheering, display of signs, or other conduct disruptive of the hearing.

g. The presiding officer, councilors, city attorney and, with the approval of the presiding officer, any other officer or employee of the City may question and cross-examine any person who testifies.

3. Challenging Participation by a Councilor.

a. Any proponent, opponent of, or other party interested in a matter to be heard by the Council may challenge the qualification of any Councilor to participate in such hearing and decision. Such challenge must state facts relied upon by the party relating to a Councilor’s bias, prejudgment, personal interest, or other facts from which the party has concluded that the Councilor will not participate and make a decision in an impartial manner.

1) Such challenge must be made prior to the commencement of the public hearing.

2) Such challenge shall be incorporated into the record of the hearing.

b. No Councilor shall participate in discussion or vote on the matter when for any reason the Councilor determines he or she cannot participate in the hearing and decision in an impartial manner.

c. No other officer or employee of the City who has a financial or other private interest shall participate in discussion with, or give an official opinion to, the Council on the matter without first declaring for the record the nature and extent of such interest.

d. The general public has a right to have Councilors free from pre-hearing or ex parte contacts on matters heard by them. It is recognized that a countervailing public right is free access to public officials on any matter. Therefore, Councilors shall reveal any significant pre-hearing or ex parte contacts with regard to any matter as early as possible under the circumstances in the hearing on the matter. If such contacts have impaired the Councilor’s impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the Councilor shall so state and shall abstain therefrom.

e. Notwithstanding any provision of this or any other rule: (1) an abstaining or disqualified Councilor may be counted for purposes of forming a quorum; and (2) a Councilor may represent himself or herself, a client or any other member of the public at a hearing, provided that Councilor:

1) abstains from the vote on the matter;

2) removes himself or herself from the Council area and joins the audience; and

3) makes full disclosure of his/her status and position at the time of addressing the Council.

4. Presiding Officer.

a. The mayor, or in the absence of the mayor the Council president, shall be the presiding officer at all hearings. In their absence, or with their consent, the Council may designate one of its members to act as presiding officer at a hearing.

b. The presiding officer shall have authority to:

1) regulate the course and decorum of the hearing;

2) dispose of procedural requests or similar matters;

3) rule on admissibility of exhibits and other documents into evidence, offers of proof and relevancy of evidence and testimony;

4) impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses heard and set reasonable time limits for oral presentations, cross-examination of witnesses and rebuttal testimony; and

5) take such other action authorized by the Council appropriate for conduct commensurate with the nature of the hearing.

5. Burden and Nature of Proof. The burden of proof is upon the proponent, if any. The more drastic the change, or the greater the impact of a proposal in an area, the greater is the burden upon the proponent.

6. Order of Procedure. The presiding officer, in the conduct of the hearing shall:

a. Commence the Hearing. Announce the nature and purpose of the hearing and summarize the rules for the conduct of the hearing.

b. Call for Abstentions.

1) Inquire of the Council whether any member thereof wishes to abstain from participation in the hearing. Any Councilor then announcing a decision to abstain shall identify the reasons for abstaining and shall not participate in discussion of the matter or vote on the matter.

2) Any Councilor whose participation has been challenged by allegation of bias, prejudgment, personal interest, or partiality or who has been subject to significant ex parte or pre-hearing contact with proponents or opponents, may make a statement in response thereto or in explanation thereof, as part of his or her decision to participate in the hearing. This statement shall not be subject to cross-examination, except upon consent of that Councilor, but shall be subject to rebuttal by the proponent or opponent, as appropriate.

c. Objections to Jurisdiction. Inquire of the audience whether there are any objections to the jurisdiction of the Council to hear the matter. The presiding officer shall terminate the hearing if the inquiry results in substantial evidence that the Council lacks jurisdiction or the procedural requirements of any code or ordinance provision were not met. Any matter thus terminated shall, if the defect can be remedied, be rescheduled by the Council.

d. Staff Report; Planning Commission Recommendation; Etc. Summarize the nature of the matter, explain any graphic or pictorial displays which are a part of the record, summarize the staff report, summarize the findings and decision of the Planning Commission or other appropriate board or agency and provide such other information as may be requested by the Council. The presiding officer may request a representative of staff or any other city officer or employee to perform this duty.

e. Proponent’s Case. The presiding officer shall determine whether the proponent will present the case in person or by representative. The applicant-proponent shall first be heard and persons in favor of the proponent’s proposal shall next be heard.

f. Opponent’s Case. Opponents shall be heard in the following order:

1) Neighborhood associations, special organizations formed for the purpose of opposition, or other groups represented by counsel or a spokesperson shall be allowed by the presiding officer to first proceed.

2) Persons who received notice of the hearing or who were entitled to receive notice of the hearing are presumed to have an interest in the proposal and shall next be heard.

3) Persons who did not receive notice and who were not entitled to notice shall next be heard.

g. Public Agencies. The presiding officer shall allow representatives of any city, state agency, regional authority, or municipal or quasi-municipal corporation existing pursuant to law to next be heard.

h. Rebuttal Evidence. The presiding officer shall allow the proponent to offer rebuttal evidence and testimony and, if provided, allow the opponent or other interested party to rebut the new evidence or testimony offered by proponent’s rebuttal.

i. Written Communications. Written communications addressing a matter before the Council at a hearing shall be distributed to the Council before commencement of the hearing and considered for receiving into evidence.

j. Close of Hearing and Deliberation by Council. The presiding officer shall conclude the hearing and the Council shall deliberate the matter. The Council shall either make its decision and state its findings, which may incorporate findings proposed by the proponent, opponents, the staff, or the planning commission, or may continue its deliberations to a subsequent meeting, the time and place of which must then be announced. The subsequent meeting shall be for the purpose of continued deliberation, or to consider proposed findings and the presiding officer shall not allow additional submission of testimony, except upon approval by the Council.

7. Official Notice.

a. The council may take official notice of the following:

1) all facts which are judicially noticeable; and

2) the charter, codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and official policies (if written) of the City.

b. Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the Council in the determination of the proposal.

8. Record of Proceedings.

a. The city recorder, or other designee of the presiding officer, shall be present at each hearing and shall cause the proceedings to be stenographically or electronically recorded. It shall not be necessary to transcribe testimony unless required for judicial or administrative review or unless ordered by the Council.

b. The presiding officer shall, where practicable, cause to be received all physical and documentary evidence presented which shall be marked to show the identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on behalf of proponent or opponent. Unless evidence is capable of being offered and incorporated in the record of the case, it shall not be received. All exhibits received into evidence shall be retained by the Council until after any applicable appeal period has expired, at which time the exhibits may be released upon written request to the person identified thereon.

c. Any member of the public shall have access to the record of the proceedings at reasonable times, places and circumstances. Any member of the public shall be entitled to make copies of the record at his or her own expense.

9. Publication of Hearing Rules.

a. These rules governing the conduct of hearings shall be placed of record with the city recorder.

b. A copy of these rules for conduct of hearings shall be available to the public at a cost of 15 cents per page (which represents the actual cost of reproduction).

c. These rules are supplementary to any other rules of procedure adopted by the Council, provided, however, these rules shall control where there are conflicting provisions, unless provided otherwise herein.

H. Execution of Contracts.

1. Purpose. This rule constitutes guidelines for executing certain contracts which the Council has authorized, through the contract review process, the development process or the budget process. It does not affect the need for public bidding or the function of the contract review board. It clarifies when a contract may be executed by the mayor or mayor’s designee without additional Council approval of the contract itself.

2. The mayor or the mayor’s designee, may execute the following contracts without further Council approval:

a. The resulting contract when the Council acting as the contract review board selects a contract bid or proposal or authorizes an exemption.

b. Real property acquisitions which are an incidental part of a public improvement project approved by Council, or acquisitions which are a condition of a development permit, unless the other party requires Council approval.

c. Except for real estate transactions not covered by subsection 2.b. above, and outside legal counsel’s services which must be approved by the Council, all other public contracts, providing any funds required to be paid by the City pursuant to the contract have been specifically identified in the budget and do not exceed the amount appropriated for the purpose. As stated in subsection (1) above, if the contract review board must select a vendor, it shall be submitted to the board prior to execution.

I. Reconsideration of Actions Taken. Unless specifically governed by other provisions of the codes, ordinances, or other regulations of the City, any Councilor who voted with the majority or was not present at the time of the vote may move for reconsideration of an action at the same or the next following regular meeting of the Council. Once a matter has been reconsidered, no motion for further reconsideration thereof shall be made without unanimous consent of the Council.

J. Councilor Liaison to Committees, Boards and Commissions. Unless specifically provided otherwise in the codes, ordinances, resolutions or other regulation of the City, a Councilor who is the Council Liaison to any committee, board or commission of the City shall not chair that body and shall be an ex-officio, nonvoting member of the committee, board or commission. Nothing in this rule is intended to limit the Councilor’s right to take part in all discussion and debate in any matter before the committee, board or commission.

K. Evaluation of Council Officers. The Charter provides that the Council, by majority vote of the entire Council, shall appoint and may remove a municipal judge, city attorney and auditor for the City. No later than the end of November of each year, the president of the Council shall conduct an evaluation on behalf of the Council for each of the Council officers, and, if applicable, their respective offices in general, in a manner established by the Council. The formal written evaluation in draft form shall be distributed to each of the other Councilors for their comment, possible amendment and approval prior to its adoption as an act of the Council.

L. Requests for Administrative Staff Action; Consensus of Council. This rule governs situations where, although no formal vote is taken on a matter discussed by the Council at a meeting, at least one Councilor requests some action from the administrative staff. The presiding officer shall determine if agreement exists among all Councilors present at the meeting. If consensus is established or a formal vote is taken approving the request for action, the direction shall be made to the mayor rather than the individual staff member. This rule does not apply to matters directed to the city attorney, municipal judge or auditor.

M. Suspension of Rules. Any provision of these rules not required by state law or the Beaverton Charter may be temporarily suspended by the Council. [BC 2.11.020, added by Ordinance No. 3573, 7/28/87; amended by Ordinance No. 4543, 7/12/10]

	To Do This	You Say This	May You Interrupt Speaker	Must You Be Seconded	Is The Motion Debatable	What Vote Is Required





	*Adjourn the meeting	“I move that we adjourn”	No	Yes	No	Majority



	Recess the meeting	“I move that recess until...”	No	Yes	No	Majority

	*Complain about noise, room temperature, etc.	“Point of privilege”	Yes	No	No	No vote

	*Suspend further consideration of something	“I move we table this matter”	No	Yes	No	Majority

	End debate 	“I move the previous question...”	No	Yes	No	2/3 vote

	Postpone consideration of something	“I move we postpone this matter until”	No	Yes	Yes	Majority

	Have something studied further	“I move we refer this to...”	No	Yes	Yes	Majority

	Amend a motion	“I move to amend this motion”	No	Yes	Yes	Majority

	Introduce business (a primary motion)	“I move that...”	No	Yes	Yes	Majority

	*Object to procedure or to personal affront	“Point of order”	Yes	No	No	No vote Chair decides

	*Request information	“Point of information”	Yes	No	No	No vote

	*Ask for a vote count to verify a voice vote	“I call for a division of the house:	No	No	No	No vote

	*Object to considering some matter	“I object to consideration of this”	Yes	No	No	2/3 vote

	*Take up a matter previously tabled	“I move to take from the table...”	No	Yes	No	Majority

	*Reconsider some- thing already disposed of	“I move we reconsider action on...”	Yes	Yes	Yes	Majority

	*Consider some- thing not in scheduled order	“I move we suspend the rules and...”	No	Yes	No	2/3 vote

	*Vote on a ruling by the presiding officer	“I appeal the presiding officer’s decision”	Yes	Yes	Yes	Majority

	* = NOT AMENDABLE


Title 3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Chapters:

3.02    Local Improvement Procedures

3.04    Deferred Payment of Special Assessments

3.06    Construction, Repair and Alteration of Sidewalks

3.07    Transportation System Development Charge

3.08    Alternative Methods of Installing and Financing Water and Sewer Lines

3.10    Acquisition of Property

3.11    Relocation Assistance Procedure

3.16    Acquisition of Art

3.20    Nonprofit Corporation Low-Income Housing Tax Exemptions


Chapter 3.02 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

3.02.010    Definitions.

3.02.015    Initiation of Local Improvements; Resolution of Intention.

3.02.020    Notice of Hearing.

3.02.025    Hearing and Establishment of the District.

3.02.030    Remonstrance Against Formation of Local Improvement District.

3.02.035    Alternative Procedure for Initiating Local Improvements.

3.02.040    Creation of Local Improvement District.

3.02.045    Manner of Doing Work.

3.02.050    Construction of Improvements; Bids.

3.02.055    Costs and Expenses.

3.02.060    Method of Assessment; Alternative Methods of Financing.

3.02.065    Assessment Procedure.

3.02.070    Notice of Assessment.

3.02.075    Lien Records and Foreclosure Proceedings.

3.02.080    Errors in Assessment Calculations.

3.02.095    Installment Payment of Assessments.

3.02.110    Assessed Valuation Limitation.

3.02.111    Unimproved Land.

3.02.195    Withholding Building Permits for Delinquent Assessments.

3.02.200    Filing of Resolutions and Ordinances.

3.02.205    Deficit Assessments.

3.02.210    Rebates and Credits.

3.02.215    Abandonment of Proceedings.

3.02.220    Curative Provisions.

3.02.225    Reassessments.

3.02.230    Apportionment of Liens.

3.02.235    Interpretation.

II. ALTERNATIVE METHOD FOR CREATING LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS

3.02.500    Findings and Purpose.

3.02.505    Definitions.

3.02.510    Alternative Method to Cause and Finance Improvements.

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS


3.02.010 Definitions.

As used in BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 the following mean:

Local improvement -

A. The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing any street;

B. The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks;

C. The installation of street lights;

D. The installation of underground wiring or related equipment;

E. The reconstruction or repair of any street improvement mentioned in this subsection;

F. The construction, reconstruction or repair of any sanitary or storm sewer or water main;

G. The acquisition, establishment, construction or reconstruction of any off-street motor vehicle parking facility;

H. The construction, reconstruction, alteration, relocation or repair of any flood control dike, dam, floodway, or drainage facility;

I. The construction, reconstruction, installation and equipping of a park, playground or neighborhood facility;

J. Any other local improvement for which an assessment may be made on the property specially benefited.

Local improvement district – The property which is to be assessed for the cost or part of the cost of local improvement and the property on which the local improvement is located.

Lot – A lot, block or parcel of land.

Owner – The record holder of legal title or where land is being purchased under a land sale contract recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land, the purchaser.

Unimproved land – A parcel within a proposed district for which the true cash (market) value of the land is greater than or equal to the true cash (market) value of the improvements thereon, as shown by Washington County’s current assessment roll. Added by Ordinance No. 3466, 9/17/85.


3.02.015 Initiation of Local Improvements; Resolution of Intention.

A. Whenever the Council considers it necessary to make a local improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, or when the owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the local improvement, by written petition request the Council to make a local improvement, the Council by resolution (hereinafter referred to as the “resolution of intention”) shall declare its intention to make the local improvement.

B. The resolution of intention shall:

1. describe the general nature, location and extent of the proposed local improvement and of the proposed local improvement district;

2. declare the Council’s intention to make the improvement;

3. indicate the method and manner of carrying out the improvement;

4. contain an estimate of the probable total cost of the improvement;

5. indicate the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefited;

6. set a public hearing on the improvement; and

7. direct that notice be given of the proposed improvement and of the public hearing.

C. The resolution of intention may include alternative proposals relating to a proposed local improvement; provided, however, that all of the information required for a particular local improvement shall be included for each alternative proposal.


3.02.020 Notice of Hearing.

A. After adoption of the resolution of intention, the city recorder shall cause notice of the proposed improvement and of the public hearing to be given by one publication not less than ten days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and by mailing copies of the notice by registered or certified mail to the owner of a lot affected by the proposed improvement.

B. The notice shall contain:

1. a general description of the proposed local improvement and the property to be specially benefited thereby. The description of property need not be by metes and bounds but shall be such that an average person can determine from it the general location of the property;

2. an estimate of the total cost of the improvement and the portion anticipated to be paid for by special assessments;

3. the date, time and place of the public hearing;

4. a statement of a place where preliminary project design and other additional information concerning the improvement is available to the public; and

5. any other information the Council may direct to be included.

C. Any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to mailing of notice shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the local improvement proceedings.


3.02.025 Hearing and Establishment of the District.

A. At the time of the public hearing the Council shall hear and consider testimony, both oral and written, on the proposed local improvement and may continue the hearing as it deems necessary. After the hearing the Council may order the local improvement to be made. If the Council orders the improvement, it shall, within 90 days after the date of the hearing, provide by resolution (hereinafter establishment resolution) for the establishment of the local improvement district and the construction of the improvement.

B. If the proposed improvement was petitioned for by one-half of the benefited property owners, the Council may refuse to proceed with the improvement if the proposed improvement is untimely or not in the best interests of the City.

C. At the public hearing, the Council may direct a modification of the proposed local improvement by revising the scope of the improvement, by reducing or enlarging the local improvement district which it deems will be benefited by the improvement, or by making such other modifications in the proceedings as it finds reasonable.

D. If the Council:

1. modifies the scope of the improvement so that the assessment is likely to be increased upon one or more lots, or

2. enlarges the local improvement district, or

3. causes a substantial change in any of the particulars contained in the resolution of intention; then a new resolution of intention shall be adopted, new estimates made and new notices mailed to the owners within the proposed local improvement district. However, no new publication shall be required.


3.02.030 Remonstrance Against Formation of Local Improvement District.

A. Except in the case of a water or sewer improvement declared by the Council to be needed at once because of an emergency, if written, signed objections or remonstrances to the establishment of a local improvement district are filed with the recorder by the end of the public hearing on the establishment of the district by the owners of land which bears 60 percent of the estimated assessed cost of the proposed local improvement, the Council shall abandon the establishment of the district and not reinitiate its establishment for six months.

B. If there is a multiple ownership in a parcel of land (as, for example, in the case of tenancy in common, joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety), each remonstrating multiple owner shall be counted as a fraction to the same extent as the owner’s interest in the land bears in relation to the other multiple owners, and the same fraction shall be applied to the parcel’s proposed assessment for purposes of computing the remonstrance.

C. Any person acting as agent or attorney with power to act in signing a remonstrance shall, in addition to describing the property affected, file with the remonstrance a copy in writing of the authority to represent the owner of the property.


3.02.035 Alternative Procedure for Initiating Local Improvements.

When all of the owners of property to be benefited and assessed for a local improvement have signed a petition directed and presented to the Council requesting the local improvement, the Council may initiate and construct the local improvement without publishing or mailing notice to the owners of the affected property and without holding a public hearing regarding the proposed local improvement. Petitioners for a local improvement shall be liable for all costs of the improvements including costs incurred prior to abandonment pursuant to BC 3.02.215, except as otherwise provided by Council. Petitioners’ liability shall be both personal and secured by a lien on the property. [BC 3.02.035, amended by Ordinance No. 3466, 9/17/85]


3.02.040 Creation of Local Improvement District.

The Council by an establishment resolution shall provide for the establishment of the local improvement district and making the local improvement in substantial conformity with the proposal set forth in the resolution of intention.


3.02.045 Manner of Doing Work.

Local improvements may be made in whole or in part by the City, by another governmental agency, by contract or by any combination thereof.


3.02.050 Construction of Improvements; Bids.

A. Immediately after the effective date of the establishment resolution the city engineer shall cause necessary rights-of-way and easements to be acquired and the improvement to be made in accordance with the terms of the establishment resolution if the work is to be performed by the City or another governmental agency. If any part of the work of the improvement is to be done under contract bids, the city engineer shall cause detailed plans and specifications to be prepared and filed and notice calling for bids to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City not less than five days prior to the opening of bids.

B. Except as otherwise exempted by State law, Charter, City ordinance, Code provisions or rule, contracts for all or part of the work of the local improvement may be let by the Council to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid is in the best interests of the City as determined by the Council. The Council may reject any or all bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory. If the Council rejects all bids, it may direct the city engineer to readvertise for bids or direct the work to be performed by City forces. The City shall provide for security on all contracts for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions of the security in case of default shall be enforced by an action in the name of the City.

C. If the Council finds on opening bids for the work of the improvement, that the bid in the best interest of the City is substantially in excess of the city engineer’s estimate, it may, provide for holding a special hearing to consider objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis of the bid.


3.02.055 Costs and Expenses.

The costs and expenses of local improvements that may be assessed against the property specially benefited by the improvement shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of construction and installation of the improvement; advertising, legal, administrative, survey, engineering, notice, supervision, materials, labor, contracts, equipment, inspection and assessment costs; financing costs, including interest charges; the costs of any necessary property, right-of-way or easement acquisition and condemnation proceedings; attorneys’ fees and any other necessary expenses.


3.02.060 Method of Assessment; Alternative Methods of Financing.

A. The Council in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of any local improvement may;

1. use any reasonable method of determining the extent of the local improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

2. use any reasonable method of apportioning the sum to be assessed between the properties determined to be specially benefited;

3. authorize payment by the City of all or part of the costs of a local improvement when in the opinion of the Council the topographical or physical conditions, or unusual or excess public travel or use, or other character of the work involved warrants only a partial payment or no payment by the benefited property of the costs of the local improvement.

B. Nothing contained in BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 shall preclude the Council from using other available means of financing local improvements, including federal or State grants-in-aid, water or sewer fees or charges, revenue or general obligation bonds, issuance of general obligation improvement warrants for interim financing of construction, or any other legal means of financing. If other legal means of financing local improvements are used, the Council may levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of the local improvement.


3.02.065 Assessment Procedure.

A. When the estimated cost of an authorized local improvement has been ascertained on the basis of the city engineer’s estimate of costs, on the award of a contract or on any other basis acceptable to the Council, or after the work has been completed and the actual cost thereof has been determined, the city recorder, or any other person as the Council may direct, shall prepare the proposed assessments to the lots within the local improvement district, and shall file them in the office of the city recorder and shall submit them to the Council. The submission shall be in the form of a proposed resolution (hereinafter “assessment resolution”).

B. On the receipt of the proposed assessments, the Council shall, after any modifications, adopt an assessment resolution directing notice of the proposed assessments to be mailed or personally delivered to the owners of the lots proposed to be assessed or if personal service cannot be had, then by publication once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and containing the following information:

1. the name of the owner, the description of the property assessed, the total estimated or actual project cost assessed against benefited property and the amount of the assessment against the described property;

2. a date and time by which written objections to the proposed assessment stating specifically the grounds for objection must be received and the date, time and place of a public hearing at which the Council will consider objections;

3. a statement that the assessment in the notice or as it may be modified by the Council will be levied by the Council after the hearing and that the assessment then will be charged against the property and be immediately payable in full or in installments, if applicable.

C. Supplementary notice of the proposed assessment and public hearing on it, in form and content to be determined by the city recorder, may also be published or posted by the city recorder.

D. The Council shall hold the public hearing on the proposed assessments to consider those objections filed in writing and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments. The Council shall determine the amount of assessment to be charged against each lot within the local improvement district according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing thereto from the improvement, and shall by ordinance spread the assessments.


3.02.070 Notice of Assessment.

A. Within ten days after the effective date of the ordinance levying the assessments, the city recorder shall send by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the assessed property a notice containing the following information:

1. the date of the ordinance levying the assessment, the name of the owner of the property assessed, the amount of the specific assessment and a description of the property assessed;

2. a statement that an application may be filed to pay the assessment in installments in accordance with the provisions of BC 3.02.095;

3. a statement that the entire amount of the assessment, less any part for which application to pay in installments is made, is due within 30 days of the date of the notice and, if unpaid on that date, will accrue interest and subject the property to foreclosure.

B. Supplementary notice of assessment, in form and content to be determined by the city recorder, may also be published or posted by the city recorder.


3.02.075 Lien Records and Foreclosure Proceedings.

After passage of the assessment ordinance by the Council, the finance director shall prepare a statement of amounts assessed on each particular lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners and the date of the assessment ordinance and shall make the entry on the City lien docket. On entry in the lien docket, the amount entered shall become a lien on the respective lots, parcels of land or portions thereof, which have been assessed for the improvement. All assessment liens of the City shall be superior and prior to all other liens and encumbrances on property, as permitted by State law. Interest shall be charged on all amounts not paid within 30 days from the date of the letter notifying the owner of the ordinance levying the assessment. Unless otherwise provided by Council resolution the rate of interest shall be as provided by BC 1.01.020 or at the interest rate established for the last Bancroft Bond sale, whichever is higher. After the expiration of 30 days, the City may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in the manner provided by State law. However, the City may enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under State law to redeem such property.


3.02.080 Errors in Assessment Calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be brought to the attention of the finance director, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the finance director finds that there has been an error in fact, the finance director shall recommend to the Council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of an amendment, the finance director shall cause the necessary correction to be made in the City lien docket and shall cause a corrected notice of assessment to be sent by registered or certified mail.


3.02.095 Installment Payment of Assessments.

The Bancroft Bonding Act (ORS 223.205 et seq.), excluding ORS 223.220 shall apply to assessments levied in accordance with BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235, except to the extent the terms of the State law are inconsistent with the terms of the City’s Code in which case the City’s Code shall prevail. Unless otherwise provided in the particular assessment ordinance, the owner of property assessed for a local improvement in the sum of $500.00 or more at any time within thirty (30) days after notice of the assessment is first mailed (or within the time as the Council may from time to time establish) may file with the finance department a written application to pay the whole of the assessment in equal semiannual installments, together with interest over a period not to exceed twenty (20) years as the City Council may provide. The interest shall be at the Oregon prime rate as determined by the finance director, until the sale of bonds encompassing the assessment and thereafter at a rate set by the Council, reflecting changes in the bond market and any other costs associated with the assessment or bonding process. Assessed property owners paying the prime rate and subject to adjustment in rate by the Council shall be allowed a credit or debit on future interest payments to reflect a decreased or increased interest rate. Such adjustment in interest rate shall be made by a method determined by the finance director and shall then apply to unpaid installments on the assessment. Notice of the rate adjustment shall be given by mail to the affected applicant and property owner. [BC 3.02.095, renumbered and amended by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.110 Assessed Valuation Limitation.

No application to pay in installments shall be received and filed if the amount remaining unpaid upon such assessment together with the unpaid balance of any previous assessments for improvements and taxes against the same property equals or exceeds 100 percent of any of the following: 1) the assessed valuation of the property as shown by the last County tax roll, or 2) the fair market value of the property as shown by an appraisal performed within one year of the application performed by an independent qualified appraiser acceptable to the City who is a member of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers (MAI) or Society of Real Estate Appraisers (SREA), or 3) the fair market value of the property as determined by the finance director using any reliable evidence of value. [BC 3.02.110, added by Ordinance No. 3408, 9/17/84; renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3421, 12/4/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3466, 9/17/85]


3.02.111 Unimproved Land.

A. This section shall apply in addition to the other provisions of this Code, to local improvement districts meeting one or more criteria in subsection B, below. In case of conflict between the other provisions of this Code and this section, the latter shall govern.

B. The purpose of this section is to minimize the risk of default and other financial risk to the City. Prior to the formation of a local improvement district the city engineer or the city engineer’s designee shall cause each proposed district to be evaluated and a written report to be made which identifies whether any of the following criteria apply:

1. whether there are one or more parcels of 10 or more acres or an owner with parcels which in aggregate exceed 10 acres;

2. whether unimproved land bears more than 50 percent of the estimated assessed cost of the improvement;

3. whether property within the district is owned by six or fewer unrelated persons and the estimated cost of improvement is in excess of $100,000;

4. whether the primary purpose of the district is to serve new development rather than serving existing development and infill.

5. whether the local improvement district was initiated by petition pursuant to BC 3.02.035. The finance director shall review the city engineer’s report and determine whether the proposed district meets one or more of the above criteria, and for this reason presents a potential financial risk to the City. If such risk is present, then this section shall apply in addition to the other provisions of this Code.

C. A property owner within a proposed district who disputes the finding that the district meets one or more of the criteria in subsection B may appeal the determination within five days to the mayor, who shall render a written decision within seven days. The property owner may appeal the mayor’s decision within five days of receipt of the written decision to the Council. The decision of the Council shall be final.

D. When a proposed local improvement district meets one or more of the criteria in subsection B, each owner of unimproved land and any other property owner within the proposed local improvement district that may be required by Council resolution, shall submit:

1. a financial statement no more than six months old audited by an independent certified public accountant; and

2. one of the following:

a. bank references;

b. the three most recent years’ federal income tax statements; or

c. a credit report from a major credit bureau.

3. proof of payment of all current and prior years real property taxes, interest and penalties collectible by Washington County for their property within the district.

4. cash or a certified check in the amount of $450.00 per owner submitted as a fee to cover the administrative costs for processing the proposed local improvement district. No petition shall be accepted by the City until this fee is submitted. The fee is not refundable unless the local improvement district is formed and assessments are levied, then the fee shall be returned to the petitioner and added to the actual costs of the local improvement district. This fee may be raised or lowered by Council resolution based upon a reasonable estimation of the costs to be incurred by the City.

E. Upon the City’s receipt of the information required by subsection D, the financial statement shall be reviewed by a certified public accountant selected by the City for purposes of determining the owner’s financial ability to pay for the estimated assessment in the proposed local improvement district. The City’s certified public accountant shall present an evaluation to the City. The City may prescribe specific standards upon which to base this evaluation. The petition shall not be accepted by the Council until all the information required has been received by the City.

F. A feasibility report shall be prepared by the city engineer which shall disclose all relevant financial aspects of the proposed local improvement district which will include:

1. the current value of the property as described in BC 3.02.110 in the proposed local improvement district in comparison to the estimated local improvement district cost;

2. a statement of compliance with BC 3.02.110;

3. a listing of any existing, contemporaneous or expected local improvement district assessments;

4. a statement of whether the property is planned to be resold or leased and the expected timing of these transactions;

5. any other conditions or expected conditions which are likely to affect the value of the land or the security of the City.

G. 1. each applicant required to comply with subsection D, above, who applies for installment payment shall deposit with the City or at a bank for the benefit of the City, cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or securities from the list in ORS 279.420(5) and administrative rules thereunder, in the amount of ten percent or more of the expected assessment against the property. Any interest or increase in value in posted securities shall be the property of the applicant. If any installment is not paid when due, the City may redeem the securities for the amount due. When the assessments have been paid in full, the City shall release the securities to the applicant. In the event property within a proposed local improvement district qualifies pursuant to an improved property analysis as provided in BC 3.02.110, subsection 4, additional securities shall be provided in the form stated above equal to 100 percent of the difference between the highest value of the property as described in BC 3.02.110, subsections l, 2 or 3, and the estimated improvement costs.

2. Each applicant for payment of an assessment against an unimproved land parcel shall remain liable for the amount financed in the application, regardless of the subsequent disposition of the property. If the property is sold, the original applicant’s liability shall be for any installment debt not satisfied out of foreclosure and sale of the property. The applicant shall be jointly liable with the subsequent owner for any debt not satisfied out of foreclosure and sale proceeds.

3. A subsequent purchaser may submit to the finance director the information required in subsection D of this section. If, upon analysis of this information, the finance director determines that the subsequent purchaser meets the financial criteria, the finance director shall so inform the Council. Upon completion of an application for installment payment and deposit of security as provided in subsection F of this section, the Council may order the release of the original applicant from liability for the installment debt. [BC 3.02.111, added by Ordinance No. 3466, 9/17/85]


3.02.195 Withholding Building Permits for Delinquent Assessments.

If payments on assessments made against real property are delinquent, no building permit shall be issued by the City for the improvement of the real property. The City shall develop and implement procedures for determining at the time of building permit application the status of payments on assessed real property. The decision to refuse to issue a building permit shall be in writing and may be appealed to the Council if written notice of appeal is filed with the city recorder not more than ten days following the date of the decision by the department. [BC 3.02.195, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.200 Filing of Resolutions and Ordinances.

The city recorder shall file copies of the resolution establishing the local improvement district and the assessment ordinance with the director of records and elections of Washington County; however, failure to file the resolution or ordinance shall not invalidate or affect any proceedings in connection with the local improvement district and shall not impose any liability on the City or any official, officer or employee of the City. [BC 3.02.200, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.205 Deficit Assessments.

If the initial assessment has been made on the basis of estimated cost and if on the completion of the improvement the actual cost is found to be greater than the estimated cost, the Council may make a deficit assessment of the additional cost. Assessments on the respective lots within the local improvement district for the proportionate share of the deficit shall be proposed, notices sent, a public hearing held and opportunity for objections considered. Determination of the assessment against each particular lot, block or parcel of land shall be made as in the case of the initial assessment and the deficit assessment spread by ordinance. The deficit assessments shall be entered in the City lien docket, notices published and mailed and the collection of the assessment made in accordance with the provisions of BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 relating to the original assessment. [BC 3.02.205, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.210 Rebates and Credits.

If assessments have been made on the basis of estimated cost, and if on completion of the improvement project the cost is found to be less than the estimated cost, the Council shall ascertain and declare the assessments, by ordinance, and when so declared the finance director shall:

A. Enter the over-assessed amounts on the City’s lien docket, as a reduction of the property owner’s original assessment lien;

B. Recompute all past principal and interest installment billings as though the actual cost of improvements were known at the time of the original assessment, and the differences between the original installment billings and the recomputed installment billings shall be entered into the City’s lien docket as an adjustment to the property owner’s reassessed assessment lien account. In the event that payments have been made on all or part of the original installment billings and the amount paid exceeds the total recomputed installment amount due, the person that paid the original assessment or the person’s legal representative or successor may apply for a cash refund. To receive a cash refund a written request must be received by the finance director within 30 days after passage of the re-assessment ordinance;

C. In the event that the original assessment has been paid in full before passage of the re-assessment ordinance by Council, the person who paid the original assessment or the person’s legal representative or successor shall be entitled to a cash refund of the excess amount paid. [BC 3.02.210, amended by Ordinance No. 3353, 12/20/83; renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.215 Abandonment of Proceedings.

The Council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for local improvements made pursuant to BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 at any time prior to the final completion of the improvements.

A. If the local improvement district has been formed in a manner other than by BC 3.02.035, and if liens have been assessed upon any property under the procedure, they shall be canceled, and payments made on the improvements shall be refunded to the person, or the person’s assigns or successors, paying the same to the extent the payments exceed the cost of improvements which specially benefit the property as determined by reassessment. The Council may reassess property in the improvement district based upon the costs of the special and peculiar benefits accruing thereto from any improvement made prior to abandonment of the proceedings or may recover the cost of the improvements by any other method authorized by law.

B. If the local improvement district was formed pursuant to BC 3.02.035, the finance director shall determine the special and peculiar benefits accruing to property within the district. The liens created by the original assessment shall remain in effect until the amount determined by the finance director to represent the special and peculiar benefits accruing to the property after abandonment has been paid. In addition, the City may recoup the costs of the special and peculiar benefits in any manner provided by law. The obligation to repay the cost of those benefits is a personal obligation of the petitioner and is secured by a lien on the property. [BC 3.02.215, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3466, 9/17/85]


3.02.220 Curative Provisions.

No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by a failure to have all of the information required to be in any city engineer’s or city recorder’s report, the establishment resolution, the assessment ordinance, the City lien docket or notices required to be published, mailed or posted; nor by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to, the owner of any property as required by BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235; nor by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining. The Council shall have the authority to remedy and correct all the matters by a reassessment. [BC 3.02.220, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.225 Reassessments.

A. When all or part of any assessment for any local improvement has been or shall be declared void or set aside for any reason or its enforcement refused by a court having jurisdiction, or whenever the Council is in doubt as to the validity of all or a part of such assessment, the Council may make a new assessment or reassessment in the manner provided by State law.

B. For purposes of this section, the term “assessment” includes deficit assessments and reassessments. [BC 3.02.225, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.230 Apportionment of Liens.

A. When a portion of a single tract or parcel of real property is partitioned or divided in accordance with applicable land use laws or when the ownership of a portion of a single tract of real property less than the entire tract is transferred or a portion is conveyed by a long term lease that is at least ten years in duration, a lien against the real property in favor of the City shall be apportioned upon compliance with the terms of this section.

B. Applications for the apportionment of liens shall be made to the finance director describing the tract to be segregated. The application must be completed by the owner, mortgagee, lienholder or tenant having an interest in the parcel. When the deed, mortgage or other instrument evidencing the applicant’s ownership or other interest in the parcel has not been recorded by the county clerk of the county in which the parcel is situated, the City shall not apportion the special assessment unless the applicant files a true copy of that deed, mortgage or instrument with the City.

C. The finance director shall compute the apportionment whenever the special assessment remains wholly or partially unpaid, and full payment or an installment payment is not due. The apportionment shall be calculated on the same basis as it was originally computed. The apportionment shall be entered in the City lien docket. However, no apportionment shall be made unless each part of the original tract of land after the apportionment has a true cash value, as determined from a certificate of the county assessor or appraisal of a qualified appraiser, of 120 percent or more of the amount of the lien as applied to each tract apportioned. The valuation must be determined within one year prior to the date of the application.

D. When a special assessment is being paid in installment under the Bancroft Bonding Act and a request to apportion is authorized, the remaining installments not yet due shall be prorated among the smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with that percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment.

E. Apportionment of a special assessment under this section shall be done in accordance with a resolution of the Council. The resolution shall describe each parcel of real property affected by the apportionment, the amount of the assessment levied against each parcel, the owner of each parcel and such additional information as is required to keep a permanent and complete record of the assessments and payments.

F. An application shall not be processed until the applicant pays a fee to defray the costs of evaluating the application. The amount of the fee shall be set by Council resolution. [BC 3.02.230, amended by Ordinance No. 3356, 2/1/84; renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]


3.02.235 Interpretation.

The provisions of BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 shall apply to all future local improvement districts and, to the extent further actions or proceedings may be required, to all existing districts. [BC 3.02.235, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3413, 10/23/84]

II. ALTERNATIVE METHOD FOR CREATING LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS


3.02.500 Findings and Purpose.

A. The Council finds that the rapid rate of development in the Beaverton area has led to the need to provide urban public services in areas which are currently of a rural or underdeveloped nature. Property located in these areas is often owned by individuals with highly diversified interests. Often these interests are divided between those who seek current development and those who oppose development. It is recognized by the City that traditional methods of implementing public improvements, through local improvement districts or by requiring capital improvements as a condition of development, may not provide the flexibility necessary to avoid forcing development on those who do not want it or exacting from developers costs which may exceed the amount reasonably related to the demand on public facilities caused by the development.

B. The Council further finds that Charter Section 38 and home rule authority provide authority for implementing alternative methods of making and financing public improvements.

C. The Council further finds that the purpose of BC 3.02.500 through 3.02.510 is to provide an equitable method to implement current essential public facilities and to implement other facilities, as necessary or convenient, at the time further development requires.

D. This method of causing and financing public improvements is intended to allow owners of parcels within the zone of benefit to elect to join in the formation of a local improvement district or to contribute to the improvements at the time their parcel develops. Those parcels subject to a waiver of remonstrance will be required to join the local improvement district, if the City so elects.

E. The Council further finds that the construction of public improvements by those who participate in the local improvement district formed pursuant to this section will benefit all parcels within the zone of benefit and that the construction of improvements through the local improvement district will give rise to a reciprocal obligation of those who later develop to fairly contribute to public improvements both on and off site of the developing property.


3.02.505 Definitions.

For the purpose of BC 3.02.500 through 3.02.510 the following mean:

Contribution – A lump sum payment to the City, which funds shall be kept separate from other City funds, and which will accrue interest and which are used for the sole purpose of financing public improvements within the zone of benefit; or participation in a local improvement district; or a waiver of remonstrance; or actual construction of public improvements within the zone of benefit.

Development -

A. The establishment of a use of any parcel of land involving the construction or the placing of a structure on a parcel that was prior to that event not occupied by any structure;

B. Any alteration or change in use which increases the number of parking spaces required pursuant to the Development Code;

C. Dividing land into two or more parcels including partitions and subdivisions and creating or terminating a right of access.

Public improvement – Has the meaning given the term “local improvement” by ORS 223.387.

Zone of benefit – The area which is determined by the Council to derive a benefit from a local improvement district formed pursuant to this section and includes property which will utilize or has opportunity to utilize improvements caused and financed by the owners in the local improvement district.


3.02.510 Alternative Method to Cause and Finance Improvements.

A. Whenever a public hearing has been held for the purpose of forming a local improvement district and it is determined that the Council has jurisdiction to form the district based upon State law, Charter and Code provisions but chooses not to form the district for any reason deemed to be in the best interests of the City, public or district landowners, the Council in addition to any other alternative may by resolution form a new district, which district need not be made up of contiguous properties, of those landowners in favor of the district or who have previously waived remonstrance. The assessment of such district shall be in accordance with current Code provisions. Improvements made through the local improvement district may extend beyond the boundaries of the parcels within the district. Participation in the local improvement district will exempt the owner from further contribution to public improvements within the zone of benefit for improvements listed in the resolution declaring responsibilities for properties in the zone of benefit.

B. In addition to the formation of the district, the Council by a resolution entitled “Resolution Declaring Responsibilities for Properties in the Zone of Benefit” shall:

1. establish a zone of benefit;

2. determine the minimum level of public improvements to be constructed and financed by those within the zone;

3. determine the current estimated cost of the public improvements;

4. spread the costs amongst the parcels within the zone upon a rational formula and exempt parcels for which no additional public improvements are or will be required;

5. establish a method to fix the costs over time;

6. determine alternative methods of contribution for those within the zone, if appropriate;

7. specify that obligations created by the resolution forming the zone of benefit are not a substitute for and do not release responsibilities for paying regularly required systems development taxes, connection charges, or permit fees nor does it affect, reduce or offset any other cost, obligation or requirement associated with development of property within the zone.

8. specify that the charge, participation or construction required by the terms of the resolution forming the zone of benefit is a precondition of receiving the first City permit applicable to any development within the zone;

9. set a date at which the obligation required of the resolution forming the zone of benefit ceases or if none is specified, it shall be perpetual.

10. a. direct the city recorder to mail a copy of the resolution declaring responsibilities for properties in the zone of benefit to each affected landowner; and,

b. direct the city recorder to file a copy of the resolution declaring responsibilities for properties in the zone of benefit to the director of records and elections of Washington County; however, failure to file or mail the resolution shall not invalidate or affect any proceedings in connection with the local improvement district or zone of benefit and shall not impose any liability on the City or any official office or employee of the City. [BC 3.02.500 through 3.02.510, added by Ordinance No. 3410, 9/24/84]


Chapter 3.04 DEFERRED PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

3.04.010    Deferred Payment of Assessments.

3.04.015    Financing of Program.

3.04.020    Interest.

3.04.025    Administration.

3.04.030    Appeals.

3.04.035    Termination of Deferment.

3.04.040    Confidentiality.

3.04.045    Lien.

3.04.050    Existing Assessments.

3.04.055    Installment Payment Terms.


3.04.010 Deferred Payment of Assessments.

A. To the extent that City funds are available and the requirements of BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 are met, a property owner may request deferred payment of special assessments for local improvements levied by the City.

B. To be eligible for a deferment, the applicant must meet guidelines adopted by Council resolution.

C. The property owner shall file an application to pay the assessments in installment payments pursuant to the Bancroft Bonding Act and BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 or their counterpart; submit an application for deferred payment privileges to the finance director within 30 days after the assessment is entered in the City lien docket or within such time as the finance director may establish; and enter into a contract with the City to pay the assessment when the deferment is terminated.

D. If it appears from the property owner’s application that the property owner would qualify for deferral of special assessments for local improvements under the State of Oregon, Department of Revenue rules or ORS Chapter 311.702 through 311.735, then the finance director may forward the application to the State for deferral.

E. If a property owner cannot meet all the eligibility requirements established by the Council, the property owner may apply for a special one-year deferment according to any requirements established by Council resolution.

F. A special deferment granted pursuant to subsection E shall commence on the date of timely application and shall terminate one calendar year thereafter, and is subject to all the terms and conditions of BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055. Failure of the property owner to receive notice for any reason shall not constitute a defense or otherwise invalidate a suit, action or other legal proceeding to collect delinquent assessments in a court of competent jurisdiction.


3.04.015 Financing of Program.

A. There is hereby created a fund, to be known as the local improvement assistance fund, to be used for the payment of construction costs or for the retirement of debt incurred by the City in connection with local improvement projects on which the payment of assessments has been deferred under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055.

B. The initial funds for the local improvement assistance fund shall consist of an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the assets of the City’s assessment fund that are not directly committed for the ensuing fiscal year. The local improvement assistance fund shall be replenished from time to time by interest payments on deferred accounts, payments made when deferments are terminated and by additional revenue from the assessment fund.

C. Deferments shall be granted on a first come, first served basis during each year to the extent that funds are available in the local improvement assistance fund. At no time shall outstanding assessment payment deferrals exceed 20 percent of the uncommitted assets of the City’s assessment fund.


3.04.020 Interest.

Interest shall accrue at the same rate applicable to installment payments of special assessments under the Bancroft Bonding Act (ORS Chapter 223.205 through 223.300) and BC 3.02.095. The interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance of any assessment for which payment has been deferred under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055. The interest shall be paid semi-annually during the deferment period; except that a property owner who has been granted a deferment and whose income does not exceed the income level specified in may defer BC 3.04.010, subsection B3, payment of interest in the same manner as the assessment principal.


3.04.025 Administration.

A. The finance director shall be responsible for the administration of BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 and may:

1. adopt reasonable rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration of BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055;

2. prepare and make available all necessary forms;

3. as frequently as necessary, make an investigation, including a review of all available records relating to income of property owners for which a deferment has been allowed, to ascertain that the property owner continues to meet the eligibility requirements.

B. The contract required under BC 3.04.010 shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney; shall be binding on the heirs, successors and assigns to whom ownership of the property may be transferred; and may be recorded in the official records of Washington County, Oregon. The finance director is hereby authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the City.

C. In determining eligibility, the finance director shall follow the requirements of BC 3.04.010 and Council resolution.

D. The finance director shall notify the applicant for a deferment in writing of the finance director’s decision.


3.04.030 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by a decision of the finance director under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 may appeal it to the Council by serving, within ten days after the date of the notice containing the decision, a notice of appeal in writing on the city recorder specifying the grounds for objection to the decision. The Council shall consider the matter and may sustain, modify or reverse the decision of the finance director.


3.04.035 Termination of Deferment.

A deferment shall be terminated if:

A. The property owner defaults in the performance of the terms and provisions of the owner’s contract with the City.

B. Maximum eligibility requirements for income are exceeded.

C. Fee title and/or possessory interest in the property is transferred by any means to a person other than the person’s spouse.

D. The property owner fails to comply with any rule or regulation adopted under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055; refuses to provide information to or hinders any investigation by the finance director into the continued eligibility of the property owner for a deferment; or willfully makes any false or misleading statement in order to obtain or retain a deferment; or receives benefits under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 with knowledge that the owner does not qualify for such benefits.


3.04.040 Confidentiality.

To the maximum extent possible under the law, the applications, records and other information relating to deferments shall be kept confidential by the City.


3.04.045 Lien.

Any assessment for which payment is deferred under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 shall continue to be a lien on the affected property, notwithstanding the granting of a deferment. If the deferment is terminated, the lien may be enforced as though no deferment had ever been granted.


3.04.050 Existing Assessments.

The deferral privileges authorized by BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 for future special assessments are extended to those property owners for assessments levied prior to November 4, 1974.


3.04.055 Installment Payment Terms.

The allowance of deferment under BC 3.04.010 through 3.04.055 shall have no effect on the number of installment payment periods or term of payment permitted under the Bancroft Bonding Act or BC 3.02.010 through 3.02.235 as they are now or hereafter constituted or amended. Each installment payment shall accrue at each successive payment period as though no deferment had been granted.


Chapter 3.06 CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND ALTERATION OF SIDEWALKS

Sections:

3.06.010    Definitions.

3.06.015    Duty to Construct, Repair and Clear Sidewalks, Curbs and Monolithic Curbs and Gutters; Liability for Damage or Injury.

3.06.020    Standards; Permits.

3.06.025    Notice to Construct.

3.06.030    Construction Procedure.

3.06.035    Construction by City.

3.06.040    Assessment and Collection of Costs.

3.06.045    Sidewalk Improvement Districts.

3.06.050    Responsibility of the City.

3.06.055    Violation of Ordinance Deemed Civil Infraction.


3.06.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 3.06.020 through 3.06.055 the following mean:

City engineer – The city engineer or the city engineer’s designee.

Construction – Construction, reconstruction, alteration and repair of sidewalks, curbs and monolithic curbs and gutters.

Sidewalk – That portion of the street right-of-way between the curblines or the lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for the use of pedestrians. [BC 3.06.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, January 25, 1988.]


3.06.015 Duty to Construct, Repair and Clear Sidewalks, Curbs and Monolithic Curbs and Gutters; Liability for Damage or Injury.

A. A person owning land abutting any public right-of-way has the duty to construct, reconstruct, repair and maintain abutting sidewalks, curbs and monolithic curbs and gutters so as not to present an unreasonable risk of danger to person or property, except as provided in subsection C of this section.

B. A person owning land abutting any public right-of-way hereby is declared liable for any and all claims of personal injury or property damage that may arise from the person’s negligence in failing to keep a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb or gutter abutting the person’s property in such repair as not to present an unreasonable risk of danger to person or property.

C. A person shall be relieved from the obligation imposed by subsection A of this section if the person notifies the City in writing of the need for reconstruction, maintenance or repair and the city engineer determines that:

1. The sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in question is part of an arterial or collector street, that the abutting property is not entitled to a curb cut or driveway on to that street, and that the abutting property is a through lot required to be screened from the abutting right-of-way by fence or landscaping such as to disallow direct pedestrian access to the right-of-way from the property; or,

2. The sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in question was constructed by the City within the last year and the risk of danger arises more from defective material or workmanship than from external forces.

The city engineer’s determination shall be sent in writing to the property owner and shall be final unless within ten days from the date the determination is sent, the property owner files with the City Recorder a written notice of appeal of same.

D. Nothing in this section is intended to relieve a person owning property abutting the right-of-way from the liability imposed by subsection B of this section, unless and until the property owner notifies the City as provided in subsection C of this section and the City’s resulting nonfeasance or malfeasance is held to constitute a supervening cause of any personal injury or property damage arising from the condition of the property after the property owner gives notice. [BC 3.06.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, January 25, 1988.]


3.06.020 Standards; Permits.

A. The city engineer shall establish standards and specifications for sidewalk, curb and monolithic curb and gutter construction, to provide them in a durable and practical condition at a suitable grade, width and location.

B. No person shall construct a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in the public right-of-way, except in accordance with current standards and specifications established by the city engineer.

C. No person shall construct a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter without first obtaining a permit from the City and complying with the provisions of BC 9.05.005 et seq. If the City is requiring the construction, the permit shall state the date within which the work shall be completed. [BC 3.06.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, 1/25/88]


3.06.025 Notice to Construct.

Where sidewalks, curbs or monolithic curbs and gutters are unsafe, or where no sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter exists on singular or isolated pieces or tracts of property and, the city engineer in his or her sole discretion determines that a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter are necessary to ensure safe vehicles and pedestrian travel, the city engineer shall mail notice to the record owner of the abutting property and the occupant of same. The notice shall direct the owner of the property or the owner’s agent immediately to construct a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter, or a combination, in accordance with the City ordinances, code provisions, standards, specifications and plans to be furnished by the city engineer on the owner’s or agent’s application. The city engineer shall file with the city recorder an affidavit of the mailing of the notice, stating the addresses and names to which it was mailed. The notice shall be sent to the last known address of the owner or agent, as shown on City or County records, and to the attention of the occupant at the property’s street address. A mistake in the name of the owner or agent, or a name other than that of the owner or agent of such property, or any mistake in the address, shall not invalidate the notice. [BC 3.06.025, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, 1/25/88]


3.06.030 Construction Procedure.

A. The owner of real property to whom notice has been sent, shall complete the improvement within 30 days from the date that the notice is mailed and under such other terms and conditions as are set out in the specifications and permit provided for under BC 3.06.020 and BC 9.04.020 or, within that same time, shall show cause in writing to the Council why the improvement should not be constructed.

B. The Council shall grant a hearing to the objector at regular meeting as soon as is practical. At the hearing the Council shall determine whether or not the sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter, or combination shall be constructed. The city recorder shall notify the person of the Council’s determination in writing sent to the address given on the notice.

C. Failure of the city to send the notice, or failure of the objector to receive it, or any other mistake in the notice, shall not render void or ineffective the lien to be imposed on the property in the event of City construction.

D. If the Council determines that the sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter, or combination, shall be constructed, the owner, or the owner’s agent shall, within ten days thereafter, begin the construction and complete construction not later than 30 days from the date of the Council’s decision. [BC 3.06.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, 1/25/88]


3.06.035 Construction by City.

If the owner of property to whom notice has been sent fails or refuses to complete construction of the improvement within the time allowed, the City may proceed to construct the improvement and assess the cost of same against the property as provided in BC 3.06.040. [BC 3.06.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, 1/25/88]


3.06.040 Assessment and Collection of Costs.

A. On completion of the construction, the finance director shall determine the cost as defined in BC 3.02.050. The finance director shall send a bill for the costs by regular mail to the owner of the property or the owner’s agent to the same address as the notice to construct, or to any later address known to the finance director. The bill shall also include a notice advising the property owner of the requirements of subsections B, C and D.

B. The property owner must, within 30 days of the date of mailing, either:

1. pay the bill in full; or

2. sign an agreement to pay the bill in installments; or

3. file a written protest of the billing with the city recorder. A written protest shall not be deemed timely unless actually received by the city recorder within 30 days of the date of mailing of the notice provided for in subsection A.

C. Beginning 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice any unpaid bill will accrue interest at the then prevailing prime rate per annum until paid. This provision shall apply even if a written protest is filed.

D. Thirty days from the date of mailing of the notice, the finance director is authorized to place a lien on the property unless a written protest has been timely filed with the city recorder.

E. 1. Upon timely receipt of a written protest from the property owner as provided in subsection A of this section, the city recorder shall place the matter on the Council agenda for hearing, and shall notify the property owner, the finance director and city engineer of the date of the meeting.

2. The finance director shall report to the Council the costs for work done showing the description of the property and the owner of each lot, part of lot or parcel of land for which the work was done.

3. The property owner may give oral or written testimony on the costs of the improvement.

4. If the Council finds the costs reported to be reasonable, it shall approve them by order and authorize the finance director to enter the costs together with any accrued interest as an assessment on the City lien docket.

5. Within 30 days of Council approval, the owner of the assessed property may apply to pay the assessment and accrued interest in installments.

F. An agreement to pay either an original bill or a Council approved assessment in installments, shall contain the following provisions:

1. a provision for interest at the then prevailing prime rate per annum, except that in the case of a Council approved assessment, the interest rate shall continue to be the same as originally established under subsection C;

2. a provision for installments for a period not to exceed five years;

3. a provision that an installment shall be deemed past due if not received within 30 days of the due date;

4. a provision that if any installment is past due, the City may terminate the installment agreement and if so terminated, the entire amount plus interest, less any amount paid, shall become immediately due. Failure to strictly enforce this provision shall not constitute a waiver of any right as to subsequent past due installments.

G. Foreclosure proceedings may be initiated to collect any lien due more than 30 days.


3.06.045 Sidewalk Improvement Districts.

A. In addition to the procedures contained in BC 3.06.010 through 3.06.055, the Council may establish local improvement districts for the purpose of constructing or reconstructing sidewalks, curbs or monolithic curbs and gutters, and assessing and collecting the costs in accordance with the City’s local improvement procedures.

B. If the Council forms a local sidewalk improvement district, persons owning property within the proposed district who cause sidewalks, curbs or monolithic curbs and gutters to be constructed and maintained in accordance with city specifications and standards prior to a date that the council may set, shall be excluded from the district and shall not be assessed for the improvements.

C. A person who owns property within the boundaries of a sidewalk improvement district is not thereby relieved of liability for an unsafe condition of the sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in the abutting right-of-way. [BC 3.06.045, amended by Ordinance No. 3604, 1/25/88]


3.06.050 Responsibility of the City.

[BC 3.06.050, repealed by Ordinance No. 3308, 12/14/82]


3.06.055 Violation of Ordinance Deemed Civil Infraction.

Violation of the provisions of BC 3.06.010 through 3.06.055 is a Class 1 Civil Infraction, the infraction to be processed in accordance with BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050. [BC 3.06.010 through 3.06.055 amended by Ordinance No. 3604, 1/28/88]


Chapter 3.07 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE

Sections:

3.07.010    Purpose.

3.07.020    Definitions.

3.07.030    Transportation System Development Charge Established.

3.07.040    Methodology.

3.07.050    Authorized Expenditures.

3.07.060    Expenditure Restrictions.

3.07.070    Challenge to TSDC Expenditure.

3.07.080    Improvement Plan.

3.07.090    Collection of Charge.

3.07.110    Exemptions.

3.07.120    Credits.

3.07.130    Redeeming Credits.

3.07.140    Notice.

3.07.150    Segregation and Use of Revenue.

3.07.160    Refunds.

3.07.170    Appeal Procedure.

3.07.180    Severability.

3.07.190    Classification.

3.07.200    Penalty.


3.07.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the transportation system development charge, or “TSDC,” is to ensure that new development contributes to the cost of new transportation infrastructure and any expansion of the existing transportation system required to accommodate additional vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian demand generated by the development. 

The TSDC shall provide funds for the capital improvements listed in the methodology report for each area where a TSDC is imposed. [BC 3.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

A. Actual cost – Monies expended by the developer for the construction of a qualified public improvement less any credits or reimbursements received from any agency other than the City.

B. Capital improvements – Public facilities or assets used for transportation. “Capital improvement” does not include costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.

C. Contiguous – When a property and an improvement or portion thereof share a common boundary line, they are contiguous. Determination of what is contiguous shall include the area of all property subject to the development approval. The boundary lines and area of an improvement shall be determined by the right-of-way and easement areas for the improvement. In addition, multiple properties under common ownership separated by one or more of the following – common area, nonmotorized vehicle or pedestrian way, creek, wetland, park, or similar areas – shall be deemed to include the boundary of such additional area in their boundary line, up to 100 feet between the properties at the boundary with the improvement. Any portion of an improvement that is located beyond the frontage of a property, as determined by the extension of boundary lines perpendicular to the frontage of the property, shall not be contiguous to that property. An intersection improvement shall be deemed contiguous to all property with frontage on the intersection, or that touches the intersection at any point. 

D. City Engineer – The City Engineer of the City of Beaverton or the City Engineer’s designee.

E. Council – The City Council of the City of Beaverton, Oregon.

F. Credit – The amount by which an applicant may be able to reduce the TSDC as provided in this chapter.

G. Development – Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including a building or other land construction, or making a physical change in the use of a structure or land, in a manner that increases the usage of transportation capital improvements or which may contribute to the need for additional or enlarged transportation capital facilities as determined in this chapter; or:

1. The act of bringing about growth; to construct or alter a structure, to make a change in use or appearance of land, to divide land into parcels, or to create or terminate rights of access; or

2. Any plat, partition, subdivision or planned unit development that is created under the City’s land division or zoning regulations. “Development” includes “new development.”

H. Finance Director – The Finance Director of the City of Beaverton or the Finance Director’s designee.

I. Improvement fee – An SDC for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

J. Improvement fee credit – A credit granted for the construction of a qualified public improvement under the provisions of ORS 223.304(4).

K. Lot – Any continuous area, tract or parcel of land owned by or under the lawful control and in the lawful possession of one distinct ownership undivided by a dedicated street or alley or another ownership. An abutting “platted lot” or property described by metes and bounds in the same ownership shall be considered a part of such “lot.” See also “Parcel.”

L. New development – Development which occurs on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

M. Owner – The owner of record of real property as shown in the records of Washington County Department of Records and Elections, or a person purchasing a piece of property under contract, or a public body or public agency with authority to exercise the power of eminent domain which has formally enacted a resolution of its intent to acquire the property described in the application. 

N. Parcel – See “Lot.”

O. Permittee – The person who is proposing to use or who is using the land pursuant to any permit required herein.

P. Qualified public improvement – A capital improvement that is:

1. Required as a condition of development approval; and

2. Identified in the adopted improvement plan pursuant to BC 3.07.080; and either:

a. Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or

b. Located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and, in the opinion of the Finance Director, is required to be built larger or with greater capacity (overcapacity) than is necessary for the applicant’s new development or to mitigate for transportation system impacts attributable to the applicant’s new development.

Q. Reimbursement fee – A TSDC for costs associated with transportation capital facilities that have already been constructed or are under construction and which have been determined to have capacity available to serve new development.

R. Transportation system development charge or “TSDC” – A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of transportation capital facilities or issuance of a development permit or building permit. “TSDC” includes the charge imposed under this chapter. A TSDC does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. [BC 3.07.020, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.030 Transportation System Development Charge Established.

TSDCs may be established and revised by resolution of the Council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire City, the geographic area subject to the charge. [BC 3.07.030, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.040 Methodology.

The methodology used to establish or modify the reimbursement fee shall, where applicable, be based on the cost of then-existing facilities including without limitation design, financing and construction costs, prior contributions by then-existing users, gifts or grants from Federal or State government or private persons, the cost of the unused capacity of existing facilities, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall demonstrate, where applicable, consideration of the estimated cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related. The methodology shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future system users.

The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the Council. [BC 3.07.040, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.050 Authorized Expenditures.

Reimbursement fees shall be spent only on capital improvements that are included in the plan adopted by the City pursuant to BC 3.07.080. However, expenditure of reimbursement fees is not limited to the portion of projects that create capacity for future system users.

Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements associated with the system for which the fee is assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or providing new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by new development. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the City pursuant to BC 3.07.080.

Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, TSDC revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development expenditures. [BC 3.07.050, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.060 Expenditure Restrictions.

TSDCs shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

TSDCs shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. [BC 3.07.060, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.070 Challenge to TSDC Expenditure.

A challenge to a TSDC expenditure may be made in the same way and shall be subject to the same requirements as those set forth in BC 4.01.100 for a challenge to an SDC expenditure. [BC 3.07.070, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.080 Improvement Plan.

A. Prior to the establishment of a TSDC, the Council shall adopt a plan by resolution that includes a list of:

1. The capital improvements that the Council intends to fund in whole or in part with improvement fee revenues; and

2. The estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement and the percentage of that cost eligible to be funded with improvement fee revenues; and

3. A description of the process for modifying the plan.

B. In adopting this plan, the Council may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section.

C. The Council may modify such plan and list at any time. If a TSDC will be increased by a proposed modification to the list the Council will:

1. At least 30 days prior to adoption of the proposed modification, provide written notice to persons who have requested notice pursuant to BC 3.07.140; and

2. Hold a public hearing if a written request for a hearing is received within seven days of the date of the proposed modification.

D. A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge if the change in amount is based on the periodic application of one of the construction cost indices published by the Engineering News-Record. [BC 3.07.080, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.090 Collection of Charge.

A. The TSDC is payable upon the issuance of:

1. A building permit;

2. A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit.

B. If no building, development, or access permit is required, the TSDC is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased based on the changes in the use of the property unrelated to seasonal or ordinary fluctuations in usage.

C. Notwithstanding issuance of a building or occupancy permit without payment, the TSDC liability shall survive and be a personal obligation of the permittee.

D. Intentional failure to pay the charge within 60 days of the due date shall result in a penalty equal to 50 percent of the charge. Interest shall accrue from the 60-day point at the legal rate established by statute.

E. In addition to an action at law and any statutory rights, the City may:

1. Refuse to issue any permits of any kind to the delinquent party for any development;

2. Refuse to honor any credits held by the delinquent party for any development;

3. Condition any development approval of the delinquent party on payment in full, including penalties and interest;

4. Revoke any previous deferrals issued to the delinquent party, in which case the amount immediately shall be due, and refuse to issue any new deferrals;

5. Withdraw the amount due, including penalties and interest, from any offset account held by the jurisdiction for the delinquent party.

F. For purposes of this section, delinquent party shall include any person controlling a delinquent corporate permittee, including but not limited to any partnership, limited liability company or joint venture and, conversely, any corporation or entity controlled by a delinquent individual permittee.

G. The Finance Director is authorized to take the following actions with respect to TSDCs, penalties, and interest:

1. To take any action described in this section to collect and enforce the charge, penalties, and interest.

2. To initiate legal action or exercise any other statutory right to collect any delinquent charge, penalties and interest under this chapter upon approval of the City Council, as applicable, or in accordance with any general city collection policy.

3. If the Finance Director and the City Attorney determine that the delinquent charges for any development are for any reason wholly uncollectible, the Finance Director and City Attorney may request, in writing, to the City Council for an order directing that the charges be cancelled. The City Council, when so requested, may in its discretion order and direct the Finance Director to cancel such uncollectible charges. [BC 3.07.090, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.110 Exemptions.

The uses listed and described in this subsection are exempt, either partially or fully, from payment of the TSDC. Any applicant seeking an exemption under this section shall request that exemption, in writing, no later than the time of application for the building permit. Where development consists of only part of one or more of the uses described in this section, only that/those portion(s) of the development that qualify under this section are eligible for an exemption. The balance of the development that does not qualify for any exemption under this section shall be subject to the full TSDC.

A. Remodeling or replacement of existing structures (including mobile homes) except to the extent that the remodeling or replacement creates demands on the transportation system greater than those of the existing use of the property.

B. Structures and uses established and legally existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from a system development charge to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land, as it constituted on that date.

C. Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

D. Temporary uses which do not exceed 90 days in a calendar year.

E. Temporary construction facilities as determined by the Finance Director. [BC 3.07.110, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.120 Credits.

The Finance Director may approve administrative rules for the implementation of the credit policies of this chapter. 

A. A TSDC shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given in an amount equal to the existing TSDC as applied to the preexisting type and level use. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated TSDC. No refund or credit shall be made on account of such credit.

B. An improvement fee credit shall be given for the cost of a bonded or completed qualified public improvement associated with a development upon acceptance by the City of the improvement, subject to the following conditions:

1. Such credit shall be only for the actual, estimated, or agreed-upon cost of that portion of such improvement that the adopted methodology includes in the cost basis of the improvement fee. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement is a qualified public improvement per BC 3.07.080. The request for credit shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the City.

2. When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project receiving development approval, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project, if any.

3. Credits shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit is given, after which the credit shall expire, and be null and void, without the need for the city to take any further action.

4. Credit shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another.

5. Credits may be transferable from one development to another within the geographic area subject to the TSDC.

6. Credits for any TSDC, or for the Washington County transportation development tax, shall only be used for obligations relating to the charge and capital improvement type for which the credit was issued.

C. Reimbursement in excess of credits shall be granted for that portion of the actual, estimated, or agreed-upon cost of a qualified public improvement that exceeds the improvement fee credit granted under subsection B of this section, subject to the following conditions:

1. In no event shall the sum of improvement fee credits and reimbursement in excess of credits exceed actual costs incurred by the developer.

2. Reimbursement in excess of credits is subject to budgetary appropriation, but in no event will reimbursement be made later than 15 years from the time that the qualified public improvement is accepted by the City. [BC 3.07.120, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.130 Redeeming Credits.

A developer can redeem credits for development within the City subject to the following constraints. Any credit must be redeemed not later than the issuance of the building permit or, if deferral was permitted, issuance of the occupancy permit. The applicant is responsible for presentation of any credit prior to issuance of the building or occupancy permit. Under no circumstances shall any credit redemption be considered after issuance of a building permit or, if deferral was granted, issuance of an occupancy permit. [BC 3.07.130, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.140 Notice.

The City shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for any TSDC. Written notice will be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to establish or modify a system development charge. The methodology supporting the system development charge shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the City.

The City may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, the City must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. [BC 3.07.140, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.150 Segregation and Use of Revenue.

All funds derived from the TSDC described in this chapter are to be segregated by accounting practices from all funds of the City. Those TSDCs collected under this chapter will be used for no purpose other than set forth in BC 3.07.050.

The Finance Director shall provide the Council with an annual accounting, by January 1st of each year, for TSDCs showing the total amount of revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account in the previous fiscal year. A list of the amount spent on each projected funded in whole or in part with TSDC revenues shall be included in the annual accounting. [BC 3.07.150, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.160 Refunds.

Refunds may be given by the Finance Director upon finding that there was a clerical error in the calculation of a system development charge.

Refunds are not allowed for failure to timely claim credit or for failure to timely seek an alternative method of system development charge calculation at the time of submission of an application for a building permit. [BC 3.07.160, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.170 Appeal Procedure.

A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of TSDC revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council by filing a written request with the Finance Director describing with particularity the decision of the Finance Director and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine whether the Finance Director’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decisions. If the Council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of TSDC revenues, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. The decision of the Council shall be reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise.

A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council under this chapter shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption. A person shall contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100 and not otherwise. [BC 3.07.170, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.180 Severability.

The provisions of this chapter are severable, and it is the intention to confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for. If any clause, section or provision of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of this chapter shall be in full force and effect and be valid as if such invalid portion thereof had not been incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the Council’s intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such an unconstitutional provision not been included herein. [BC 3.07.180, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.190 Classification.

The Council determines that any fee, rates or charges imposed by this chapter are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. [BC 3.07.190, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


3.07.200 Penalty.

Violations of this chapter are subject to civil penalties of no more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. [BC 3.07.200, added by Ordinance No. 4661, 7/14/15]


Chapter 3.08 ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF INSTALLING AND FINANCING WATER AND SEWER LINES

Sections:

3.08.005    Definitions.

3.08.010    Interpretation.

3.08.015    Extension of Service.

3.08.020    Deferred Assessments.

3.08.025    Deferred Payment and Refunds.

3.08.030    Conditions.


3.08.005 Definitions.

For the purpose of BC 3.08.005 through 3.08.030 the following mean:

Full cost – Shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of property acquisition and condemnation proceedings; and engineering, advertising, notice, survey, materials, labor, contracts, equipment, supervision, inspection and administrative expenses, including, but not limited to any interim interest costs the City incurs; and any other necessary expenses.

Sewer – Sanitary and storm sewers.


3.08.010 Interpretation.

The purpose of BC 3.08.005 through 3.08.030 is to provide alternative procedures to those now provided by ordinance or law for the extension of water and sewer lines.


3.08.015 Extension of Service.

When the Council considers it necessary to extend a sewer or water trunk or lateral line to serve property inside or outside the City, the Council may provide for the extension by:

A. Formation of a local improvement assessment district;

B. A contract with all or any of the property owners to be benefited by the extension; or

C. Any other method which the Council deems in the best interests of the City. The construction work may be done in whole or in part by the City, by contract, by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. The Council may authorize payment by the City of all or any part of the costs of the extension.


3.08.020 Deferred Assessments.

If a local improvement assessment district is formed for sewer or water line extension purposes, the Council may provide for deferred payment of assessments on benefited properties in accordance with applicable Code provisions of the City as now or hereafter enacted.


3.08.025 Deferred Payment and Refunds.

A. If the sewer or water line extension is provided for other than by the formation of a local improvement assessment district, the Council may provide for deferred payments in the form of additional connection fees or charges and refunds of pro rata portions of the costs to the person or persons originally undertaking the payment of the costs. The deferred payments and refunds shall be made as provided in this section.

B. If a person agrees to pay all or part of the costs of extending a sewer or water trunk or lateral line to serve the person’s property, and the extension of the line would be across or adjacent to property other than that person’s own so that sewer or water service for either domestic, commercial or industrial use is available to such other property without further extension of the line, the City shall require the owners of the other property, prior to providing sewer or water service to property, to refund to the person required to pay the costs of extending the sewer or water line a pro rata portion of the costs of the extension. The amount to be refunded, including interest charges, shall be determined by the Council, and the determination shall be final. The right to a refund extends to the City to the extent that the City pays all or part of the original cost of the extension. The right of the City to require refunds shall not continue for more than ten years after the installation of the water or sewer line and apportionment of the cost by the Council. The Council may authorize, subject to conditions and terms as it considers necessary, single-family residences, existing at the time construction begins, to hook up to the water or sewer line, for domestic use only, without requiring a refund to be made at that time.

C. When an extension is completed to the city engineer’s satisfaction, the city engineer shall file a certificate of completion and approval with the city recorder. The certificate shall also contain the full cost of the extension and what the city engineer considers to be a just apportionment of the cost. The city recorder shall forward the certificate to the Council as soon as possible after filing by the city engineer.

D. The Council shall, by ordinance, make a determination as to the properties benefited by the extension and shall apportion the cost among such properties as it considers reasonable. Prior to the apportionment of cost, the Council may provide for a public hearing and notice as it considers appropriate. The ordinance shall be filed with the Director of Records and Elections of Washington County and mailed or delivered to the property owners involved.

E. Property owners required to pay a proportionate share of the cost of the extension may pay their share:

1. in full on completion of the extension;

2. in installments as may be approved by the Council; or

3. in a lump sum at the time of connection to the extension. Interest shall be charged on all amounts not paid within 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance containing the apportionment of costs. Unless otherwise provided by the ordinance, the interest rate shall be the rate established by resolution pursuant to BC 1.01.020 or at the interest rate established for the last Bancroft Bond sale, whichever is higher.

F. The proportionate share of costs for extensions shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any service connection fees or charges now or hereafter imposed by the City.


3.08.030 Conditions.

Nothing in BC 3.08.005 through 3.08.030 shall be construed to require the City to provide water or sewer service to property outside the City. In addition to payment of the proportionate share of costs of an extension, the City may require a property owner to consent to annexation and may impose any other conditions the Council considers necessary for the best interests of the City prior to authorizing a connection to the City’s water or sewer systems.


Chapter 3.10 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY

Sections:

3.10.010    Property Acquisition Generally.

3.10.015    Reports to Council.

3.10.020    Authority to Execute Purchase and Sale Agreements and Option Agreements.

3.10.025    Expenditure Limits.

3.10.030    Repealed.

3.10.035    Repealed.


3.10.010 Property Acquisition Generally.

The City may acquire real property as needed for public purposes or as desirable to guide the development of the City, at times in partnership with the Beaverton Urban Redevelopment Agency or with other public and private entities. The Mayor, the City Council and City staff may develop procedures that result in the selection of property for acquisition on advantageous terms, subject to Council scrutiny. [BC 3.10.010, amended by Ordinance No. 4750, 1/8/19]


3.10.015 Reports to Council.

A. City staff will provide City Council semi-annual updates regarding real estate acquisition activities, opportunities, and priorities. 

B. In addition to the updates described in subsection A of this section, City staff will discuss specific property acquisition activity with the City Council as needed to keep the Council informed. [BC 3.10.015, amended by Ordinance No. 4750, 1/8/19]


3.10.020 Authority to Execute Purchase and Sale Agreements and Option Agreements.

The Mayor is authorized to execute purchase and sale agreements and option agreements without specific Council authorization, so long as such agreements include a statement that without Council approval within a specified period prior to closing, the agreement will terminate without further obligation on the part of the City. [BC 3.10.020, amended by Ordinance No. 4750, 1/8/19]


3.10.025 Expenditure Limits.

Absent Council’s prior approval, the sum of site control expenditures and due diligence expenditures shall not exceed the amount specified in Beaverton Purchasing Code Section 46-0200.A.1 as the limit of the Mayor’s contracting authority. [BC 3.10.025, amended by Ordinance No. 4750, 1/8/19]


3.10.030 Commencement of Condemnation Action.

[BC 3.10.030, repealed by Ordinance No. 4750, 1/8/19]


3.10.035 Abandonment of Proceedings.

[BC 3.10.035, repealed by Ordinance No. 4750, 1/8/19]


Chapter 3.11 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PROCEDURE

Sections:

3.11.010    Purpose.

3.11.015    Definitions.

3.11.020    Policy.

3.11.025    Appeals Board Created.

3.11.030    Powers and Duties.

3.11.035    Procedure for Appeals.

3.11.040    Reconsideration; Judicial Review.


3.11.010 Purpose.

The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies of 1970 (Public Law 91-646, January 2, 1971) and ORS 281.045 to 281.105 require the City to establish a procedure that will assure that individuals, partnerships, companies, corporations or any other legal entity are afforded an opportunity to have the City’s determination as to any displaced person’s eligibility for payment or the amount of the relocation payment reviewed by the City. The City will use a three member appeals board designated by the Council to make this determination.

The eligibility of a person and the amount of relocation assistance will be determined by the rules established under the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, ORS 281.045 to 281.105, and the Right-of-Way Manual of the State of Oregon, Department of Transportation, Official Publication 74-4, Chapter Six.


3.11.015 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 3.11.010 through 3.11.040 the following mean:

Person – Means an individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or any other legal entity, including any receiver, trustee, assignee or similar representative.

Displaced person – A “displaced person” is any person who meets the criteria of A and B, below:

A. 1. Is in occupancy at the initiation of negotiations for the acquisition of the real property or other real property on which the person conducts a business or farm operation, in whole or in part; or

2. Is in occupancy at the time the person is given a written notice by the City, its agents or representatives that it is their intent to acquire the property by a given date; and

B. 1. Moves from the real property or moves the person’s personal property from the real property or other real property on which the person conducts a business or farm operation subsequent to the earliest date established above; and

2. The real property is subsequently acquired; or if the move occurs after a written order to vacate is issued, the occupant is eligible even though the property is not acquired.

Notice of benefit – “Notice of benefit” is notice received by a person from the City, its agents or representatives, setting forth or denying the right to or amount of benefits to be received pursuant to the Relocation Assistance Act of Oregon (ORS 281.045 to 281.105) and Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970.

The notice of benefit shall indicate that any person aggrieved by the City’s determination shall have the right to appeal that determination in accordance with the City’s procedure for Relocation Appeals.


3.11.020 Policy.

Any person who is aggrieved by the City’s determination as to the applicant’s eligibility for payment or to the amount of the relocation payment may appeal that determination in accordance with these procedures. These procedures effectuate the City’s policy that:

A. Each person who appeals has the opportunity for oral presentation;

B. Each appeal will be decided promptly and the applicant informed of the decision in writing; and

C. Each appeal decision will include a statement of the reasons upon which it is based.


3.11.025 Appeals Board Created.

There is hereby created an Appeals Board which shall consist of one representative from the Oregon Department of Transportation, one representative from the City’s purchasing department, and one representative from the City’s engineering department.


3.11.030 Powers and Duties.

The Appeals Board shall have the following powers and duties:

A. Hear and determine appeals pursuant to this procedure.

B. Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be necessary to achieve the purposes of this procedure.


3.11.035 Procedure for Appeals.

A. Any person determined to be ineligible to receive a specific relocation assistance benefit or any person disputing the amount of specific relocation assistance benefits must file an appeal within 90 days after notice by the City, its agents or representatives.

B. The request for an appeal hearing and all other communications with the City or Appeals Board shall be in writing and shall be directed to the following person at the City:

City Engineer City of Beaverton P.O. Box 4755 Beaverton, Oregon 97076

C. Hearings will be granted on all requests that are postmarked no later than 12:00 a.m. of the 90th day following the mailing date of the notice of benefit. The hearing shall be in substantial compliance with ORS Chapter 183.

D. When a person files a request for a hearing with the City, an informal conference will be scheduled within 30 days with the person and the City’s project manager for the project involved. At the informal conference the person shall be permitted to make an oral presentation and to supply the project manager with any information the person deems relevant.

E. Within 10 days after the informal conference, the person requesting the hearing shall be mailed written notice of the results of the conference. The results shall include a statement of the reasons upon which the decision is based. Should the person requesting the hearing not agree with the results of the informal conference, the person shall so notify the City in writing within 10 days after the date notification was mailed, and the City shall set a date for a formal hearing with the Appeals Board which shall be within 20 days after the person informs the City that the results of the informal conference are not acceptable.

F. The City shall send notice of the time and place for the formal hearing to the person requesting the hearing, to the project manager and to the Appeals Board. Notice to the person requesting the hearing shall be by mail to the return address stated on the notice requesting a hearing; all other notices may be by any means reasonably calculated to give actual notice. Notice may also be given to such other persons as the project manager or Appeals Board may determine to be interested persons.

G. The person requesting the hearing and the project manager or their representatives may make argument, submit testimony, cross-examine witnesses and submit rebuttal evidence on the pertinent issues.

H. All hearings shall be recorded in a manner which will allow for written transcription to be made, and all materials submitted at the hearing shall be retained by the hearings officer for a period of three years.

I. Failure of the person requesting the hearing to appeal at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.

J. After the hearing the Appeals Board shall issue and mail a copy of its final order determining the question within 15 days from the date of the hearing, or any continuance thereof not to exceed 15 days, to the person(s) requesting the hearing. The final order shall include a statement of the reasons upon which the final order is based.


3.11.040 Reconsideration; Judicial Review.

A. The Appeals Board may reconsider a final order upon the filing of a written petition for reconsideration with the City. A petition for reconsideration must be filed within 15 days after issuance of the order.

B. The City shall notify the Appeals Board that a petition for reconsideration has been filed. If no action is taken by the Appeals Board within 15 days after the petition is filed, the petition shall be deemed denied. If the petition is allowed by vote of the Appeals Board, a hearing on the reconsideration shall be held. The City shall notify the petitioner and all parties to the original hearing of the time and place of the reconsideration.

C. The petitioner may make an oral presentation at the hearing. The Appeals Board may in its discretion allow new evidence.

D. The Appeals Board shall issue a new order which shall include a statement of the reasons upon which the new order is based. Only those Appeals Board members who voted in the original hearing on the appeal may vote on whether to allow a petition for reconsideration.

E. Review of the action of the Appeals Board shall be taken solely and exclusively in the manner set forth in ORS 183.480. [BC 3.11.010 through 3.11.040, added by Ordinance No. 3319, 4/19/83]


Chapter 3.16 ACQUISITION OF ART

Sections:

3.16.010    Purpose.

3.16.015    Definitions.

3.16.020    Dedication.

3.16.025    Selection Committee.

3.16.030    Administration and Authority.

3.16.035    Phased Projects.

3.16.040    Ownership.


3.16.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this section and the policy of the City that each major city construction project which involves the construction or alteration of certain city facilities shall have an appropriate display of works of art integrated into the project. [BC 3.16.010, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


3.16.015 Definitions.

As used in BC 3.16.010 through 3.16.040, the following mean:

Construction cost – The actual construction cost, excluding engineering costs and administrative costs, costs for fees and permits, and indirect costs, such as interest during construction, advertising, legal fees and the like.

Construction or alteration – Construction, rehabilitation, renovation, remodeling or improvement.

City facility – All City buildings and parks, but does not include the construction of service facilities not normally visited by the public, such as maintenance sheds, storage buildings, bridges and the like, or improvement projects and facilities such as streets, sewer, water or similar facilities or projects.

Major City construction project – A construction project which involves the construction or alteration of a City facility with an estimated construction cost of $50,000 or more.

Works of art – All forms of original creations of visual art including, but not limited to, the following:

A. Painting of all media, including both portable and permanently fixed works, such as murals;

B. Sculpture which may be in the round, base relief, high-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic and others, in any material or combination of materials;

C. Other visual media including, but not limited to, prints, drawings, stained glass, calligraphy, mosaics, photography, clay, fiber and textiles, wood, metals, plastics, or other materials or combination of materials, or crafts or artifacts. [BC 3.16.015, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


3.16.020 Dedication.

One percent (1%) of the construction cost of a major City construction project which involves the construction or alteration of a City facility shall be set aside for the acquisition of works of art; which works of art shall be displayed in, upon, adjacent to or in close proximity to the City facility which is the subject of the project; except that if it would be inappropriate to display the works of art in that location, said one percent (1%) shall be used for the acquisition of works of art for display in, upon, adjacent to or in close proximity to other city facilities. [BC 3.16.020, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


3.16.025 Selection Committee.

A selection committee which shall recommend to the Beaverton Arts Commission or, in the event the Beaverton Arts Commission is not in existence, to the City Council, the selection of an artist, a work of art or other expenditure of funds dedicated pursuant to BC 3.16.020, shall be established specifically for each major city construction project, in accordance with the following guidelines:

A. Membership. The selection committee shall consist of the architect or designer for each major city construction project, three professional artists and one resident of the City who is not a member of the Beaverton Arts Commission. The above-mentioned three professional artists and the resident of the City shall be selected for each major City construction project by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, the Beaverton Arts Commission. For the purposes of this subsection, professional artists shall mean practitioners in the visual arts, generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent and recognized ability who produces works of art, as defined in BC 3.16.015.

B. Quorum and voting for selection committee. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the selection committee and a majority of those members present and voting shall be required for any decision.

C. Meetings to be public. All meetings of the selection committee shall be conducted in accordance with the Oregon Public Meetings Law.

D. Criteria for selection committee decisions. Selection of works of art by the selection committee shall be by open competition. In making its decision a selection committee shall consider and base its decision upon:

1. the quality of past works or a particular work of art of the artist;

2. the appropriateness of the proposal or the work of art for the particular city facility which is the subject of the major city construction project; and

3. the materials, construction, durability, maintenance, public access and public safety. [BC 3.16.025, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


3.16.030 Administration and Authority.

The Beaverton Arts Commission shall adopt procedures and guidelines consistent with the provisions of BC 3.16.010 through 3.16.040 to administer the acquisition and display of works of art. The decision of the Beaverton Arts Commission as to the selection, acquisition, and display of works of art shall be final. [BC 23.16.030, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


3.16.035 Phased Projects.

Unless the Council decides otherwise, for a major city construction project which will be completed in phases, the dedication of funds in accordance with BC 3.16.020, above, the one percent set aside for the acquisition of works of art shall be limited to the estimated construction cost of the specific phase of the major city construction project. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Council from deciding otherwise, including, but not limited to, deciding to set aside the entire dedication from the funds of a particular phase of the major city construction project. [BC 3.16.035, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


3.16.040 Ownership.

All works of art acquired pursuant to BC 3.16.010 through 3.16.040 shall be acquired in the name of the City of Beaverton, Oregon, and title shall vest in the City of Beaverton, Oregon. [BC 3.16.040, added by Ordinance No. 3429, 1/29/85]


Chapter 3.20 NONPROFIT CORPORATION LOW-INCOME HOUSING TAX EXEMPTIONS

Sections:

3.20.010    Definitions.

3.20.020    Nonprofit Corporation Low-Income Housing Exemption; Criteria.

3.20.030    Application for Exemption.

3.20.040    Determination of Eligibility for Exemption; Notice to County Assessor.

3.20.050    Council Approval for an Extension of Time.

3.20.060    Termination of Exemption.

3.20.070    Delegation of Administrative Authority.


3.20.010 Definitions.

A. “Debarment” means action taken by a debarring official under Federal or State law to exclude a contractor from government contracting and government-approved subcontracting for a reasonable, specified period.

B. “Governing body” means the Beaverton City Council.

C. “Low-income” means:

1. Income at or below 60 percent of the area median income as determined by the Oregon Housing Stability Council based on information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; or

2.    a. For the initial year that persons occupy property for which an application for exemption is filed under ORS 307.545, income at or below 60 percent of the area median income as determined by the Oregon Housing Stability Council based on information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and

b. For every subsequent consecutive year that the persons occupy the property, income at or below 80 percent of the area median income as determined by the Oregon Housing Stability Council based on information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. [BC 3.20.010, added by Ordinance No. 4619, 8/13/13; amended by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15; amended by Ordinance No. 4760, 3/20/19]


3.20.020 Nonprofit Corporation Low-Income Housing Exemption; Criteria.

A. The governing body shall use the following criteria to determine whether property is exempt from taxation as provided in this section:

1. The property is owned or being purchased by a corporation described in Section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code that is exempt from income taxation under 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.

2. Upon liquidation, the assets of the corporation are required to be applied first in payment of all outstanding obligations, and the balance remaining, in cash and in kind, to be distributed to corporations exempt from taxation and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes or to the State of Oregon.

3. The property is:

a. Occupied by low-income persons; or

b. Held for the purpose of developing low-income housing for a period of not more than six years. If the corporation requires additional time to develop the property for low-income housing and still seeks an exemption under this chapter, the corporation shall seek approval from the governing body for an extension of time in the manner described in BC 3.20.050.

4. The property or portion of the property receiving the exemption is actually and exclusively used for the purposes described in Section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code.

5. The corporation:

a. Is not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, or declared ineligible by any Federal or State agency;

b. Has not, within the three-year period preceding the application, been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against it for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public transaction or contract under a public transaction; or been convicted of any Federal or State statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification, destruction of records, making false statements, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty; and

c. Is not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a Federal, State, or local government entity with commission of any of the offenses enumerated in subsection (A)(5)(b) of this section. 

B. In applying the criteria identified in subsection A of this section to determine whether the property qualifies for exemption, the governing body may consider any information provided by the corporation regardless of whether that information was included in the application or was otherwise provided by the corporation. If the corporation does not complete the application as provided under BC 3.20.030, however, then the governing body may reject the application. 

C. For purposes of subsection A of this section, a corporation that only has a leasehold interest in property is deemed to be a purchaser of that property if:

1. The corporation is obligated under the terms of the lease to pay the ad valorem taxes on the real and personal property used in this activity on that property; or

2. The rent payable by the corporation has been established to reflect the savings resulting from the exemption from taxation.

D. A partnership shall be treated the same as a corporation to which this section applies if the corporation is:

1. A general partner of the partnership; and

2. Responsible for the day to day operation of the property that is the subject of the exemption. [BC 3.20.020, added by Ordinance No. 4619, 8/13/13; amended by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15]


3.20.030 Application for Exemption.

A. To seek the exemption provided by BC 3.20.020, the corporation shall file an application for exemption with the City for each assessment year the corporation wants the exemption. 

B. The application shall be filed before March 1st of the assessment year for which the exemption is applied for, unless the property designated is acquired after March 1st but before July 1st. If the property designated is acquired after March 1st but before July 1st, the claim for that year shall be filed within 30 days after the date of acquisition. 

C. The application shall include the following information as applicable:

1. A description of the property for which the exemption is requested;

2. A description of the charitable purpose of the project and whether all or a portion of the property is being used for that purpose;

3. A certification of income levels of low-income occupants;

4. A description of how the tax exemption will benefit project residents;

5. A description of the development of the property if the property is being held for future low-income housing development;

6. A declaration that the corporation has been granted exemption from income taxation under Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code as an organization described in Section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code; and

7. A certification that the corporation meets the criteria provided for in BC 3.20.020(A)(5).

D. The applicant shall verify the information in the application by oath or affirmation. [BC 3.20.030, added by Ordinance No. 4619, 8/13/13; amended by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15]


3.20.040 Determination of Eligibility for Exemption; Notice to County Assessor.

A. Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section, within 30 days of the filing of an application under BC 3.20.030, the governing body shall determine whether the applicant qualifies for the exemption granted under BC 3.20.020. If the governing body determines the applicant qualifies, then the governing body shall certify to the County Assessor that all or a portion of the property shall be exempt from taxation under the levy of the certifying governing body.

B. If the governing body has previously determined that the applicant qualified for the exemption granted under this chapter, then the governing body shall use the criteria that were in place when the applicant was first granted the exemption for the property each year the applicant reapplies for the exemption. 

C. Upon receipt of certification under subsection A of this section, the County Assessor shall exempt the property from taxation to the extent certified by the governing body. [BC 3.20.040, added by Ordinance No. 4619, 8/13/13; amended by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15]


3.20.050 Council Approval for an Extension of Time.

A. If a corporation requires additional time to develop the property for low-income housing and seeks to extend the property tax exemption previously approved by the governing body, then it shall provide a written request to the governing body and include supporting documentation with the request. The written request shall be on a form supplied by the City.

B. If the corporation submits a written request with supporting documentation, the governing body shall review the request. The governing body may use any of the following factors to determine whether to grant or deny an extension to the corporation including, but not limited to:

1. Whether the corporation has created any designs for the proposed development of low-income housing on the property;

2. Whether the corporation has applied for, or received, any permits relating to development of low-income housing on the property;

3. Whether the corporation has applied for, or received, any private or public funding for development of low-income housing on the property, including any tax credits;

4. Whether the corporation has contracted with another party to begin development of low-income housing on the property;

5. Whether the corporation has made any site improvements towards development of low-income housing on the property; or

6. Whether there was any uncontrollable or unforeseeable act or circumstance beyond the corporation’s reasonable control that caused or is causing the delay in developing the low-income housing on the property.

C. The governing body shall determine whether to grant or deny an extension within 30 days of receiving the written request and supporting documentation from the corporation. [BC 3.20.050, added by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15]


3.20.060 Termination of Exemption.

A. If the City determines that property that has received an exemption under this chapter in anticipation of future development of low-income housing is being used for any purposes other than the provision of low-income housing, or that any provision of this chapter is not being complied with, the City shall give notice of the proposed termination of the exemption to the owner by mailing the notice to the last known address of the owner, and to every known lender by mailing the notice to the last known address of every known lender. The notice shall state the reasons for the proposed termination and require the owner to appear at a specified time, not less than 20 days after mailing the notice, to show cause, if any, why the exemption should not be terminated.

B. If the owner fails to appear and show cause why the exemption should not be terminated, the City shall notify every known lender, and shall allow any lender not less than 30 days after the date the notice of failure to appear and show cause is mailed to cure any noncompliance or to provide adequate assurance to the governing body that all noncompliance shall be remedied.

C. If the owner fails to appear and show cause why the exemption should not be terminated, and the lender fails to cure or give adequate assurance of the cure of noncompliance, the governing body shall adopt a resolution stating its findings that terminate the exemption. A copy of the resolution shall be filed within 10 days after its adoption with the County Assessor, and a copy shall be sent to the owner at the owner’s last known address and to the lender at the last known address of the lender within 10 days of its adoption.

D. Upon the County Assessor’s receipt of the governing body’s termination findings:

1. The exemption granted to the housing unit or portion under this chapter shall terminate immediately, without right of notice or appeal;

2. The property shall be assessed and taxed as other property similarly situated is assessed and taxed;

3. Notwithstanding ORS 311.235, there shall be added to the general property tax roll, for the property in question, for the tax year next following the presentation or discovery, to be collected and distributed in the same manner as other real property tax, an amount equal to the difference between the taxes assessed against the property and the taxes that would have been assessed against the property had it not been exempt under this chapter for each of the years, not to exceed the last 10 years, during which the property was exempt from taxation under this chapter.

E. The assessment and tax rolls shall show potential additional tax liability for each property granted an exemption under this chapter because the property is being held for future development of low-income housing.

F. Additional taxes collected under this section shall be deemed to have been imposed in the year to which the additional taxes relate. [BC 3.20.050, added by Ordinance No. 4619, 8/13/13; amended by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15. Formerly 3.20.050]


3.20.070 Delegation of Administrative Authority.

The governing body hereby delegates to the Mayor or his/her designee all authority necessary to make all determinations and otherwise administer the provisions of this chapter, excepting determinations and actions required to be made or taken by the governing body pursuant to BC 3.20.040, 3.20.050, and 3.20.060. [BC 3.20.060, added by Ordinance No. 4619, 8/13/13; amended by Ordinance No. 4668, 12/1/15. Formerly 3.20.060]

 


Title 4 UTILITIES AND SANITATION

Chapters:

4.01    General Provisions

4.02    Water Service Regulation

4.04    Sewer Regulations

4.05    Sewer Repairs

4.06    Maintenance and Operation of Storm Water Drainage

4.07    Storm Drainage Charges

4.08    Solid Waste and Recycling

4.10    Cable Communications

4.15    Utility Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way

4.20    Telecommunications Service Providers


Chapter 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

4.01.010    Definitions.

4.01.015    Penalty.

4.01.100    Challenge to SDC Expenditure.

4.01.200    Installment Payments of SDC.


4.01.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

Consumer – The person occupying the premises or using the water supplied to the premises.

Customer – The actual person as shown in the records of the finance department who is responsible for paying any bills for water use or charges established pursuant to this chapter. Customer may include the consumer and always includes the owner of record of the property.

Mayor – The mayor or the mayor’s designee.

Systems Development Charge (SDC) – Has the meaning given to that term in ORS 223.299 (1989 version). [BC 4.01.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3787(1), 9/9/91]


4.01.015 Penalty.

Unless otherwise provided, any violation of this chapter is a Class 1 Civil Infraction and shall to be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050 (Civil Infractions Ordinance). In addition to any other remedy available to it, the City may deny any and all discretionary permits to a person or his or her agent or employee if any or all of a fee imposed for any aspect of property development or redevelopment or an installment payment of that fee is due the City from that person but is unpaid and delinquent. [BC 4.01.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3787(2), 9/9/91]


4.01.100 Challenge to SDC Expenditure.

A person who challenges the City’s expenditure of SDC revenue shall file the challenge in writing with the City Recorder stating the grounds for the challenge. A challenge to an SDC expenditure shall be void and of no legal effect if not received by the City within two years from the date of the first purchase order or other debt instrument executed by the City making all or part of that expenditure. On the City’s receipt of a valid challenge the Mayor or his/her designee shall investigate the matter and shall issue a formal determination of the validity of the expenditure in writing within 30 days from the date the challenge is received. The Mayor’s determination shall be final unless the person who filed the challenge appeals that determination in writing to the City Recorder no later than 14 days after the date of the Mayor’s determination. On receipt of a timely filed appeal the City Recorder shall set the matter for public hearing at the next available regular meeting of the City Council. The Council after public hearing shall affirm, reject or modify the Mayor’s determination based on the record made at the hearing by majority vote of those present; its vote on the matter shall be final. [BC 4.01.100, added by Ordinance No. 3787(3), 9/9/91]


4.01.200 Installment Payments of SDC.

A. Except where the Washington County Ordinance relating to a traffic impact fee provides otherwise, a person from whom an SDC in an amount not less than $500 is due and payable may apply to the City on or before the due date to pay same in equal semi annual installments with interest over a period not to exceed 10 years.

B. The Finance Director in his/her discretion shall determine from time to time the appropriate interest rate to be charged for such installment payments sufficient to recoup the city’s costs to administer the installment payment process and reflecting the present state of the local market for sale or guarantee of the payments receivable.

C. No application for installment payment financing of SDC shall be valid unless in writing on a City approved form, signed by the owner of the property on which the development subject to the SDC occurs or the owner’s agent with authority, submitted with a non-refundable application fee set by the Finance Director, and accompanied by written acknowledgment by any and all persons presently holding security interests in the same property that the City’s lien on the property for payment of the installments shall be prior and superior to any other lien. The Finance Director shall reject any application as to which the evidence available to him/her shows that the fair market value of the owner’s interest in the property free and clear of property taxes and all other existing liens and encumbrances does not equal or exceed the amount to be financed by the City.

D. Notwithstanding any other provision in Oregon law or this Code and in addition to any other remedy available to it, if any installment payment of principal or interest on an SDC is unpaid for more than 30 days after the due date, the City may declare the entire remaining balance of the SDC due and payable at once and if not so paid, may proceed to foreclose its lien on the property for that remaining balance. [BC 4.01.200, added by Ordinance No. 3787(4), 9/9/91]


Chapter 4.02 WATER SERVICE REGULATION

Sections:

4.02.010    Short Title.

4.02.020    Property Owner Responsible for All Charges.

4.02.025    Application for Connection or Discontinuance of Water Service.

4.02.030    Water Charges to Premises.

4.02.035    Installation of Services from Main to Property; Connection Permit and Payment of Fees Required.

4.02.036    Systems Development Charge.

4.02.040    Installation of Service Pipes: Domestic Service Size Requirement.

4.02.045    Separate Service to Each House or Premises.

4.02.050    Repair and Protection of Water Pipes.

4.02.055    Temporary Disconnection.

4.02.060    Outside Connection.

4.02.065    Fire Protection Service.

4.02.070    Jurisdiction, Maintenance and Repair of Service Connections.

4.02.075    Stop and Waste Cocks; Private Service Pipe Responsibility.

4.02.080    Use of Private Water and City Water.

4.02.085    Access to Premises for Inspection.

4.02.090    Use of Fire Hydrants.

4.02.095    Permit to Use Water from Fire Hydrant.

4.02.100    Water for Building Purposes.

4.02.105    Ownership, Damage and Recording of Meters.

4.02.110    Service Outside the City.

4.02.115    Testing Meters.

4.02.120    Payment and Collection of Water Charges.

4.02.125    Proration of Monthly Charges.

4.02.130    Meter Reading Schedule.

4.02.135    Other Supplier’s Charges for Water.

4.02.140    Penalty for Turning Water On or Off Without Authority.

4.02.145    Adjustments and Refunds.

4.02.150    Rates for Premises Within the City.

4.02.155    Rates for Premises Outside the City.

4.02.160    Cross Connection Control Requirements.

4.02.165    Air Gap Separation and Backflow Prevention Device Assembly Testing Program.

4.02.170    Premises Without Piped-in Water.

4.02.175    Separating Use of Water and Authorization of Installation and Use of Master Meter System.

4.02.180    Emergency Restrictions on Use of Water.

4.02.185    Water Service Termination.


4.02.010 Short Title.

BC 4.02.010 through 4.02.185 shall be known and may be cited as the “Water Service Regulation Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this ordinance”.


4.02.020 Property Owner Responsible for All Charges.

A. The property owner of record shall be responsible for the payment of all water and sewer charges and fees prescribed in this chapter. If the property is rented and the renter fails to pay the charges, the city shall submit the bill to the owner. Water shall not again be furnished to the premises and/or the consumer who used the water services for which payment has not been made, until all outstanding obligations for water supplied to the premises have been paid in full.

B. Whenever a customer has tendered a check which is returned three times in a two-year period, the city may require the customer to pay a $50 deposit and any outstanding water charges. If the customer’s water service has already been shut off, the water service will not be restored until the customer has paid the deposit and any outstanding charges. If the customer is still receiving water service, and refuses to pay the deposit and any outstanding charges, then the city may terminate water service in accordance with BC 4.02.185.

C. The security deposit is refundable if:

1. The customer has kept account payments current for a period of three years and is not currently delinquent in payments; or

2. the water service is finally terminated and further water service will not be provided to the customer and all charges and fees have been paid in full. [BC 4.02.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3371, 5/22/84; Ordinance No. 3428, 1/22/85; Ordinance No. 3472, 10/8/85]


4.02.025 Application for Connection or Discontinuance of Water Service.

Applications for permits to connect premises with the city water system or requests to turn water on or off at any premises already served by the city water system shall in all cases be made in writing at the city, and be signed by the owner or agent of the owner of the premises served or to be served. Applicants must agree to conform to the provisions of this code, city ordinances and regulations concerning the use of water.


4.02.030 Water Charges to Premises.

All charges for furnishing water within the city and to premises outside the city served by the city water system shall be billed to the premises where the water is supplied unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner.


4.02.035 Installation of Services from Main to Property; Connection Permit and Payment of Fees Required.

A. No service connection of less than 3/4 inch in size shall be installed. The installation of all domestic service connections shall include:

1. the construction of a city approved concrete meter box;

2. purchase and installation of the meter; and

3. connection from the water main to:

a. the nearest property line, or

b. the street side of the sidewalk, or

c. another location appropriate under the particular circumstances, to be determined by the city.

B. No person shall connect any building or structure to the municipal water system of the city unless and until the charges and fees authorized in subsection C below have been paid and a connection permit issued.

C. The Council by ordinance shall establish a systems development charge for potable water and the methodology supporting that charge, and by resolution may establish a connection fee, meter installation fee and any other appropriate fees and charges. [BC 4.02.035, amended by Ordinance No. 3787(7), 9/9/91; Ordinance No. 3911, 8/22/94]


4.02.036 Systems Development Charge.

A. There is imposed on the act of development or redevelopment of property in the City a systems development charge (SDC) for connection to the City’s domestic water supply, due and payable at the time of application for a building permit for that (re)development.

B. The Council adopts that certain methodology for computation of a domestic water systems development charge as is set out in the report by Red Oak Consulting dated December 18, 2008, incorporated by this reference. The SDC for a single equivalent dwelling unit thus shall be $711.00 for a reimbursement fee, and $4,582 for an improvement fee, for a total of $5,293. The SDC for development served by water meters up to one and one-half inches in diameter shall be calculated by multiplying those amounts by the equivalent dwelling units of water that may be supplied by those larger meters.

C. The increases in the SDC to correspond to construction cost indices as recommended in that report shall be implemented as follows: Effective on February 1, 2015, and on that date for each calendar year thereafter, the SDC shall be increased to reflect the total increase in the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for Seattle, Washington, for the period February of the preceding year through February of the then current year.

D. The charge for water meters two inches in diameter or larger shall be estimated at the time the SDC is due based on anticipated water usage, computed as set out in the Red Oak Consulting Report at page 3. The SDC for water meters two inches in diameter or larger shall be recalculated and the difference shall be immediately due and payable by the property owner on the City’s demand whenever actual water usage during any 24 successive calendar months exceeds 110 percent of the estimated usage on which the SDC payable for that meter first was estimated. Failure to pay the difference between the estimated and recalculated charge shall constitute cause for termination of the domestic water service to the premises served by the meter.

E. The Council may grant credits against the domestic water conveyance systems development charge imposed by this chapter for qualified public improvements as defined in ORS 223.304 on certification by the City Engineer that the improvement(s) qualifies for that credit.

F. This section shall take effect as to all complete applications for building permits for which a water SDC is payable that are received on and after July 1, 2014. [BC 4.02.036, added by Ordinance No. 3990, 7/15/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4195(1), 2/4/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4627, 1/14/14]


4.02.040 Installation of Service Pipes: Domestic Service Size Requirement.

A. Domestic water service lines connecting the premises to the water meter shall not be less then 3/4 inch in diameter and shall be of a material which complies with the requirements for such lines in the State of Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code.

B. Services from the property line to the wall of the building shall be laid with not less than 24 inches of cover below the surface of the graded ground. Pipes laid for lawn sprinkling systems must be installed so that the systems may be properly drained to avoid freezing. Connections for sprinkling systems or for other use shall be made from the water service pipe on the owner’s private property. No pipes shall be laid in sewer ditches.


4.02.045 Separate Service to Each House or Premises.

Upon the payment in advance of the regular charges required by BC 4.02.035, the City shall install the service from the water main and including the water meter, as described in BC 4.02.035 A for each house or other premises to be supplied with water. The City may require the owner of subdivided property to install water service to City-approved standards from the water main line to and including the meter box for each structure to be supplied with potable water in the subdivision. The water service so installed shall be publicly owned. The charges required of the developer under BC 4.02.035 of this code shall be adjusted in such case to reflect the reasonable value of such installation to the City. [BC 4.02.045, amended by Ordinance No. 3654, 3/6/89]


4.02.050 Repair and Protection of Water Pipes.

The City reserves the right at any time, without notice, to temporarily shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, or in emergency situations. The City shall not be responsible for any damage to property or persons, such as the bursting of boilers, the breaking of pipes or fixtures, or loss of income or any other consequential damage resulting from the discontinuance of service.


4.02.055 Temporary Disconnection.

Any property owner who wishes to discontinue the use of all water supplied to the premises must file a written request for shutoff with the City. The water shall then be turned off and a bill rendered for water consumed to the date of service discontinuance. Service may be resumed on written request providing payment of water bills has been made. No charge shall be made for shutoff or resumption of service.


4.02.060 Outside Connection.

No faucets shall be allowed on the outside of any building except hose connections, which must be controlled with a separate stop and waste cock. No hose connections for domestic use will be allowed. All water pipes must be extended into the building.


4.02.065 Fire Protection Service.

Fire protection pipes to be used in case of fire will be allowed within and without buildings on the following conditions:

A. When the owner of a building desires, or when the Building Code, Fire Code, or other City ordinance or Code provision requires a certain capacity pipe to supply water to an automatic fire sprinkler system the pipe shall be metered with an approved proportional meter or detector check meter at the property line.

B. The owner or agent of the building shall agree in writing that water supplied through this service will not be used for any purpose except extinguishing a fire. If it is found that connections other than for fire protection have been added to the system or that registration is recorded on the meter or detector check, the immediate installation of a compound meter will be required and installed by the City, and the cost of materials and labor will be borne by the property owner. [BC 4.02.065, amended by Ordinance No. 3788(1), 9/23/91]


4.02.070 Jurisdiction, Maintenance and Repair of Service Connections.

A. City Jurisdiction and Responsibilities. All mains, laterals, service connections and other parts of the system are under the exclusive control of the City. A private valve shall be installed between the meter and the premises served for the owner’s use. The City will maintain all service connections in good operating condition and will make all necessary inspections, repairs and replacements of meter and other parts of the service connection at the expense of the City.

B. Consumer’s Responsibilities. Each consumer is required to take all precautions to protect the connection through which consumer’s premises is served from damage by freezing, hot water, traffic or malicious tampering. Damage resulting through lack of such precaution shall be charged against the owner of the property served.

C. Interference Prohibited. No person other than City personnel will be permitted to:

1. install, remove, alter or tamper with a meter or service connection, or;

2. interfere in any manner with a main, service pipe, meter or any other part of the system; or

3. turn the water on or off at the meter.


4.02.075 Stop and Waste Cocks; Private Service Pipe Responsibility.

A. A stop and waste cock approved by the City, by means of which the pipes in the building may be drained, shall be installed in all buildings or structures just inside the foundation wall in a convenient location. If the building is not provided with a basement, the stop and waste cock must be installed near the outside wall and protected by a suitable box.

B. All pipes from the meter to the premises must be installed in accordance with good engineering practices and maintained in good order by the consumer or owner. The consumer or owner will be held responsible for loss or damage occurring from the meter to and including the premises, resulting from leaks, freezing, hot water or otherwise.


4.02.080 Use of Private Water and City Water.

Premises using both a City water supply and a supply of water other than that furnished by the City water system may obtain water at metered rates only if there exists a backflow prevention device installed on the public supply as required under BC 4.02.160 of this Code, and if so, then only under the following conditions:

A. No physical connection, direct or indirect, shall exist or be made in any manner, even temporarily, between the city water supply and a private water supply.

B. If a connection is found to exist, or if a provision is made to connect the two systems by means of spacer or otherwise, the City water supply shall be discontinued.

C. Where service has been discontinued under this section, it shall not be resumed until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross connection has been completely and permanently severed. [BC 4.02.080, amended by Ordinance No. 3788(2), 9/23/91]


4.02.085 Access to Premises for Inspection.

A. Employees of the City shall have free access, at proper hours of the day, to all parts of building or premises for the purpose of inspecting the condition of the pipes, fixtures and other appurtenances and the manner in which the water is being used.

B. If access to the premises is refused, the City employee shall not inspect the premises until the employee has obtained an administrative search warrant for inspection of the premises pursuant to BC 2.04.102.


4.02.090 Use of Fire Hydrants.

No person shall operate, alter, remove, draw water from, disconnect, connect with or tamper in any manner with any fire hydrant owned or used by the City without first obtaining written permission from the City. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the City’s fire or operations departments when acting in their official capacity or as agents of or on behalf of the City, or in the performance of their duties.


4.02.095 Permit to Use Water from Fire Hydrant.

A. A person desiring to draw water from a fire hydrant shall apply to the operations department for a permit to use water from a fire hydrant.

B. The permit shall specify:

1. the use to which the water will be put;

2. the location where the water will be used;

3. the location and number of the fire hydrant to be used;

4. the dates and times when the water will be used;

5. the estimated quantities of water to be used;

6. the name of the person using the water and the person’s address, telephone number, and the person who will be responsible for the drawing of water.

C. Any violation of the terms of the permit authorized in subsections A and B is a Class 1 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

D. The permit holder shall be required to pay a permit fee to defray administrative costs, a fee for the use of the water, and a security deposit fee for the use of equipment. The fees shall be set by Council resolution.

E. The security deposit fee will be refunded if the equipment is returned to the City within the time stated on the permit in as good condition as when it was released by the City to the user.


4.02.100 Water for Building Purposes.

Water used for building construction shall be billed at meter rates and charged against the premises.


4.02.105 Ownership, Damage and Recording of Meters.

A. All meters are the property of the City, and any repairs to meters shall be made by the City. If a meter is damaged by hot water return through the meter or by the carelessness or negligence of the consumer, occupant or owner of the premises, the City will repair the meter, and the cost of the repairs shall be charged to the owner and against the property.

B. When a meter fails to register accurately, the charge shall either be based on the average quantity of water use, as recorded by the meter when in order, or if there is no average consumption, then the minimum rates of the City shall apply. If freezing or other inclement weather makes reading of the meter impracticable, the minimum charge shall be made for those months during which the conditions exist. Estimated readings for other just conditions affecting the reading of a meter shall be made only on approval of the City.


4.02.110 Service Outside the City.

Water service shall not be provided to property outside the limits of the City except in the following circumstances:

A. All prior connections and contracts or agreements for services lawfully authorized and existing on the effective date of this Code section.

B. The Council finds that extenuating circumstances or other justifiable reasons exist to grant service outside the city and the Council authorizes the service by resolution upon written application of the property owner.

C. Consumers outside the City are subject to the same regulations now or hereafter in effect for consumers inside the City unless the Council specifies otherwise in the resolution.

D. Except as otherwise provided by contract, agreement or resolution, service to consumers outside the City shall at all times be subject to the prior and superior rights of consumers inside the City to City water.

E. Except as otherwise provided by contract, agreement or resolution, the City reserves the right to refuse service to any consumer not complying with the requirements of this section.


4.02.115 Testing Meters.

When a water customer makes a complaint that the bill for any particular period is excessive, the City will, on request, have the meter reread and service inspected for leaks. If the customer wishes to have the meter tested, the customer shall deposit security in the amount set by resolution of the Council to cover the cost of the meter test. The meter will then be tested. If the test reveals a registration in excess of three percent in favor of the City, the amount deposited shall be refunded and the bill adjusted accordingly. The excess registration on the meter, if billed and paid, for the three previous readings for billing shall be credited to the account. When no error is found, the amount deposited will be retained to defray the expense of the meter test.


4.02.120 Payment and Collection of Water Charges.

A. Charges for water service are due to the City on the date of mailing or presentation of a statement of the amount due, and become delinquent ten days thereafter.

B. If charges for water service to any premises become delinquent, written notice shall be given in accordance with BC 4.02.185. After compliance with BC 4.02.185, if all charges imposed by this ordinance have not been paid, or arrangements acceptable to the City made to pay by the specified date, no further water shall be furnished to the premises.

C. If water service has been turned off because of a delinquent account, a service fee, the amount of which shall be established by Council resolution, may be collected before service shall be restored. If the service is turned back on without authorization of the City the meter may be removed or padlocked, and an additional fee, the amount of which shall be determined by Council resolution, shall be collected before service shall be restored.

D. The City, in cases of extreme hardship, may renew service to a delinquent account on receipt of a plan for the payment of the back-due amount in installments.

E. All water service charges shall be a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing and entry in the City lien docket. The lien docket shall be made accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of the charges against the property. When a bill for water service remains unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in the manner provided for by ORS 223.610, or in any other manner provided by law, this Code or City Ordinance.


4.02.125 Proration of Monthly Charges.

Upon request of either an owner, occupant, purchaser, lessor, lessee, or any person contemplating the purchase, occupancy or leasing of any real property in the City, the finance director shall have the water meter read at any time during regular working hours that the person requests and prorate all water charges for the number of days elapsed since the previous month’s billing based on actual date that change should become effective. [BC 4.02.125, amended by Ordinance No. 3428, 1/22/85]


4.02.130 Meter Reading Schedule.

All water meters in the City shall be read on a regularly scheduled basis as jointly established by the finance director and the operations director. The charge for each meter shall be made from one reading date to the next upon the monthly basis established.


4.02.135 Other Supplier’s Charges for Water.

All charges now or hereafter imposed on the City by any supplier for supplying water to the City that are based upon the number of consumers of water from the municipal water supply system of the City shall be added to all other charges imposed for the use of water under City ordinances.


4.02.140 Penalty for Turning Water On or Off Without Authority.

If the water is turned on or off by any person without authority from the City, upon proper notice to the consumer, the service may be shut off at the main, or the meter removed. The charge for shutting the service off at the main or removal of the meter shall be the actual cost of the work plus ten percent. All the charges shall be made against the premises where the water is supplied, and the water shall not again be furnished to the premises until the charges are paid.


4.02.145 Adjustments and Refunds.

The City may to refund overpayments of the water bill or deposits if the deposit is refundable. Refunds due to excess billing of water consumption shall be made to the customer either by City check or applied as credit to the following month’s statement.


4.02.150 Rates for Premises Within the City.

The rates and charges for water services supplied to premises within the City shall be established by Council resolution.


4.02.155 Rates for Premises Outside the City.

Premises located outside the limits of the City that are served by the municipal water system shall pay the rates which are set by Council resolution for premises outside the City.


4.02.160 Cross Connection Control Requirements.

A. The owner of premises to which the City supplies water shall install an approved backflow prevention device assembly on the owner’s service to the premises if on the premises:

1. There is an auxiliary water supply; or,

2. There is piping used to convey a liquid other than potable water, and the piping is under pressure and installed and operated in a manner that may cause a cross connection; or,

3. There is intricate plumbing that makes it impractical to ascertain whether a cross connection exists; or,

4. There is a pipeline larger than two inches internal diameter supplying public water to the premises; or,

5. There is a structure more than 30 feet high as measured between the highest peak of the roof of that structure and the elevation of the service connection at the public water main to those premises, and the pipeline supplying water to that structure is two inches or less in internal diameter; or,

6. There is a risk of back siphoning or back pressure; or,

7. There is a cross connection or a potential cross connection.

B. The owner of mobile apparatus to which the City supplies water shall provide for backflow prevention by installing a backflow prevention device assembly or providing an air gap separation on the mobile apparatus.

C. A backflow prevention device assembly required under this section shall be:

1. of a type and model approved by the State Health Division of the Department of Human Resources; and

2. installed in accordance with standards approved by the State Health Division of the Department of Human Resources.

D. An air gap separation required under this section shall be installed in accordance with standards approved by the State Health Division of the Department of Human Resources.

E. Installation, repair, disconnection or other modification of a backflow prevention device assembly or air gap separation shall be at the sole expense of the property owner or the owner of mobile apparatus on which the assembly or separation is located. If modification of the City’s water system is required to allow compliance with the requirements of this section, the cost of such modifications may be added to the property owner’s water bill or may be billed directly to the property owner.

F. A backflow prevention device assembly installed before the effective date of this section shall be permitted to remain in service regardless of whether the devise is currently approved under subsection C of this section, so long as the device:

1. was an approved device by the State Health Division at the time of installation; and

2. was properly installed at the time of installation; and

3. is:

a. properly maintained;

b. commensurate with the degree of hazard;

c. tested annually as required by BC 4.02.165; and

d. performs satisfactorily.

However, a backflow prevention device assembly used pursuant to this subsection shall be replaced by a device and in a manner approved by the Oregon State Health Division if the existing device is relocated or requires more than routine maintenance.

G. If the City has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this section has occurred, is occurring, or is likely to occur, then upon reasonable notice to tenant or property owner, the City may deny or discontinue water service to the premises where the violation is believed to exist. The denial or discontinuance of water service may continue until an appropriate backflow prevention device assembly or air gap separation is installed on the premises. [BC 4.02.160, amended by Ordinance No. 3667, 5/15/89]


4.02.165 Air Gap Separation and Backflow Prevention Device Assembly Testing Program.

A. Unless otherwise provided, the owner of property where a backflow prevention device assembly is required to be installed shall cause a test of the device to be performed:

1. at the time of installation;

2. within 30 days of the anniversary date of installation; and,

3. if the device is moved, immediately thereafter.

B. Unless otherwise provided, the owner of a mobile apparatus on which a backflow prevention device assembly or air gap separation is required shall cause a test of the assembly or an inspection of the air gap separation to be performed:

1. within the year before use in the City; and

2. annually thereafter.

C. The City may require more frequent testing of backflow prevention assembly devices than is required under subsection (A) or (B) of this section if the assembly is installed at a facility that poses an extreme health risk or if the device fails repeatedly.

D. The result of the test of a backflow prevention device assembly required under subsection A or B of this section shall be forwarded to the city within ten days of the date of the test.

E. If the test result indicates the backflow prevention device assembly is operating properly, the City may acknowledge receipt of the test result and may indicate when the next regularly scheduled test of the assembly is required.

F. If the test result indicates the backflow prevention device assembly is not operating properly, the assembly shall be repaired immediately and retested. The result of the retest shall be forwarded to the City within 10 days of the original test. If the retest result indicates the assembly is operating properly, the City may acknowledge receipt of the retest result and may indicate when the next regularly scheduled test of the assembly is required. If the retest result indicates the assembly is not operating properly, the City shall be notified immediately and the assembly shall again be repaired immediately and retested. The result of the retest shall be forwarded to the City within 10 days of the test. Retesting and repairing of an assembly shall continue until a test indicates the assembly operates properly.

G. If the City has not received the result of a test required under subsection A or B of this section within 30 days of the required date of the test, the City may order a test and add the cost of the test to the property owner’s water bill.

H. If a property owner fails to repair a backflow prevention device assembly within ten days of the test showing the assembly is not operating properly, the City may order the repair of the assembly and add the cost of the repair to the property owner’s water bill.

I. The City, in accordance with BC 4.02.185, may discontinue the water service of any person who refuses or fails to pay for charges added to the person’s water bill pursuant to subsection F and G of this section.

J. All tests required under this section shall be performed by a person currently certified by the State Health Division of the Department of Human Resources to perform such tests.

K. If the City has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this section has occurred, then upon reasonable notice the City may deny or discontinue water service to the premises where the violation is believed to exist. The denial or discontinuance of water service may continue until a backflow prevention device assembly is appropriately tested and shown to be operating properly.

L. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, violation of BC 4.02.160 or 4.02.165, or failure to comply with an order thereunder, is punishable as a Class 1 Civil Infraction, to be processed in accordance with the procedure contained in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050. The imposition of a penalty for an infraction shall not excuse the infraction or permit it to continue. In addition to any liability under BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050, a person found in violation of 4.02.160 or 4.02.165 shall be ordered to correct or remedy the cause of the violation. [BC 4.02.165, amended by Ordinance No. 3667, 5/15/89]


4.02.170 Premises Without Piped-in Water.

No water service charge will be made to any premises, building, store, office, warehouse or other places of residence or business where a water supply is not piped to the premises.


4.02.175 Separating Use of Water and Authorization of Installation and Use of Master Meter System.

A. Any commercial or industrial water user may install, at the owner’s expense, a water meter of approved pattern for the purpose of separating, for sewer service billing, domestic use from commercial or industrial use. (For purposes of this section, domestic use is that water used in sanitation, i.e., toilet, washbasin, sink, laundry or any other use requiring disposal through the City sanitary sewer system.)

B. An owner or operator of a multi-family complex, or group of owners of a condominium complex, at their own expense may request installation by the City of a master meter system, approved by the City, for accurately measuring and recording the cubic feet of water used by said complex.


4.02.180 Emergency Restrictions on Use of Water.

A. If the Council finds that an emergency exists or that the water supply is or will be reduced and that it would be in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare, the Council may, by resolution, prohibit or restrict the use of water by any or all users.

B. Where the circumstances do not require immediate action, the City Recorder shall give notice of the prohibitions or restrictions on water use by mailing notice to the premises served. However, if immediate action is required then notice may be given through information releases to radio, television or through other means.

C. It is a class 1 civil infraction for any person to use water in violation of the resolution at any time 48 hours after notice was given until the Council rescinds or repeals the resolution.


4.02.185 Water Service Termination.

A. Whenever service is to be discontinued or water to premises is to be turned off, and the request for turn off does not come from the consumer, the City shall follow these procedures:

1. the finance department or the operations department shall give notice by mail, to the customer stating:

a. that the City intends to terminate the customer’s water service by shutting off water to the customer, property, premises or building;

b. the reason for termination of the service;

c. that before water service is terminated, the customer has a right to a hearing before the mayor on the validity of the reason for termination of water service; and

d. that the customer must request a hearing on the validity of the termination of service, which request must be received by the City within ten calendar days of the date of the notice. The delinquent notice shall state the actual date by which the hearing must be requested and the date that the water service shall be shutoff. The request for the hearing must be in writing and shall state the grounds upon which the customer believes the termination to be invalid.

2. If the customer timely requests a hearing, a hearing shall be held within ten days of receipt of the request and the customer given an opportunity to be heard.

a. if the ground for termination was customer’s failure to pay bills or charges, the mayor shall determine what amount is due and owing and inform the customer that the customer has ten calendar days to pay the amount. If the customer has not paid the amount owed within the ten calendar days, water service may be terminated in accordance with subsection A 3.

b. if the ground for termination was a violation of this Code, then the mayor shall determine whether the violation occurred.

c. if the mayor finds that the violation occurred, the mayor may:

1) order the water service discontinued until satisfactory proof is furnished that the violation no longer exists; or

2) give the customer up to three days to furnish proof that the violation no longer exists. If the customer does not furnish the proof within the required period of time, the water service may be terminated.

3. If the customer does not appear for the hearing requested or the customer does not timely request a hearing, or after a hearing, does not pay the amount due or remedy the violation, then a final shutoff notice shall be hung on the door of the premises stating the date that payment must be received or the violation corrected and proof of correction presented. If payment is not made or the violation corrected and proof presented, the water service may be terminated. No further right to a hearing exists.

4. The City or any of its officers or employees shall not be liable for any damages that occur because water service is terminated pursuant to this section.

B. The notice provisions in subsection A do not apply to:

1. temporary or permanent disconnections requested by the customer;

2. emergency situations when immediate or prompt turn off of water is required to prevent damage to persons or property, or to make repairs to the water system; or

3. temporary disconnection to allow installation of extensions or additions to the water system.

C. The operations department, water division shall attempt, when possible to give notice to affected customers of temporary water shutoffs for emergency, repair, maintenance or installation purposes. The notice may be given in any feasible manner including, but not limited to, information releases by radio, television and newspapers or by telephone.


Chapter 4.04 SEWER REGULATIONS

Sections:

4.04.005    Short Title.

4.04.010    Sewer Service Charge.

4.04.015    Billing, Collection or Payment of Sewer Service Charges.

4.04.025    Revenues to Be Separately Designated.

4.04.030    Hook-up to New Sewers Required; Permit Required; Violation; Abatement of Nuisances.

4.04.035    Use of Septic Tanks, Cesspools Prohibited Except with Special Permit.

4.04.036    Sewer Interceptors.

4.04.040    Sewer Connection Permit Required; Application for Permit.

4.04.045    Issuance of Permit.

4.04.050    Failure to Obtain Permit Deemed Violation of this Ordinance.

4.04.055    Permit Exemptions.

4.04.060    Sanitary Sewer Repair and Replacement Charge Imposed.

4.04.065    Computation of Charge.


4.04.005 Short Title.

BC 4.04.005 through 4.04.050 shall be known and may be cited as the “Sewer Regulation Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this ordinance”.


4.04.010 Sewer Service Charge.

The amount charged and collected as a connection charge from a person who holds a permit for use of a septic tank serving the person’s property as provided for in Section BC 4.04.035 shall be credited against the cost of connection of the person’s property to the public sewer system at such time as the connection is made. [BC 4.04.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3565, 5/5/87]


4.04.015 Billing, Collection or Payment of Sewer Service Charges.

A. The charges imposed by this ordinance are hereby made a part of the charges imposed for the use of water from the City water system.

B. All the provisions of BC 4.02.120 shall apply equally to and govern billing, collection and payment of sewer charges including, but not limited to, cutoff and renewal of service and imposition of liens against the property for failure to pay charges.


4.04.025 Revenues to Be Separately Designated.

All revenues, except those from inspection fees, resulting from the rates and charges authorized by the Sewer Regulation Ordinance shall be kept separate and apart from all other funds and shall be used for the construction, addition, improvement, financing, operation and maintenance of the sewer system of the City and the reserves shall be used for depreciation to the sanitary sewer facilities. [BC 4.04.025, amended by Ordinance No. 3387, 8/13/84]


4.04.030 Hook-up to New Sewers Required; Permit Required; Violation; Abatement of Nuisances.

A. The owner of any property is required to connect the property to public sewer facilities if:

1. use of the owner’s property requires sewage disposal facilities; and the owner’s property is adjacent to a street, alley or easement where a public sewer is located; or

2. the exterior boundaries of the owner’s land is within 100 feet of a sewer, main, conduit or lateral and the sewage will flow by gravity into the sewer, main, conduit or lateral, and the person(s) occupying the property do(es) not have a valid permit for use of an existing private system as provided in BC 4.04.055.

B. If the public sewer, main, conduit or lateral is already constructed and in use, the property owner must hook up immediately. If the public sewer, main, conduit or lateral has not yet been constructed or is not yet operating, the property owner must connect to the sewer, main, conduit or lateral within 90 days after the sewer, main, conduit or lateral becomes available for public use. The owner must obtain a permit in accordance with BC 4.04.045 to hook up to the sewer, main, conduit or lateral.

C. Any owner of property within the City who fails to connect to said sewer as required by subsections A and B shall be deemed to have committed a Class 1 Civil Infraction. The infraction shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050, as it is now or hereafter constituted. A separate infraction will be deemed to occur each month the infraction continues to exist and a separate penalty may be imposed for each infraction.

D. In addition to the penalty imposed under BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050, failure to hook up to public sewer facilities as required by subsection A and B shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in the Nuisance Ordinance. [BC 4.04.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3565, 5/5/87]


4.04.035 Use of Septic Tanks, Cesspools Prohibited Except with Special Permit.

No person shall install, use or cause to be installed or used any cesspool, septic tank or other means of sewage disposal upon any property within the City limits (other than by connecting to the City sanitary sewage system), if such property by the terms of this ordinance would be required to connect to the City sanitary system, unless the person has a valid permit for use of an existing private system as provided in BC 4.04.055. A special permit for a separate sewage system or septic tank may be allowed by motion of the Council whenever there is no sanitary sewage disposal system operated by the City available to the tract of ground involved. [BC 4.04.035, amended by Ordinance No. 3565, 5/5/87]


4.04.036 Sewer Interceptors.

A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system:

1. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not and whether containing vegetable or petroleum products or substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 Celsius); and

2. Any flammable wastes, sand, soil, conglomerate or other harmful ingredients which are not readily dissolved by water.

B. Any such discharger shall be required to install, use, maintain and keep in good working condition an interceptor. As used in this section, “interceptor” shall mean a device designed and installed so as to adjust, separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from sewage and to permit normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the disposal terminal.

C. All such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City in accordance with standards established by the City and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

D. At the time of connection, new services shall have installed a City approved interceptor. For existing uses, a City approved interceptor shall be installed within 90 calendar days of written notice from the City unless extended for good cause shown, which cause shall be solely within the determination of the City. Where installed, all interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner’s expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.

E. Failure to install or maintain an approved interceptor is a Class 1 Civil Infraction. Additionally, any actual costs incurred by the City due to an illegal discharge shall be billed to the owner or user directly. These remedies are in addition to any other legal, equitable or administrative remedies which may be available.

F. This section shall in no way substitute or eliminate the necessity for compliance with Federal, State or other local laws.

G. In addition to other penalties, violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in this Code. [BC 4.04.036, added by Ordinance No. 3412, 10/1/84]


4.04.040 Sewer Connection Permit Required; Application for Permit.

No person shall make or use any connection with the sanitary sewer system of the City without first having obtained a permit from the City to do so. No person shall connect a roof drain, surface water drain or storm drain with the sanitary sewer system of the City, nor shall any permit be issued for the connection of any roof drain, surface water drain, or storm sewer drain to the sanitary sewer system.

Any person desiring a permit to connect a building or structure to the sanitary sewer system of the City is required to apply to the City for the permit and shall pay permit, inspection and connection fees in accordance with the rates and charges established by the City and the Unified Sewerage Agency of Washington County and in effect at the time the permit is issued. The Council by resolution shall establish a sewer inspection fee. The finance director shall record the applicable Unified Sewerage Agency resolutions and orders with the City recorder. [BC 4.04.040, amended by Ordinance No. 3387, 8/13/84]


4.04.045 Issuance of Permit.

The issuance of a sewer connection permit on payment for the charges and fees pursuant to BC 4.04.040 entitles the holder to connect the building or facility for which the permit was issued to the City sanitary sewer system.


4.04.050 Failure to Obtain Permit Deemed Violation of this Ordinance.

No person shall:

A. Make any connection with the City sanitary sewer system without first having paid hook-up and any other authorized charges and fees and having obtained a written permit from the City to do so; or,

B. Install or use a cesspool, septic tank, or other means of sewage disposal other than connecting to the City sewage disposal system without a permit or in violation of the terms of a permit.

A violation of BC 4.04.050 A or B is a Class 1 Civil Infraction to be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050, as it is now or hereafter constituted. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate violation.


4.04.055 Permit Exemptions.

A. A person who owns and occupies a single-family residence on property that was outside the boundary of the City on December 31, 1985, or after, and who has owned and occupied that same property at all times since annexation of same into the City, may apply as provided in this section for a permit exempting the person from the application of BC 4.04.030 and BC 4.04.035.

1. The City shall not accept any such application not received by the City within 90 days from the date of annexation of the property or 90 days from the date this section is effective, whichever is later.

2. As used in this section, the term “person” shall be deemed to include all persons holding title as tenants in common or by the entirety in the property on which a permit is sought.

B. A person described in subsection A of this section shall apply for such a permit in writing on a form provided by the City on which the person shall certify:

1. that the person meets the ownership and occupancy requirements set out in subsection A of this section; and,

2. That there exists on the premises occupied by the person as of the date of the application, a sanitary sewage disposal system in the form of a septic tank that it is in good working order, is of adequate capacity to serve all occupants of the property, and serves that property alone; and,

3. That the person understands and agrees to the schedule of charges to be imposed by the City for sewage disposal services notwithstanding the person’s desire to use an existing private system, and that all such charges once received are entirely the property of the City; and,

4. That the person or his/her representative currently does not have pending an application before any entity of government to partition the property in question nor is there currently in force and effect, an executed contract for sale of the property or a present possessory interest therein, including, but not limited to, an “earnest money agreement”; and,

5. That the person understands and agrees that any permit issued under this section is not transferable and is revocable at will by the Council, and any representation by the person to the contrary may constitute fraud; and,

6. That the person by submitting the application, consents to the City’s entry on the property in question to verify any and all of the person’s statements made in the application and to verify that the existing disposal system remains in good working order without substantial repair or replacement while this permit is in effect; and,

7. That the person will hold harmless and indemnify the City from any claim of damage to person or property alleged to be caused by the person’s private sewerage disposal system.

C. On receipt of a certified application from a person qualified under and within the time limit provided in subsection A of this section together with any fee the City may require, the City may cause an inspection to be made of the property including but not limited to the condition of the existing sewage disposal system. If the City in its sole discretion determines that all statements made in the application are true and complete, the City shall issue to the person, a revocable permit for the person’s continued use of the existing, private sewage disposal system on the property and for exemption from the application of BC 4.04.030 and BC 4.04.035.

D. Any permit issued under provision of this section shall be deemed revoked and thereby void and of no (further) force and effect:

1. Ab initio, if the City at any time determines that any material statements made on the application for the permit were false, whether or not the falsity was intentional; or,

2. If the person (or all persons) to whom the application is issued ceases to occupy the property as his/her principal residence or ceases to own the exclusive present right to possess the property; or,

3. If any entity of government of competent jurisdiction grants an order or permit for partition of the property, as the term “partition” is defined now or hereafter in the Development Code; or,

4. If the City in its sole discretion finds that the private sewerage disposal system serving the property no longer exists in good working order or that a major part of same has been or is about to be repaired or replaced since the permit first was issued; or,

5. If the person holding the permit denies the City entry upon the property in question to make an inspection contemplated in subsection D4 of this section; or,

6. If the City finds that the dwelling area of the property in question has been or is about to be substantially increased.

E. In addition to the provisions for revocation provided in subsection D of this section, the Council in its sole discretion by resolution may revoke any and all permits granted any person(s) under this section if it finds that the public interest so requires.

1. In the event that a permit granted under this section is revoked for any reason, no person shall be eligible to apply for or receive another such permit for the same property. [BC 4.04.055, added by Ordinance No. 3565, 5/5/87]


4.04.060 Sanitary Sewer Repair and Replacement Charge Imposed.

The owner or occupant of property within City boundaries that is subject to a charge imposed by the Clean Water Services District for use of the regional sanitary sewerage system, shall pay to the City a charge for the City’s repair and replacement of the City’s system in addition to and not in lieu of any similar sanitary sewer maintenance charge imposed by the District. The charge shall be that amount determined by the Council from time to time to be an equitable share of the City’s actual costs to repair and replace that portion of the regional system which the City owns and is responsible to maintain, the equitable share to be calculated according to the number of dwelling unit equivalents on the property. For definition purposes of this ordinance, "dwelling unit equivalent" has the meaning shown in Clean Water Services’ Resolution and Order No. 05 23, titled Clean Water Services Rates and Charges, or current adopted version of same. [BC 4.04.060, added by Ordinance No. 4371, 11/7/05]


4.04.065 Computation of Charge.

The charge shall be $1 per equivalent dwelling unit from February 1, 2006 until January 31, 2007. The charge shall be $2 per equivalent dwelling unit from February 1, 2007 until January 31, 2008. Effective February 1, 2008 and on February 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the charge shall be adjusted to reflect annual inflation in the cost to construct sanitary sewerage facilities as is shown in the construction cost index for Seattle, Washington, published in the ENR Engineering News-Record in January of each year. [BC 4.04.065, added by Ordinance No. 4371, 11/7/05]


Chapter 4.05 SEWER REPAIRS

Sections:

4.05.010    Definitions.

4.05.015    Liability of Owner.

4.05.020    Liability of City.

4.05.025    Repair of Sewer Laterals.

4.05.030    Repair of Sewer Mains.

4.05.035    Liens.

4.05.040    Interest.

4.05.045    Notices.


4.05.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 4.05.010 through 4.05.045 the following mean:

Repair – Repair, restoration or maintenance.

Sewage – The water-carried waste from residences, businesses, buildings, institutions, industrial establishments or other establishments, together with such ground or surface water as may be present.

Sewer – A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

Sewer lateral – A sewer that connects to a sewer main and terminates on abutting or other real property and that is constructed, used or maintained for the purpose of carrying sewage from the real property to a sewer main.

Sewer main – A sewer in which all owners of abutting or other real property have rights to its use and benefit and that is controlled by the City.


4.05.015 Liability of Owner.

Except as provided in BC 4.05.020, the owner of real property on which a sewer lateral terminates shall be liable for the costs, expenses, and charges incurred in the repair of the sewer lateral.


4.05.020 Liability of City.

The City shall be liable for the costs, expenses and charges for the repair of a sewer lateral that has been constructed by or on behalf of the City, if the repair is made necessary because of faulty materials, improper construction or because of work done by or on behalf of the City in the repair, alteration or improvement of the street, alley or right-of-way in which the sewer lateral is located.


4.05.025 Repair of Sewer Laterals.

A. If repair of a sewer lateral becomes necessary and requires work in a street, alley or public right-of-way, the repair may be made by the owner of the real property or the owner’s agent where the sewer lateral terminates. However, the owner or the owner’s agent shall first:

1. give written notice to the director of the operations department (hereafter operations director) of the necessity of the repair and of the owner’s intention to make the repair;

2. execute a bond in favor of the City in an amount to be determined by the City engineer, with a surety licensed to do business in the State, to guarantee the completion of the work contemplated and the repair of any streets, curbs, sidewalks or sewer mains that may be damaged during the repair of the sewer lateral; and

3. obtain a permit to repair the sewer lateral from the City engineer.

B. If the operations director determines that the repair of a sewer lateral is necessary for the proper functioning of the sewer lateral, the City may repair it or employ a private contractor after first giving notice of its intention to do so to the owner of the real property where the sewer lateral terminates, unless the owner, within 30 days after receiving the City’s notice, gives written notice to the operations director of the owner’s intention to have the repair made and thereafter diligently performs the work after complying with the provisions of subsection A.

C. If the operations director or other official of the City, the County health department or State Board of Health determines that a sewer lateral constitutes a health hazard or creates a danger to persons or property, the City, may immediately perform or employ a private contractor to immediately perform the required work without giving notice.


4.05.030 Repair of Sewer Mains.

If a sewer main requires repair because of the roots of trees, shrubs or other plants that are growing into or near the sewer main, the owner of the real property on which the trees, shrubs or other plants are located, or if the trees, shrubs or other plants are located on a street, the owner of the abutting real property, shall be liable for the costs, expenses and charges incurred by the City in the repair of the sewer main.


4.05.035 Liens.

Within 30 days after the City completes the repair of a sewer lateral or sewer main for which the property owner is liable, the operations director shall certify the costs, expenses and charges to the finance director. The finance director shall notify the owner of the costs, expenses and charges and that unless the costs, expenses and charges are paid within 30 days, they shall become a lien on the owner’s property. Unless the owner files written objection within 30 days of receiving notice, the finance director shall enter the costs, expenses and charges in the City lien docket and they shall become a lien on the property involved and conclusive to all parties. If the owner files written objection within 30 days of notice, the Council shall set a date for a hearing on the objections and give notice of the hearing to the objector at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The Council shall at the time specified hear the matter and make a determination which shall be conclusive unless an appeal is taken to the circuit court for Washington County within 30 days after the determination is made. If the time in which an appeal can be taken has expired and no appeal is pending, the finance director shall enter the lien in the City lien docket.


4.05.040 Interest.

The cost, expenses and charges incurred by the City in the repair of a sewer lateral or sewer main for which the owner of the property involved is liable shall accrue interest beginning 30 days after the notice of costs, expenses and charges is given to the owner.


4.05.045 Notices.

Notices required of the City under BC 4.05.010 through 4.05.045 shall be given by mailing the notice to the last known address of the person to be notified as shown on City records or the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the county assessor. The time when the notice is deposited in the mail in Beaverton, Oregon, shall be considered the time when the notice is given. Proof of giving notice may be made by the certificate of the person mailing the notice.


Chapter 4.06 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE

Sections:

4.06.010    Definitions.

4.06.020    User Surcharge for Connection to Public Drainage System.

4.06.030    Computation of Surcharge.

4.06.040    Disconnection.

4.06.050    Repealed.


4.06.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to sections 4.06.010 through 4.07.090 of this code:

A. Connect or Connection. The act of causing or allowing impervious surfaces or other storm and surface water drainage facilities on private property to drain directly or indirectly to the public storm and surface water drainage system including open channels, creeks and rivers.

B. Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU). A unit of measurement of impervious surface area that is equivalent to the average such area for property improved with a single family dwelling as determined by the Unified Sewerage Agency of Washington County, namely, 2640 square feet.

C. Impervious Surface Area. Land area altered from its natural state so as not to allow infiltration and retention of water equivalent to undisturbed soil and improvements lying over that land area, including but not limited to pavement, structures, decks and compacted gravel but not including any area lying within public right-of-way or railroad trackage.

D. User. The legal owner (as shown by property tax records) or the purchaser under land sale contract of unoccupied property or the occupant of property that is occupied. [BC 4.06.010, added by Ordinance No. 3687, 7/17/89; BC 4.06.010(e), amended by Ordinance No. 3758, 11/19/90; BC 4.06.010 amended by Ordinance No. 3933, 6/26/95]


4.06.020 User Surcharge for Connection to Public Drainage System.

A user of property connected to the public storm drainage system shall pay a monthly surcharge determined by the Council to be an equitable share of the city’s actual cost of operating and maintaining the system. The surcharge shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any similar charge imposed by any other public entity for operation and maintenance of a similar system [BC 4.06.020, added by Ordinance No. 3687, 7/17/89; BC 4.06.020 amended by Ordinance No. 3933, 6/26/95]


4.06.030 Computation of Surcharge.

The user surcharge for public storm drainage shall be $2/month/EDU. Effective February 1, 2008 and on February 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the charge shall be adjusted to reflect annual inflation in the cost to construct storm drainage facilities as is shown in the construction cost index for Seattle, Washington, published in the ENR Engineering News-Record in January of each year. Measurement of EDU as to property other than improved single family dwellings shall be according to the method employed by the Unified Sewerage Agency of Washington County and shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. [BC 4.06.030, added by Ordinance No. 3687, 7/17/89; BC 4.06.030 amended by Ordinance No. 3933, 6/26/95; Ordinance No. 3986, 7/15/97; Ordinance No. 4371, 11/7/05]


4.06.040 Disconnection.

An owner or purchaser under land sale contract of property may apply to disconnect the property from the public drainage system by submitting proof satisfactory to the City Engineer that:

A. All impervious surface area of the property has been demolished and removed; or,

B. There exists on the property a storm and surface water retention and infiltration system designed and operated so as to dispose of all such water in any foreseeable storm event without use of the public drainage system. By its application the owner or purchaser shall be deemed to have given consent to the city’s entry onto the property to verify the matters stated in the application. Disconnection shall not be effective to allow the user of the property to avoid the charge unless and until the City Engineer confirms in writing that the disconnection meets the criteria of this section. [BC 4.06.040, added by Ordinance No 3687, 7/17/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3758, 11/19/90; Ordinance No. 3933, 6/26/95]


4.06.050 Repealed.

[BC 4.06.050, repealed by Ordinance No. 3986, 7/15/97]


Chapter 4.07 STORM DRAINAGE CHARGES

Sections:

4.07.010    Definitions.

4.07.020    Systems Development Charge Imposed.

4.07.030    Method of Computation.

4.07.040    Systems Development Charge in Lieu of On-Site Storm Water Quality and Quantity Control Facilities.

4.07.050    Lien for Unpaid Charges.

4.07.060    Credit for Qualified Public Improvement.

4.07.070    Exempt Property.

4.07.080    Storm Water Conveyance Systems Development Charge Established.

4.07.085    Methodology.

4.07.090    Credit for Qualified Improvement.

[Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 3787, passed 9/9/91, the Council suspends indefinitely the imposition of the systems development charge for offsite storm drainage now provided for in BC 4.07.020, 4.07.030 and 4.07.060 as to all development or redevelopment otherwise subject to that charge and for which a building permit application first was submitted to the City on or after July 1, 1991.]


4.07.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to sections 4.07.010 through 4.07.090 of this code:

A. Dwelling Unit (DU), Multiple Dwelling Unit (MDU), Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU), Commercial Unit, Impervious Surface and Property have the meanings assigned to those terms in BC 4.06.010 of this Code (added by Ordinance No. [3687]).

B. Building Permit – any permit issued by the City under auspices of Chapter 8 of this Code.

C. Development – the first use of property by occupancy with a structure or the placing of pavement or other impervious surface on property not already occupied by a structure.

D. Redevelopment – an intensified use of property resulting in a greater impervious surface area on the property than existed prior to such redevelopment. [BC 4.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 3686, 7/17/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3910, 8/22/94]


4.07.020 Systems Development Charge Imposed.

[BC 4.07.020, added by Ordinance No. 3686, 7/17/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3758, 11/19/90; repealed by Ordinance No. 3933, 6/26/95]


4.07.030 Method of Computation.

[BC 4.07.030, added by Ordinance No 3686, 7/17/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3758, 11/19/90; repealed by Ordinance No. 3933, 6/26/95]


4.07.040 Systems Development Charge in Lieu of On-Site Storm Water Quality and Quantity Control Facilities.

A. On all development or redevelopment of property for which the City Engineer determines construction of on site storm water detention quality or quantity control facilities to be not required by or expressly excepted from the Unified Sewerage Agency’s standards, there is imposed a systems development charge in lieu of construction of either or both such facilities by the developer.

B. The Council adopts the methodology of the Unified Sewerage Agency of Washington County as is set out in the cost analysis by Brown and Caldwell dated June 5, 1991, on file with the City Recorder, and finds that the amount of $238/EDU for quality control and $291/EDU for quantity control facilities represent a fair and reasonable charge for improvements to be constructed by the City.

C. A person who constructs on site storm water quality or quantity control detention facilities or both shall not thereby be entitled to a credit against any other systems development charge otherwise due for the act of development or redevelopment.

D. The Council authorizes the Mayor in his discretion to accept real property rights having an appraised fair market value equal to or greater than the fee(s) in lieu of on site construction of storm water quality or quantity control detention facilities, in place of the fee(s) for same otherwise due from the act of development or redevelopment. [BC 4.07.040, added by Ordinance No. 3758, 11/19/90; amended by Ordinance No. 3787(6), 9/9/91]


4.07.050 Lien for Unpaid Charges.

There hereby is imposed a lien upon all property within the City for which the property’s owner or the owner’s agent with authority has applied for permission to develop and redevelop and for which the charges for storm drainage imposed by this ordinance, as amended from time to time, are payable in installments under the Bancroft Bonding Act, per ORS 223.208 (1989 version), and are delinquent. In such case the Council declares that the City’s lien for the delinquent payments shall constitute a first lien on the property, prior and superior to any and all other liens. In all other cases the charges shall constitute a joint and several personal obligation and liability of the applicant and of the person on whose behalf a permit for development or redevelopment is sought. Nothing in this section is intended to limit or deny any and all other remedies that may be available to the City for collection of those charges. [BC 4.07.050, added by Ordinance No. 3686, 7/17/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3758, 11/19/90]


4.07.060 Credit for Qualified Public Improvement.

On application from a person subject to the systems development charge imposed by this ordinance, the council shall allow a credit against the charge for the construction of a qualified public improvement. For purposes of this section, a “qualified public improvement” means one that is required as a condition of residential development approval, identified in the City’s capital improvement plan for storm drainage, and not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of residential development approval. [BC 4.07.060, added by Ordinance No. 3686, 7/17/89]


4.07.070 Exempt Property.

The systems development charge imposed by this ordinance shall not apply to property owned by the City, nor to other improved property to the extent of the impervious surface area of same for which a building permit has been issued and which exists on or before the effective date of this ordinance. [BC 4.07.070 added by Ordinance No. 3686, 7/17/89]


4.07.080 Storm Water Conveyance Systems Development Charge Established.

There is imposed on the act of development or redevelopment of property in the city a systems development charge for storm water conveyance, due and payable at the time of application for a building permit for that (re)development. [BC 4.07.080, added by Ordinance No. 3910, 8/22/94]


4.07.085 Methodology.

The Council adopts that certain methodology for computation of a storm water conveyance systems development charge as is set out in the report by Economic and Engineering Services dated June 2, 2000. The charge shall consist of an Improvement Fee of $726, that amount reflecting the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the period September 1994 to January 1999. Effective February 1, 2003, the charge shall consist of an Improvement Fee reflecting the increase in the same index for the period February 1999 to December 2002. Effective February 1, 2004, and on February 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the SDC shall be increased to reflect the total increase in the same index for the preceding calendar year. The Council from time to time may adopt a new methodology and impose a new improvement or reimbursement fee or both for a storm water conveyance systems development charge by amendment to this ordinance. [BC 4.07.085, added by Ordinance No. 3910, 8/22/94; amended by Ordinance No. 4195(2), 2/4/02]


4.07.090 Credit for Qualified Improvement.

The Council may grant credits against the storm water conveyance systems development charge imposed by this ordinance for qualified public improvements as defined in ORS 223.304 on certification by the city engineer that the improvement(s) qualify for that credit. [BC 4.07.090, added by Ordinance No. 3910, 8/22/94]


Chapter 4.08 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING

Sections:

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

4.08.010    Short Title.

4.08.020    Purpose, Policy and Scope.

4.08.030    Definitions.

4.08.100    Nonexclusive Franchise.

4.08.110    Term of Franchise.

4.08.120    Notice of Franchise Review or Request for Franchise Applications.

4.08.130    Description of Franchise Areas.

4.08.140    Transfer of Franchise.

4.08.200    Responsibility of City.

4.08.205    Rulemaking Authority for Administration and Enforcement.

4.08.210    Enforcement of Standards – Customers.

4.08.215    Enforcement of Standards – Franchisees.

4.08.220    Uniform Rate Setting.

4.08.230    Imposition of Franchise Fees.

4.08.240    Clean and Efficient Fleet.

II. REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES

4.08.310    Periodic Informational Reports.

4.08.320    Quarterly Franchise Fee Report.

4.08.330    Annual Franchise Reports.

4.08.340    Subcontracting Services.

4.08.350    Access for Inspections and Delivery of Notices.

4.08.360    Indemnification, Bond and Insurance.

III. ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS, SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE

4.08.410    Initiation of Enforcement Actions.

4.08.420    Penalties for Infractions.

4.08.430    Termination of Franchise for Default.

4.08.440    Service Interruption.

4.08.450    City’s Right to Perform Service.

4.08.460    Dispute Resolution with Customers.

4.08.470    Dispute Resolution with City.

IV. BUSINESS RECYCLING REQUIREMENT

4.08.505    Short Title.

4.08.510    Purpose.

4.08.520    Applicability.

4.08.530    Business Recycling Requirement.

4.08.540    Compliance with Business Recycling Requirement.

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS 


4.08.010 Short Title.

BC 4.08.010 through 4.08.470 shall be known and may be cited as the “solid waste and recycling ordinance” and may also be referred to as “this chapter.” [BC 4.08.010, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.020 Purpose, Policy and Scope.

A. It is the policy of the City of Beaverton to reduce the amount of solid waste generated and disposed per capita by undertaking aggressive waste prevention and recycling activities.

1. The City shall promote the development of environmentally sound and efficient practices regarding the collection of solid waste, recyclable material, and compostable material.

2. In order to attain these goals and protect public health and the environment, the City shall regulate collection of solid waste, recyclable material and yard debris within the city limits.

B. In carrying out this policy, the goals of this chapter are:

1. To promote sustainability throughout the collection system, by seeking to maximize efficiency, equity and economic vitality, improve worker safety and reduce environmental and human health impacts over the entire life cycle of materials.

2. To reduce the amount of solid waste generated, as measured on a per capita basis.

3. To achieve a 75 percent recovery rate from the solid waste stream by 2020 and 90 percent by 2050.

4. To ensure the safe and sanitary collection, transportation and recovery of solid waste, recyclables, and compostable materials.

5. To provide Beaverton residents and businesses with the opportunity to recycle more materials through convenient on-site, curbside and depot collection programs.

6. To establish and enforce collection standards for solid waste, recyclables and compostable materials to ensure uniform, cost effective and high quality service delivery to all customers.

7. To establish rates that are fair to the public, the franchisee and the City, encourage waste reduction, and promote safe, efficient collection.

8. To promote awareness of the waste reduction system in order to achieve the highest participation possible throughout the community.

9. To achieve reductions in toxic waste and minimize its harmful impacts and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

10. To reduce life cycle impacts by promoting product stewardship and producer responsibility. [BC 4.08.020, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

“Affiliated company” means any company that shares expenses and/or revenues with the franchisee with respect to the services under this agreement and is: (1) the parent company (corporation, partnership or limited liability company) of the franchisee; or (2) any subsidiary of such parent company; or (3) any company of which 30 percent or more of the common stock or control is owned or controlled by the franchisee or the franchisee’s shareholders. Examples of such shared costs include, but are not limited to: labor, equipment, vehicles, insurance, or administrative costs.

“Allowable expenses” means those expenses incurred by franchisee in the performance of this agreement that are allowed by the City as reimbursable by the ratepayer as enumerated below. Allowable expenses are allowable only to the extent that such expenses are known and measurable, calculated according to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) on an accrual basis and, when applicable, prorated or allocated to the franchisee’s operations within the City, do not exceed the fair market value of comparable goods or services, and are commercially reasonable and prudently incurred by the franchisee solely in the course of performing its obligations under the franchise. Allowable expenses shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. The costs of complying with all laws, regulations or orders applicable to the obligations of franchisees under federal, state or local law, including this chapter, as now or hereafter amended;

2. Disposal costs;

3. Labor costs, including operational and supervisory labor, payroll taxes, workers’ compensation, and benefits;

4. Vehicle and equipment expenses, including vehicle registration fees, motor fuel, oil, tires, rental charges and/or operating lease payments and repairs and maintenance;

5. Expenses of maintaining other capital assets, including rental charges and/or operating lease payments and repair and maintenance;

6. Performance bonds and insurance in at least the amounts and coverages required by the City;

7. Administrative expenses related to data processing, billing and supplies, finance and accounting, franchise administration, human resource and labor management, rate analysis, and regulatory compliance;

8. Compensation paid to officers, up to limits set by City rule, based upon total revenues managed by the officers;

9. Utilities;

10. Training and worker safety expenses;

11. Promotion and public education costs;

12. Depreciation and amortization of capital assets, including any necessary standby or backup equipment used on a regular and ongoing basis in the provision of services under this franchise over standardized economic useful lives of the various assets;

13. Outside professional fees and costs, limited to two percentage points of revenue, unless an extraordinary circumstance exists;

14. Interest expense, other than interest paid with respect to route or franchise acquisition, that is not in excess of market rates ordinarily charged for the various types of financing required for purchases or leases;

15. All surcharges, taxes or fees, other than state or federal income taxes or franchise fees that are imposed upon the franchisee or levied by federal, state or local government in connection with franchisee’s provision of collection services under this franchise;

16. Direct write-off charges for bad debts; and

17. Franchise fees assessed by the City.

“Business” means any entity of one or more persons, corporate or otherwise, engaged in commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial, educational, or other activity that is nonresidential in nature, including public bodies, but not business activities in residential dwellings unless they subscribe to commercial collection services from their franchised hauler.

“Business recycling service customer” means any person who enters into a service agreement with a waste hauler or recycler for business recycling services.

“Commercial” means relating to an entity that is nonresidential in nature.

“Compensation” includes any type of consideration paid for service, including but not limited to rent, the sale of recyclable materials, and any other direct or indirect provisions for payment of money, goods or benefits by property owners, tenants, members, franchisees, and similar persons.

It shall also include any exchange of services, including the hauling of solid waste and waste. Compensation includes the flow of consideration from the person owning or possessing the solid waste or waste to the person collecting, sorting, transporting, or disposing of the solid waste or waste.

“Compostable material” and “compostable” include yard debris, food scraps and food-soiled paper when source separated for controlled biological decomposition. Compostable material shall not include food-soiled paper containing plastic or other materials that inhibit controlled biological decomposition.

“Composting” means the managed process of controlled biological decomposition of source separated organic waste. It does not include composting of mixed solid waste. Compost is the product resulting from the composting process.

“Container” means a receptacle used to store solid waste or recyclable materials that is designed for on-site unloading into a closed-bodied collection vehicle in which the contents of the receptacle are mixed with the contents of other similar receptacles.

“Customer” means the person that enters into an agreement with a franchisee for the collection of solid waste, mixed loads of solid waste and recyclable materials, source separated recyclable materials, and/or compostables.

“Depot” means a facility for transferring containerized solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris from one mode of transportation to another. The term also refers to a place for receiving source separated recyclable materials.

Disposal Costs. For the purpose of this agreement, “disposal costs” shall mean the total allowable expense incurred by the franchisee for the disposal of solid waste collected under this agreement at a disposal site permitted by the appropriate government authority.

“Disposal site” means land and facilities used for the disposal, handling or transfer of, or resource recovery from solid wastes, including but not limited to dumps, landfills, sludge lagoons, sludge treatment facilities, disposal sites for septic tank pumping or cesspool cleaning service, transfer stations, resource recovery facilities, incinerators for solid waste delivered by the public or by a solid waste collection service, composting plants and land and facilities previously used for solid waste disposal at a land disposal site. Disposal site does not include the following: a facility authorized by a permit issued under ORS 466.005 to 466.385 to store, treat or dispose of both hazardous waste and solid waste; a facility subject to permit requirements of ORS 468B.050 or 468B.053; a landfill site used by the owner or person in control of the premises to dispose of soil, rock, concrete or other similar non-decomposable material, unless the site is used by the public either directly or through a solid waste collection service; or a site operated by a wrecker issued a certificate under ORS 822.110.

“Drop box” means a single receptacle used to store solid waste or recyclable materials that is designed to be removed from the generator’s site on the back of an open truck for unloading at a disposal site, material recovery facility, or other storage or processing facility. The contents of the receptacle are not mixed with the contents of other similar receptacles until delivery to a disposal site.

“Food scraps” means all waste from meats, fish, and vegetables, which attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling, or serving of food for human consumption. Food scraps include, but are not limited to, excess, spoiled or unusable food or dairy products, meats, vegetable and meat trimmings, grains, breads and dough, incidental amounts of edible oils, and organic waste from food processing.

“Force majeure” means acts of God, fire, landslides, lightning, storms, floods, freezing, earthquakes, epidemics, volcanic eruptions, public riots, civil disturbances, acts of the public enemy, wars, blockades, embargoes, or acts of civil or military authority, breakage, explosions or accident to machines or other materials, pipelines or materials, governmental restraint, unavailability of a disposal site, and any other event that could not with reasonable diligence be controlled or prevented by the party affected by the event.

“Franchise” means a contract with the City allowing the use of public rights-of-way to collect and transport solid waste.

“Generator” means a person who last uses a material and then makes it available for disposal or recycling.

“Gross revenue” for any period shall mean:

1. Gross accrual based billings by the franchisee to customers for services provided under this agreement; and

2. The allocated gain on the sale of fixed assets, the depreciation or amortization from which was an allowable expense under the terms of this chapter, and refunds, sales proceeds or other reimbursements for any other expense that was an allowable expense under this chapter; and

3. The accrual based proceeds from the sales of recycled material collected within the franchise.

“Hazardous waste” means solid waste or waste that may, by itself or in combination with other waste, be explosive, poisonous, caustic or toxic, or otherwise dangerous or injurious to human, plant or animal life, as defined by ORS 466.005.

“Infectious waste” means biological waste, cultures and stocks, pathological waste, and sharps, as defined in ORS 459.386.

“Material recovery facility” means a solid waste management facility that separates material for the purpose of recycling from an incoming recoverable mix of nonputrescible waste by using manual and/or mechanical methods and achieves a verifiable minimum 25 percent recovery rate. It also means a facility that primarily accepts previously separated recyclables.

“Mayor” means the Mayor of the City of Beaverton or the Mayor’s designee.

“Multifamily” means any multi-dwelling building or group of buildings that:

1. Contain(s) five or more dwelling units on a single tax lot, such as apartments, condominiums and mobile home parks; and

2. Receives services on a per lot or per building basis, as opposed to a per unit basis. Multifamily complex also includes certified or licensed residential care housing, such as group homes and adult foster care homes.

“Operating margin” for a period shall mean gross revenues minus allowable expenses.

“Organic waste” means materials that:

1. Can be biologically synthesized by plants or animals from simpler substances;

2. Are no longer suited for their intended purpose; and

3. Are readily broken down by biological processes into soil constituents. Examples include, but are not limited to, food waste, yard debris, contaminated paper, and putrescible materials that are generally a source of food for bacteria.

“Per class,” used in reference to the imposition of an infraction, refers to an infraction that applies to more than one customer (e.g., failure to distribute required promotional material to 2,000 customers would constitute one class infraction).

“Per day,” used in reference to the imposition of an infraction, refers to an infraction that may apply to one or more customers on the day the infraction occurs (e.g., an uncovered truck would generate one infraction for each day it operated without a cover).

“Per incident,” used in reference to the imposition of an infraction, refers to a franchisee’s failure to comply with the ordinance on an individual act, occurrence, or customer basis (e.g., failure to deliver two recycling bins to a customer within seven days).

“Processing” means an operation where collected source separated recyclable materials are sorted, graded, cleaned, identified or otherwise prepared for end use markets.

“Putrescible waste” means solid waste containing organic material that can be rapidly decomposed by microorganisms, and which may give rise to foul smelling, offensive products during such decomposition or which is capable of attracting or providing food for birds and potential disease vectors such as rodents and flies.

“Receptacle” means a can, cart, container, drop box, compactor or recycling bin or any other means of containment of solid waste, waste or recyclable materials.

“Recyclable material,” “recyclable,” or “recyclables” means any material that has or retains useful physical, chemical, or biological properties after serving its original purpose(s) or function(s), and is separated from solid waste by the generator or at a material recovery facility.

“Recycling” means any process by which waste materials are transformed into new products in such a manner that the original products may lose their identity.

“Residence” or “residential” means a single-family dwelling or any dwelling having four or fewer units on one tax lot regardless of whether it has solid waste collection in individual carts or containers.

“Self-haul” means the collection and transportation of solid waste from a commercial, multifamily, or residential entity by the generator, owner or occupant of the property, rather than by a third party hired to perform this function.

“Solid waste management” means the management of the accumulation, storage, collection, transportation, treatment, processing and final disposal or utilization of solid waste and waste, or resource recovery from solid waste, and facilities necessary or convenient to those activities. The franchisee may contract with another person to provide service of any type under the franchisee’s service franchise, but the franchisee shall remain ultimately responsible for solid waste and waste management in the franchisee’s franchised service area.

“Solid waste” or “waste”” means all useless or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible materials, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, paper and cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge, useless or discarded commercial, industrial, demolition and construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid materials, dead animals and infectious waste as defined in ORS 459.386. “Solid waste” does not include:

1. Source separated, principal recyclable materials, as defined in OAR 340-090-0070 and any others designated by the City, which have been purchased or exchanged for fair market value, unless the City declares a site of uncollected principal recyclable materials to be public nuisance;

2. Hazardous waste as defined in ORS 466.005;

3. Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of animals.

“Source separated materials” means recyclable materials that have been separated by type of recyclable material and removed from the solid waste stream by the person who last used the recyclable materials.

“Unallowable expenses” shall include the following:

1. All charitable and political contributions;

2. Fines and penalties, including without limitation judgments incurred by a franchisee for violation of applicable laws;

3. Payments for services provided by individuals related by blood or marriage or by affiliated companies to a franchisee to the extent that such payments exceed the reasonable cost that would be charged by an independent third party to provide the substantially equivalent service;

4. Accruals for future unknown regulatory changes;

5. Costs associated with purchase of other companies including, but not limited to, employee stock ownership plan payments, goodwill, amortization of goodwill and premiums on key person life insurance policies;

6. Principal or interest payments on the acquisition of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection routes; the purchase of equipment and/or facilities to the extent that the price includes goodwill or a premium in excess of fair market value at the time of acquisition;

7. State and federal income taxes;

8. Fees paid to a franchisee’s board of directors;

9. Advertising expenses beyond basic collection and recycling promotion and education, and minimal telephone listings under “Garbage Collection” or “Recycling Collection.” Display advertisements and entertainment expenses are specifically excluded;

10. Attorney’s fees and related expenses resulting from:

a. Any judicial proceeding in which the City and a franchisee are adverse parties, unless the franchisee is the prevailing party,

b. Any judicial proceeding in which a franchisee is ruled to be liable due to willful misconduct or gross negligence or in violation of law or regulation;

11. Any other expenses defined as unallowable and approved by the council.

“Yard debris” means grass clippings, leaves, tree and shrub prunings of no greater than four inches in diameter, or similar yard and garden vegetation. Yard debris does not include such items as: dirt, sod, stumps, logs, tree and shrub prunings greater than four inches in diameter, rocks, plastic, animal waste or manure, cat litter, potting soil, prepared food wastes or nonputrescible material. [BC 4.08.020, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4497, 12/15/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.100 Nonexclusive Franchise.

A. No person shall do business in the collection and transport of solid waste generated within the City without a current, valid City franchise.

B. A franchise to provide collection service for solid waste, recyclable and compostable materials in a service area of the City shall be granted only after a determination of need for the service.

C. The determination of need is the responsibility of the City Council, which will seek the best balance of the following objectives:

1. To ensure safe, efficient, economical and comprehensive solid waste service;

2. To avoid duplication of service that will cause inefficiency, excessive use of fuel, increased traffic, and greater wear on streets;

3. To provide service in areas of marginal return;

4. To promote and encourage recycling and resource recovery;

5. To improve the likelihood of the franchise holder making a reasonable profit, thereby encouraging investment in modern equipment;

6. To cooperate with other governmental bodies by recognizing their service arrangements; and

7. To otherwise provide for the service in a manner appropriate to the public interest.

D. In granting a franchise renewal or a new franchise due to an annexation, termination, or revocation of a franchise, the Council shall, in addition to the above, consider the following factors in selecting a new or replacement franchisee:

1. The candidate’s prior service record in the same or a related industry, and its professional relationships with other corporate entities and local, regional and/or state jurisdictions;

2. The candidate’s financial ability to perform the obligations of a franchise holder;

3. The candidate’s equipment and personnel available to meet current and future needs of a franchise holder;

4. The candidate’s ability to provide all services to customers within the geographic boundaries of the designated franchise area, including every residential, multifamily and commercial customer;

5. The candidate’s exercise of the burden of proof, demonstrating a proposed franchise area is being or has been underserved by the existing or previous franchise holder; and

6. The candidate’s good moral character as is relevant to a franchised provider’s customer relations, namely any unpaid judgments against the applicant (whether doing business under the same or another name) and any judgments for civil fraud or for a crime of dishonesty.

E. Franchises granted by the City shall be nonexclusive.

1. However, it is understood that during the term of franchises granted under this chapter, the City shall not grant any other person a franchise for solid waste management, unless there is a showing by the applicant of the need for such additional service in the proposed service area.

2. As to such application(s), the Council may consider whether a current franchisee is capable of providing the additional service.

F. In evaluating whether a need exists for additional service, the City Council may consider, among any other criteria it deems relevant, the following items:

1. An increase in the population of the City;

2. An extension of the boundaries of the City;

3. Intensive residential, commercial or industrial development within the boundaries of the City;

4. Changes in solid waste technology and/or recycling collection technology that could substantially improve collection service or reduce collection costs to residents of the City;

5. The effect that an additional franchise would have on each existing franchisee’s ability to meet the City’s service standards and maintain a fair return on its investment;

6. The number of existing collection franchisees or drop box service franchisees, as applicable, providing service in the area of the City in which the applicant wishes to provide service; and

7. Changes in federal or state laws, rules or regulations that substantially affect solid waste or recycling collection requirements.

G. A franchise is not required of the following:

1. Any person self-hauling solid waste, recyclables or compostable materials. A generator may self-haul his or her own material, and a generator’s contractor may haul materials that are generated as a direct result of the service provider’s activity. For example, landscapers, roofers, and remodelers may self-haul materials, but may not contract with third parties other than franchisees for collection and transport.

2. Any person that collects, handles, processes, transports or markets source separated recyclable material where (a) the generator is being paid for the recyclable material, or (b) the net cost to the generator for having the recyclable material removed is zero ($0) for all activities related to each transaction, including but not limited to collection, handling, processing, transporting, marketing, storing and rental of container.

3. Any person that collects, stores, transports, or disposes of waste or solid waste resulting from a disaster event pursuant to a contract with any Federal, State or local agency that was entered into during a state of emergency declared pursuant to BC 2.01.040. [BC 4.08.100, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13; Ordinance No. 4745, 10/17/18]


4.08.110 Term of Franchise.

A. A franchise to provide collection service for solid waste, recyclables and compostable materials in a portion of the City shall be granted for a period of 10 years.

B. At least every three years, the Mayor shall report to the Council a comprehensive review of the rates, customer service, franchise performance based on criteria described in BC 4.08.100, and overall state of the franchise system to determine if the system is achieving waste reduction, increased recycling, cost effective collection services and providing a high level of service to residents and businesses.

1. The Council may extend the franchise term by up to three years, thereby returning the remainder of the franchise term to 10 years.

2. The Council has the authority to not extend a franchise for any reason. If the Council decides not to extend a franchise, it shall, prior to the expiration of the franchise, consider applications for a franchise to serve the affected area from any interested person and award a franchise for that area based on a determination of which applicant best meets the criteria stated in BC 4.08.100.

3. At the time of issuance of an extension of a franchise, the City may impose or modify conditions subject to the notification and hearing process set forth in BC 4.08.120.

4. Prior to the issuance, extension, or review of a franchise, the Council shall provide notice and opportunity for public comment as provided by BC 4.08.120.

5. If the Council determines not to extend a franchise term, then the franchisee shall continue to provide service during the years that are remaining in its franchise term. At all times the franchisee remains subject to the BC.

C. Nothing in this section restricts the Council from suspending, modifying or revoking the franchise for cause pursuant to BC 4.08.430.

1. A franchisee who desires to terminate its rights and obligations under a franchise shall give not less than 90 days’ notice of its intent.

2. Upon receipt of such notice, the Council shall initiate proceedings to consider applications by any other person for a franchise to serve the same area. [BC 4.08.110, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.120 Notice of Franchise Review or Request for Franchise Applications.

A. Prior to a periodic franchise review, or the end of a franchise term, notice that the City intends to review the performance of franchisees or solicit applications for solid waste franchises shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.

B. Notice shall also be sent to all holders of Beaverton solid waste franchises.

C. The Mayor may keep a list of interested persons who will also be provided notice.

D. The Mayor shall establish forms and deadlines. [BC 4.08.120, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.130 Description of Franchise Areas.

A City solid waste franchise service area shall include single-unit residential customers and any multifamily residential, commercial and industrial customers within that service area. The service areas shall be determined by Council resolution.

The franchise areas and the franchisees serving such areas shall be indicated on a map entitled “Solid Waste Franchise Service Areas of the City of Beaverton” (the “map”). A copy of the map shall be dated with the effective date of the Council resolution and maintained in the Office of the Mayor. Amendments to the map may be made by Council resolution, and copies of amendments shall be kept on file by the City Recorder. [BC 4.08.130, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.140 Transfer of Franchise.

A. An assignment or transfer of a franchise shall include, but not be limited to:

1. A sale, exchange or other transfer of 50 percent or more of a franchisee’s assets dedicated to service in the City;

2. A sale, exchange, or other transfer of 50 percent or more of the outstanding common stock of a franchisee;

3. Any reorganization, consolidation, merger, recapitalization, voting trust, pooling agreement, escrow arrangement, liquidation or other transaction to which the franchisee or any of its shareholders is a party that results in a change of ownership or control of 50 percent or more of the value or voting rights in the stock of the franchisee; and

4. Any combination of the foregoing that has the effect of a transfer or change of ownership and control.

B. The franchisee shall provide no less than 60 days’ advance written notice to the City of any proposed transfer or assignment.

1. Except as specifically authorized by the City, the franchisee shall not assign any of its rights or delegate or otherwise transfer any of its obligations to any other person without the prior consent of the City Council.

2. Any such assignment without the consent of City Council shall be void and any such attempted assignment shall constitute default and grounds for termination of the franchise.

C. If a franchisee requests the City’s consent to transfer the franchise, the City shall act on such request within 60 days of the receipt of the franchisee’s written request together with all information, as set forth below, required for the City’s action on the request.

D. The City shall not unreasonably refuse to consent to an assignment of the franchise to a proposed assignee that has sufficient knowledge, experience, and financial resources so as to be able to meet, to the satisfaction of the City Council, in its sole discretion, all obligations of the franchisee hereunder.

E. An application to the City to consider a sale or other transfer of a franchise shall include the following:

1. A nonrefundable application fee of $2,000 payable at the time of application to the City in advance to defray the City’s anticipated expenses and costs resulting from the franchisee’s request;

2. Financial statements audited or reviewed by a certified public accountant of the proposed assignee’s operations for the three immediately preceding operating years together with any additional evidence of financial ability to perform its franchise obligations; and

3. A showing that the proposed assignee meets all City criteria for the grant of a franchise as are set out in BC 4.08.100. [BC 4.08.140, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.200 Responsibility of City.

Franchisees are subject to the exercise of the police power of the City and to such regulations as the City may provide by resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation. [BC 4.08.200, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.205 Rulemaking Authority for Administration and Enforcement.

The Mayor may promulgate such rules and regulations to promote recycling and proper disposal of solid waste as are necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to additional definitions, fee collection requirements, service standards, franchisee responsibilities, customer responsibilities, forms and procedures to implement the provisions of this chapter, and a process for notice and comment regarding such rules and regulations prior to their adoption. [BC 4.08.205, added by Ordinance No. 4331, 11/16/04; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.210 Enforcement of Standards – Customers.

A. A violation of a provision of this chapter or of a rule duly promulgated under authority of this chapter by a franchise customer shall constitute a Class l Civil Infraction and shall be processed according to the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each violation of this chapter or of a rule duly promulgated under authority of this chapter relating to the responsibilities of a franchise customer shall constitute a separate civil infraction. Each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter or of a rule promulgated under authority of this chapter is committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate civil infraction.

C. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter or a rule duly promulgated under authority of this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty or sanction otherwise authorized by law. [BC 4.08.210, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; Ordinance No. 4331, 11/16/04; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.215 Enforcement of Standards – Franchisees.

A. A violation by a franchisee of a provision of this chapter or of a rule duly promulgated under authority of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be processed according to the procedure set forth in this chapter.

B. Infractions under this chapter and under any rules duly promulgated under authority of this chapter are classified by an Enforcement Code consisting of two letters.

1. The first letter identifies the severity of the infraction (“A” being the most severe, “B” being the second most severe, “C” being the third most severe and “D” being the least severe).

2. The second letter identifies whether the infraction is measured “per day” (referred to as D), “per class” (referred to as C), or “per incident” (referred to as I).

C. Violation of this chapter or of a rule duly promulgated under authority of this chapter by a franchisee is punishable as provided in BC 4.08.420.

D. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter or a rule duly promulgated under authority of this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty or sanction otherwise authorized by law.

E. Upon recommendation of the Mayor, the Council may declare a franchisee who fails to abide by the rules to be in default. [BC 4.08.215, added by Ordinance No. 4331, 11/16/04; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.220 Uniform Rate Setting.

A. The City Council may review and set rates on an annual basis by Council resolution that considers the following goals:

1. Rates shall be established to the greatest extent practicable on a cost of service basis.

2. Rates shall be adequate to provide an operating margin equal to nine percent of franchise-wide gross revenues.

a. However, the City shall not be required to change rates if the expected operating margin in the current year falls between seven and 11 percent of gross revenues.

b. The nine percent target return on gross revenues is considered sufficient to reflect the level of business risk assumed by the franchisee, to allow investment in equipment, and to ensure quality collection service.

B. Accordingly, the City shall have the authority to commission audits, reviews, or analysis of franchisee annual reports to validate hauler submissions.

C. The expected operating margin in a future year would incorporate expected inflation factors, and the effect of known or expected increases or decreases in expenses or revenues.

1. The rates charged by franchisees shall conform to the most current Council resolution.

2. Prior to implementation, the Mayor must approve any interim rate for services not included in the current resolution.

3. If the franchisees for the majority of the franchise areas within the City notify the Mayor in writing that they believe a material change outside the franchisees’ control has occurred, and the change will have an adverse effect on operating margins such that current year operating margins will be less than seven percent, a material change will be deemed to have occurred.

a. At that time, the City may undertake any type of review it finds necessary to validate the existence of the material change and estimate its effect on the operating margin.

b. If the results of the review are such that no rate adjustment is warranted, persons requesting the review shall reimburse the City for reasonable costs incurred during the investigation at the time the next payment of franchise fees is due.

c. If the City believes that a material change has occurred that will result in current year operating margins falling under seven percent or over 11 percent, the City may undertake an abbreviated rate review at its own expense.

4. A change in tipping fee will be evaluated by the Mayor to determine its effect upon rates and services. [BC 4.08.220, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.230 Imposition of Franchise Fees.

A. For the privilege of using the City’s streets and other facilities and for the purpose of defraying the City’s regulatory expenses, each franchisee shall pay a franchise fee to the City at a rate established by resolution of the City Council.

1. The franchise fee shall be computed and collected on a calendar quarterly basis.

2. The fee shall be paid by the franchisee not later than the last day of the month immediately following the end of the quarter.

3. A franchise fee payment shall become delinquent if not paid by the last day of the month immediately following the end of the quarter.

4. A simple interest charge of 18 percent shall be charged against the entire delinquent balance until the balance is paid.

B. At the time of payment of the quarterly fee, each franchisee shall file with the Mayor a verified statement of quarterly cash receipts for the period covered by the tendered fee.

1. Such statements shall be public records.

2. Each franchisee shall maintain books and records disclosing the cash receipts derived from business conducted within the City, which shall be open at reasonable times for audit by the Mayor.

3. The City may require a uniform system of bookkeeping and record keeping to be used by all franchisees.

4. Material misrepresentation of cash receipts by a franchisee constitutes cause for revocation of the franchise.

C. The franchise fee imposed by this section is in addition to and not in lieu of any other fee, charge, or tax imposed by the City.

D. The obligation to pay franchise fees on cash receipts generated from services performed under a City franchise shall survive termination of the franchise no matter how terminated.

E. The City Council by resolution may change the amount and computation of franchise fees from time to time.

F. The Council by resolution may reallocate the franchise fee percentages for different customer groups, such as residential or commercial, if such a reallocation mitigates a cost of service disparity that is not fully corrected through the rate setting process.

1. In order to do so, the Mayor must be able to demonstrate that overall equity among the franchisees is improved.

2. Such a reallocation may not materially reduce the amount of total franchise fee revenue obtained by the City. [BC 4.08.230, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.240 Clean and Efficient Fleet.

The Mayor is authorized to adopt requirements leading to a clean and efficient collection fleet to protect public health and the environment. This can include requiring the use of a blend of biodiesel fuel in any collection vehicle with a diesel engine and requiring regular replacement of all collection vehicles used by franchisees within the City.

A. For purposes of this section, “collection vehicles” are vehicles used by franchisees for residential or commercial collection of solid waste, recycling or compostable materials for at least 50 percent of their hours or miles. “Collection vehicles” do not include backup vehicles used less than 20 percent of full-time vehicles’ hours or miles.

B. Fleet Replacement.

1. By December 31, 2017, all collection vehicles shall have engines that are 12 years old or newer.

2. Diesel Particulate Filter Retrofits. Collection vehicles that have been retrofitted with a diesel particulate filter through a Metro grant-funded program will be considered to have 2007 model year engines and will not be required to be replaced until December 31, 2019.

3. Franchisees shall prepare and annually update a clean and efficient fleet replacement plan (plan), approved by the Mayor, that complies with the following deadlines:

a. The plan shall provide for the replacement of all collection vehicles with engines older than the 2005 model year by December 31, 2017.

b. The plan shall provide for the replacement of no more than five vehicles between January 1, 2017, and December 31, 2017. [BC 4.08.240, added by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]

II. REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES 


4.08.310 Periodic Informational Reports.

Each franchisee shall respond to periodic requests for information from the Mayor about quantities of materials collected, locations where materials are delivered, customer account addresses, customer service inquiries and/or other information relevant to franchise oversight. [BC 4.08.230, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.320 Quarterly Franchise Fee Report.

A. Each franchisee shall complete and remit to the City a quarterly franchise fee report not later than the last day of the month immediately following the end of the quarter.

B. At the time of payment of the quarterly franchise fees, the franchisee shall file with the Mayor a sworn and verified statement of quarterly gross revenues for the period covered by the tendered fee.

1. Such statements shall be public records.

2. Each franchisee shall maintain books and records disclosing the gross receipts derived from business conducted within the City, which shall be open at reasonable times for audit by the Mayor.

3. The City may require a uniform system of bookkeeping and record keeping to be used by all franchisees. (D/D)

4. Misrepresentation of cash receipts shall be deemed:

a. Material and a breach of the franchise contract; and

b. Cause to initiate the process to terminate the franchise. [BC 4.08.320, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.330 Annual Franchise Reports.

A. An annual financial/operational report in a format approved by the Mayor that identifies revenues, expenses, and selected program data for the previous calendar year, specifically associated with or allocated to the City, is due on or before March 15th of each year. (D/D)

B. Specifically, franchisees shall report revenues and expenses (allowable and unallowable), in an income statement format, and provide a variety of information about customer counts, service levels, disposal volumes, and recycling activities.

1. While direct charge of allowable expenses is preferred, it is understood that many franchisees provide service in areas outside the City.

2. Consequently, allocations to franchise operations within the City are necessary for most allowable expenses.

C. In addition to the results of operations within the City, franchisees shall report totals for all operations, both within and outside the City, that share significant operational, management, and administrative expenses with the Beaverton franchise.

1. Resources allocated from regional or corporate offices or affiliates shall be distributed to appropriate expense line items, and shall also be disclosed in a schedule describing total allocations and their distribution to individual expense line items.

2. All allocations from affiliated companies must be described and must be equal to or less than the fair market value of similar goods and services purchased from a nonaffiliated company.

D. The report will also include a synopsis of the operating year, a description of the measures each franchisee has taken in the preceding year to make its operation more efficient, a listing of the efficiency measures that each franchisee proposes to take in the next year, a composite table showing the type and number of customer service complaints, a description of the measures that the franchisee has taken or is planning to take to correct the cause of commonly reported complaints, and such other information as requested by the Mayor.

1. All report information shall be presented on a calendar year basis.

2. The report shall contain detailed information on education and promotion activities, and other information as required by the Mayor. (D/D)

E. Franchisees may identify information submitted to the City in the annual report as confidential.

1. The City shall treat any information marked “Confidential” as such, and shall not subject the confidential information to public disclosure except as required by law.

2. If the City receives a request for disclosure of confidential information, the Mayor shall notify the franchisee within a reasonable time after receiving the request so as to allow the franchisee a reasonable opportunity to defend against the requested disclosure through appropriate legal process. [BC 4.08.330, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.340 Subcontracting Services.

A. A franchisee may contract with another person to provide service within the franchisee’s service area with the written approval of the Mayor; provided, that:

1. The subcontract does not amount to a transfer of the collection franchise; and

2. The subcontracting party agrees to:

a. Abide by the conditions of this chapter; and

b. In written application to the City, show how they will meet the criteria applying to the current franchise.

B. A franchisee may subcontract all drop box and medical/infectious waste collection, but may not otherwise subcontract more than 25 percent of the remaining franchised services, except during an emergency, with the approval of the Mayor, for a period of not more than 60 days. (A/I) [BC 4.08.340, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.350 Access for Inspections and Delivery of Notices.

A. Franchisees shall make all company premises, facilities and records related to their solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services (including, but not limited to: offices, storage areas, financial records, nonfinancial records, records pertaining to the origin of any solid waste collected by the franchisee, receipts for sale or delivery of collected recyclable materials, customer lists, and all vehicle maintenance and safety records required under ODOT motor carrier requirements and regulations and ORS 767) available for inspection by the Mayor within 24 hours of notice by registered mail.

1. Such inspections are only for purposes of enforcing this chapter, and are restricted to normal business hours.

2. During normal business hours, the franchisee shall make all company premises and facilities accessible to City employees for delivery of any written notices. (A/I)

B. 1. Collection vehicles must be accessible for inspection during the normal operating hours for collection, in addition to normal business hours.

2. Where receptacles are stored in the public right-of-way or when the City is inspecting a situation where the franchisee is allegedly commingling recyclable materials or yard debris with solid waste, the need for 24 hours’ notice does not apply to inspection of receptacles or vehicles. (A/I) [BC 4.08.350, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.360 Indemnification, Bond and Insurance.

A. Indemnification.

1. A franchisee shall pay, save harmless and indemnify the City from any loss, damage, penalty or claim against the City on account of, or in connection with, any activity of the franchisee in the operation of the franchisee’s solid waste collection business, including activity by any contract hauler under BC 4.08.055(D).

2. If such suit shall be filed against the City, either independently or jointly with the franchisee or its contract hauler to recover for any claim or damages, the franchisee, upon notice to it by the City, shall defend the City against the action.

3. In the event of a final judgment being obtained against the City, either independently or jointly with the franchisee or its contract hauler, the franchisee will pay said judgment and all costs and hold the City harmless therefrom. (A/I)

B. Bond.

1. Each collection franchisee and drop box franchisee shall furnish a performance bond, in a form approved by the City Attorney, by an acceptable surety company in the amount of $25,000, but may, in lieu of a bond, furnish an irrevocable letter of credit or assign a savings account or deposit in any federally insured financial institution in the amount of $25,000 on a form approved by the City Attorney.

2. The security shall guarantee faithful performance of all the obligations contained herein, with the premium for such bond or cost of such assignment to be paid by the collection franchisee or drop box franchisee furnishing the bond or letter of credit, or making the assignment. (A/I)

C. Insurance.

1. A franchisee shall maintain commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis, which will cover the franchisee’s business operation, including each vehicle it operates, in such forms and with such companies as shall be approved by the City Attorney.

2. The insurance coverage shall include not less than $100,000 for one person, nor less than $300,000 for bodily injury due to each occurrence, and not less than $100,000 for damage to property due to each occurrence, and coverage of at least $1,000,000 in the aggregate per occurrence.

3. All such insurance coverage shall provide a 30-day notice to the Mayor in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in the policies prior to the date the material alteration or cancellation shall become effective.

4. Copies of all policies required hereunder shall be furnished to and filed with the Mayor prior to the commencement of operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be.

5. The franchisee shall furnish proof annually to the Mayor that the insurance remains in effect. (A/I)

D. Good Faith and Liability of Franchisee. The provisions of this section, any bonds accepted by the City pursuant thereto, and any damage recovered by the City hereunder shall not be construed to excuse unfaithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under this chapter or the franchisee for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. [BC 4.08.360, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]

III. ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS, SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE 


4.08.410 Initiation of Enforcement Actions.

In addition to enforcement under State law, the City may prosecute any infraction as defined in this chapter or the rules issued hereunder, based on any information coming to the City, in Beaverton Municipal Court. The burden of proof is on the City to prove an infraction by a preponderance of the evidence. [BC 4.08.410, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.420 Penalties for Infractions.

A. Each franchise provision, including rules adopted hereunder, is assigned an enforcement code consisting of two letters, such as (A/I).

1. The first letter represents the severity of the infraction (A being the most severe), and the second identifies the incident definition.

2. Incident definitions indicate whether the infraction is measured “per day,” referred to as D, “per class,” referred to as C, or “per incident,” referred to as I.

B. The severity of the infraction is described in the following table:

	Category	First Infraction	Second Infraction	Third and Subsequent Infractions

	A	$500	$1,000	$1,500

	B	$400	$800	$1,200

	C	$300	$600	$900

	D	$200	$400	$600

	E	Warning	Warning	Treat as D

C. 1. In addition to monetary penalties and upon recommendation by the Mayor, the City Council may terminate for default a franchise held by a person who is assessed more than $2,000 in penalties per 1,000 customers in any 365-day period.

2. In the event a franchise is sold, the infraction record of the previous owner will remain with the new owner, if the previous owner maintains any ownership or control of the new owner of the franchise.

D. Penalties not paid within the allotted time are subject to interest charges at the statutory rate of interest. [BC 4.08.420, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.430 Termination of Franchise for Default.

A. 1. In addition to default for accrued penalties, upon recommendation by the Mayor, the City Council may terminate a franchise for the franchise holder’s default in performing any material term or condition of the franchise.

2. An event of default also shall include, but not be limited to, entry of a judgment against the franchise holder for material misrepresentation or deceit committed against the City or a customer, or entry of a judgment of conviction (including conviction on a plea of no contest) against the franchise holder or any principal of same for a crime involving dishonesty.

B. 1. Notice to a franchisee of default shall be delivered to the franchisee by certified mail requiring the franchisee to show cause in a public hearing before the City Council at a place and time to be stated in the notice, but no earlier than 14 days from the date the notice is mailed, why the franchise should not be terminated.

2. At the hearing the franchisee shall demonstrate the measures it has taken or commenced to cure the default. [BC 4.08.430, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.440 Service Interruption.

A. Except for the right to refuse service for nonpayment as set forth in this chapter, franchisees shall not interrupt service unless:

1. Access roads, streets and highways necessary for collection operations are unusable or unsafe, and there are no alternative routes. Franchisees shall resume service within 24 hours after access is restored.

2. A force majeure event occurs.

B. Upon the occurrence of a force majeure event that prevents or impairs a franchisee’s ability to perform any of its franchise obligations, the franchisee shall:

1. Provide immediate notice, either verbal or written, to the Mayor of the nature of the event, and the extent and anticipated duration of franchisee’s inability to perform any obligation under this agreement. If verbal notice is given, then written notice must be delivered to the City within 24 hours of verbal notice;

2. Commence immediately to develop, in communication and cooperation with the City, an interim plan for the restoration of full performance; and

3. Take all such other reasonable actions requested by the City to assist the City in protecting the public health and safety, and to restore service as soon as practicable.

C. Labor unrest, including but not limited to strike, work stoppage or slowdown, sick out, picketing, or other concerted job action conducted by franchisee employees or directed at the franchisee is not an event of force majeure, and the franchisee shall be obligated to continue to provide service, notwithstanding the occurrence of any or all of such events. [BC 4.08.440, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.450 City’s Right to Perform Service.

A. 1. In the event that a franchisee, for any reason whatsoever, fails, refuses or is unable to collect or transport any or all solid waste for a period of more than 48 hours, and if, as a result thereof, solid waste or recyclable materials should accumulate in the City to such an extent that the City finds that such accumulation endangers the public health, safety or welfare, then the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, upon 24 hours’ prior written notice to the franchisee, to perform or cause to be performed collection services with its own or other personnel at the franchisee’s expense.

2. This right shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other remedy available to the City.

B. If necessary and until such time as the emergency is resolved, the City may take temporary possession of, and a franchisee shall peacefully surrender, any or all the franchisee’s land, equipment, and other property used or useful in the collection of solid waste or recyclable materials. [BC 4.08.450, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.460 Dispute Resolution with Customers.

A. 1. Upon receipt of any notice of dispute from a customer about any bill, charge, or service, the franchisee shall thoroughly investigate the matter and promptly report the results of its investigation to the customer.

2. A franchisee shall not refuse service to any customer during a time of dispute.

B. If the franchisee is not able to resolve a dispute with the customer, the customer may contact the Mayor.

1. The Mayor or delegate will act as an informal arbitrator in an attempt to resolve the matter.

2. The Mayor may formally resolve a dispute of $500.00 or on the basis of evidence presented by the franchisee and the customer.

C. For matters in excess of $500.00, the parties may mutually agree to abide by the City’s recommended resolution, or pursue the matter in any court with jurisdiction. [BC 4.08.460, added by Ordinance No. 4203, 5/6/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.470 Dispute Resolution with City.

A. 1. During all disputes arising under this franchise, the City and franchisee shall continue performance of their respective obligations under this franchise, unless and until the franchisee is terminated for default.

2. In which case, the franchisee’s obligation to pay a franchise fee based on cash receipts generated from services provided under the franchise during said dispute shall survive such termination.

B. In addition to and without waiving any rights and remedies under civil or common law, in the event of a dispute under this franchise, the parties may mutually agree to arbitration.

1. Within 15 days after agreement to arbitration has been reached, each party shall submit the name of its own arbitrator, selected from a panel of persons qualified with the Arbitration Service of Portland, Inc., or the American Arbitration Association, whichever organization is specified in the written notice of request for arbitration.

2. The two arbitrators shall select a third arbitrator from such panel within 15 days, or in case of a disagreement concerning the appointment of the third arbitrator, the third arbitrator shall be appointed from such panel by the presiding judge for the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon for Washington County.

3. During such time that the arbitrators are being selected or appointed, the parties shall continue to negotiate in good faith to resolve their dispute in a cooperative manner.

4. Arbitration shall be conducted in the City in accordance with the then effective rules of the arbitration service/association.

5. The decision of the arbitrators in the matter shall be final and binding on the parties, and any judgment upon the award rendered pursuant to such arbitration may be entered in any court having jurisdiction thereof. [BC 4.08.470, amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]

IV. BUSINESS RECYCLING REQUIREMENT 


4.08.505 Short Title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the “business recycling requirement ordinance.” [BC 4.08.505, added by Ordinance No. 4497, 12/15/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.510 Purpose.

The purpose of this article is to comply with the business recycling requirement set forth in Metro Code Chapter 5.10. A significant increase in business recycling will assist the Metro region in achieving waste reduction goals, conserving natural resources, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. [BC 4.08.510, added by Ordinance No. 4497, 12/15/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.520 Applicability.

This article applies to all businesses and business recycling service customers except for sites located in a residence. [BC 4.08.520, added by Ordinance No. 4497, 12/15/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.530 Business Recycling Requirement.

A. Businesses shall source separate all recyclable paper, cardboard, glass and plastic bottles and jars, and metal cans for reuse or recycling.

B. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall ensure the provision of recycling containers for internal maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials may be collected, stored, or both.

C. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall post accurate signs that:

1. Describe the location where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both;

2. Identify the materials that the business must source separate for reuse or recycling; and

3. Provide recycling instructions. [BC 4.08.530, added by Ordinance No. 4497, 12/15/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


4.08.540 Compliance with Business Recycling Requirement.

A. A business or business recycling service customer that does not comply with the business recycling requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall describe the violation, provide the business or business recycling service customer an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance.

B. A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation shall provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the citation and shall notify the business or business recycling service customer that it may be subject to a fine.

C. A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the citation may be subject to a fine.

D. A violation of a provision of this article or of a rule duly promulgated under authority of this article by a business or business recycling service customer shall constitute a Class 1 Civil Infraction and shall be processed according to the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

E. Each violation of this article or of a rule duly promulgated under authority of this article relating to business recycling requirements shall constitute a separate civil infraction. Each day that a violation of a provision of this article or of a rule promulgated under authority of this article is committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate civil infraction.

F. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this article or a rule duly promulgated under authority of this article is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty or sanction otherwise authorized by law. [BC 4.08.540, added by Ordinance No. 4497, 12/15/08; amended by Ordinance No. 4613, 4/2/13]


Chapter 4.10 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS

Sections:

4.10.010    Short Title.

4.10.015    Definitions.

4.10.020    Declaration of Powers.

4.10.025    Selection of Franchise.

4.10.030    Violation, Penalties and Remedies.


4.10.010 Short Title.

BC 4.10.010 through 4.10.030 shall be known and may be cited as the “Beaverton Cable Communications Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance”.


4.10.015 Definitions.

As used in this ordinance the following mean:

Cable communications system or system – A system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios, and any other conductors, terminals, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the primary purpose of distributing video programming to subscribers and the secondary or additional purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electronic or electrical signals, whether owned, rented, leased, or lease-purchased by a person, firm or corporation.

Franchise – The privilege conferred upon a person, (franchisee) by the City to operate a cable communications system under the terms and provisions of this ordinance.


4.10.020 Declaration of Powers.

The City, by and through its Council, recognizes, declares and establishes the authority to regulate the development and operation of a cable communications system for the City and to exercise all powers necessary for that purpose, including, but not limited to, the following:

A. To grant by resolution non-exclusive franchises for the development and operation of a system or systems;

B. To contract, jointly agree or otherwise provide with other local or regional governments, counties or special districts or other public or private entities, for the development, operation, and/or regulation of a system or to exercise any powers, rights, duties or responsibilities pursuant to BC 4.10.010 through 4.10.030, or franchises therefore, even if the system extends beyond the boundaries of the City;

C. To create local improvement districts for the development or extension of a system and/or to provide for the undergrounding of the system as a local improvement, as that term is defined by ORS Chapter 223, or City ordinances;

D. To purchase, hire, construct, own, maintain and operate or lease a system and to acquire property necessary for any such purpose;

E. To regulate and supervise all facets of a system, including, but not limited to:

1. consumer complaints;

2. disputes among the City, franchisees, and consumers;

3. fair employment practices;

4. the development, management and control of a government access channel as well as development of other access channels;

5. rates and review of finances for rate adjustments;

6. construction timetables and standards;

7. modernization of technical aspects;

8. ensuring adherence to federal and state regulations;

9. franchise transfer and transfer of control of ownership;

10. franchise renewal and/or franchise revocation;

11. enforcement of buy-back, lease back or option to purchase provisions; and

12. receivership and foreclosure procedures.


4.10.025 Selection of Franchise.

A. If the Council finds it in the best interests of the City to grant a franchise for a system, the procedures of this section shall be followed. On motion of the Council, the mayor or the mayor’s designee shall prepare a request for proposal (hereafter referred to as an “RFP”) containing at least the following:

1. information and instructions relating to the preparation and filing of bid proposals;

2. requirements regarding the development, operation and regulation of a system, including, but not limited to the following:

a. the length, renewal and transfer or assignment of the franchise, including foreclosure and receivership provisions,

b. a description of the franchise territory and the extension of service,

c. the system design, including channel capacity, channel uses, access programming facilities, specialized services, point to point service, two-way provisions, subscriber privacy, interconnection of systems, and underground and aboveground installation requirements,

d. technical performance standards,

e. records and reporting,

f. indemnification, insurance, and liability for damages; and

g. provision of an option for the City to acquire the system upon revocation or expiration of the franchise;

3. criteria to be used in evaluating applicant proposals.

B. The Council, by resolution, may:

1. approve the RFP as proposed, or modify or otherwise make amendments to it as necessary;

2. authorize the mayor to seek bids for a system pursuant to the RFP.

C. The mayor may employ the services of a technical consultant, as necessary, to assist in the analysis of any matter relative to the RFP and to the evaluation of any bid.

D. The mayor or the mayor’s designee shall prepare an evaluation of the bids received, and shall submit the evaluation to the Council together with any recommendations. The evaluation shall be made available to the public for inspection.

E. The Council may award a franchise to an applicant only after a public hearing on the application and bid, notice of which shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. All applicants shall be notified by mail of the public hearing; provided, however, that no defect in the notice or failure to notify shall invalidate the franchise awarded.

F. No franchise or franchise award shall be deemed final until passage of a resolution containing the terms and conditions of the franchise. The franchisee shall bear the costs of all publications and notices given in connection with the award of the franchise.


4.10.030 Violation, Penalties and Remedies.

A. Violation and Penalties. Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provision of this ordinance or performing any of the acts and/or functions itemized under BC 4.10.015 A of this ordinance, which defines a cable communications system, without having been awarded a franchise to perform the acts or functions pursuant to the terms of this ordinance shall be deemed to have committed a Class 1 Civil Infraction. The infraction shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050, as it is now or hereafter constituted. Each violation occurring on a separate day is considered a separate violation of this ordinance.

B. Cumulative Remedies. The rights, remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and not mutually exclusive and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the City under any other ordinance or law.

C. Injunctive Relief. On request of the mayor, the City attorney may institute a suit in equity in the circuit court of the State or other appropriate court to enjoin the continued violation of any provision of this ordinance.


Chapter 4.15 UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

4.15.010    Short Title.

4.15.020    Purpose and Intent.

4.15.030    Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights-of-Way.

4.15.040    Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.

4.15.050    Definitions.

4.15.060    Registration.

4.15.070    Licenses.

4.15.080    Construction and Restoration.

4.15.090    Location of Facilities.

4.15.100    Leased Capacity.

4.15.110    Maintenance.

4.15.120    Vacation.

4.15.130    Rights-of-Way Fee.

4.15.140    Audits.

4.15.150    Insurance and Indemnification.

4.15.160    Compliance.

4.15.170    Confidential/Proprietary Information.

4.15.180    Equal Employment Opportunity/Diversity in Workforce/Minority Business Enterprises.

4.15.190    Penalties.

4.15.200    Severability and Preemption.

4.15.210    Application to Existing Agreements.


4.15.010 Short Title. 

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referenced as the “Utility Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way” ordinance. [BC 4.15.010, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.020 Purpose and Intent. 

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

A. Permit and manage reasonable access to the rights-of-way of the City for utility purposes and conserve the limited physical capacity of those rights-of-way held in trust by the City consistent with applicable State and Federal law;

B. Assure that the City’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating access to and the use of the rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

C. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and its residents, who have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build and maintain the rights-of-way, for permitting use of the rights-of-way by persons who generate revenue by placing facilities therein and charging residents for services delivered thereby;

D. Assure that all utility companies, persons and other entities owning or operating facilities or providing services within the City register and comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City;

E. Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its residents, and assure the structural integrity of its rights-of-way when a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of the rights-of-way is their frequent excavation by persons whose facilities are located therein;

F. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive utility services on the widest possible basis to businesses and residents of the City. [BC 4.15.020, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.030 Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights-of-Way.

A. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all rights-of-way within the City under authority of the City Charter and State law. 

B. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each right-of-way whether the City has a fee, easement or other legal interest in the right-of-way, and whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

C. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a right-of-way by the City is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the City to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

D. The provisions of this chapter are subject to and will be applied consistent with applicable State and Federal laws, rules and regulations and, to the extent possible, shall be interpreted to be consistent with such laws, rules and regulations. [BC 4.15.030, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.040 Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.

A. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all other Federal, State, local and City charges, including any permit fee, or any other generally applicable fee, tax or charge on the business, occupation, property or income, as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility operator, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of utility services.

B. The City has determined that any fee or tax provided for by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees or taxes are not imposed on property or property owners.

C. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter are subject to applicable Federal and State laws. [BC 4.15.040, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16] 


4.15.050 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive.

A. “Cable service” is to be defined consistent with Federal laws and means the one-way transmission to subscribers of: (1) video programming, or (2) other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

B. “City” means the City of Beaverton, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the City’s behalf.

C. “City Council” means the elected governing body of the City of Beaverton, Oregon.

D. “City facilities” means City or publicly owned structures or equipment located within the rights-of-way or public easement used for governmental purposes.

E. “Communications services” means any service provided for the purpose of transmission of information including, but not limited to, voice, video or data, without regard to the transmission protocol employed, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself. Communications services includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information transport, but does not include: (1) cable service; (2) open video system service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. 76; (3) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; (4) public communications systems; and (5) direct-to-home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act.

F. “License” means the authorization granted by the City to a utility operator pursuant to this chapter.

G. “Person” means and includes any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association, local service district, governmental entity or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity.

H. “Public communications system” means any system owned or operated by a government entity or entities for their exclusive use for internal communications or communications with other government entities, and includes services provided by the State of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140. “Public communications system” does not include any system used for sale or resale, including trade, barter or other exchange of value, of communications services or capacity on the system, directly or indirectly, to any person.

I. “Public works director” means the public works director for the City of Beaverton or any designee.

J. “Public utility easement” means the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under an easement for the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, inspection and repair of utility facilities. “Public utility easement” does not include an easement solely for the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, inspection and repair of City facilities, or where the proposed use by the utility operator is inconsistent with the terms of any easement granted to the City.

K. “Rights-of-way” means and includes, but is not limited to, the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, public utility easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but does not include parks, parkland or other City property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the City’s right, title, interest and authority to grant a license to occupy and use such areas for utility facilities.

L. “State” means the State of Oregon.

M. “Utility facility” or “facility” means any physical component of a system, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, transmitters, plants, equipment and other facilities, located within, under or above the rights-of-way, any portion of which is used or designed to be used to deliver, transmit or otherwise provide utility service.

N. “Utility operator” or “operator” means any person who owns, places, operates or maintains a utility facility within the City.

O. “Utility service” means the provision, by means of utility facilities permanently located within, under or above the rights-of-way, whether or not such facilities are owned by the service provider, of electricity, natural gas, communications services, cable services, water, sewer or storm sewer to or from customers within the corporate boundaries of the City, or the transmission of any of these services through the City whether or not customers within the City are served by those transmissions.

P. “Work” means the construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance or relocation of any utility facility, including but not limited to any excavation and restoration required in association with such construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance or relocation. [BC 4.15.050, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.060 Registration.

A. Registration Required. Every person who desires to provide utility services to customers within the City shall register with the City prior to providing any utility services to any customer in the City. Every person providing utility services to customers within the City as of the effective date of this chapter shall register within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter. 

B. Annual Registration. After registering with the City pursuant to subsection A of this section, the registrant shall, by December 31st of each year, file with the City a new registration form if it intends to provide utility service at any time in the following calendar year. Registrants that file an initial registration pursuant to subsection A of this section on or after September 30th shall not be required to file an annual registration until December 31st of the following year.

C. Registration Application. The registration shall be on a form provided by the City, and shall be accompanied by any additional documents required by the City to identify the registrant and its legal status, describe the type of utility services provided or to be provided by the registrant and list the facilities over which the utility services will be provided.

D. Registration Fee. Each application for registration shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council sufficient to fully recover all of the City’s costs of administering the registration program. [BC 4.15.060, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.070 Licenses.

A. License Required.

1. Except those utility operators with a valid franchise agreement from the City, every person shall obtain a license from the City prior to conducting any work in the rights-of-way.

2. Every person that owns or controls utility facilities in the rights-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter shall apply for a license from the City within 45 days of the later of: (a) the effective date of this chapter, or (b) the expiration of a valid franchise from the City, unless a new franchise is granted by the City pursuant to subsection E of this section.

B. License Application. The license application shall be on a form provided by the City, and shall be accompanied by any additional documents required by the application to identify the applicant, its legal status, including its authorization to do business in Oregon, a description of the type of utility service provided or to be provided by the applicant, and the facilities over which the utility service will be provided, and other information reasonably necessary to determine the applicant’s ability to comply with the terms of this chapter.

C. License Application Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee or deposit set by resolution of the City Council in an amount sufficient to fully recover all of the City’s costs related to processing the application for the license. 

D. Determination by City. The City shall issue, within a reasonable period of time, a written determination granting or denying the license in whole or in part. If the license is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The license shall be evaluated based upon the provisions of this chapter, the continuing capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed utility facilities and the applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules, regulations and policies.

E. Franchise Agreements. If the public interest warrants, the City and utility operator may enter into a written franchise agreement that includes terms that clarify, enhance, expand, waive or vary the provisions of this chapter, consistent with applicable State and Federal law. The franchise may conflict with the terms of this chapter with the review and approval of the City Council. The franchise shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter to the extent such provisions are not in conflict with any such franchise. In the event of a conflict between the express provisions of a franchise and this chapter, the franchise shall control. 

F. Rights Granted.

1. The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to the provisions of the City code and other applicable provisions of State or Federal law, to construct, place, maintain and operate utility facilities in the rights-of-way for the term of the license.

2. Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not convey equitable or legal title in the rights-of-way, and may not be assigned or transferred except as permitted in subsection K of this section.

3. Neither the issuance of the license nor any provisions contained therein shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power, including without limitation the police power or regulatory power of the City, as it may exist at the time the license is issued or thereafter obtained.

G. Term. Subject to the termination provisions in subsection M of this section, the license granted pursuant to this chapter will remain in effect for a term of five years.

H. License Nonexclusive. No license granted pursuant to this section shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the rights-of-way for delivery of utility services or any other purpose. The City expressly reserves the right to grant licenses, franchises or other rights to other persons, as well as the City’s right to use the rights-of-way, for similar or different purposes. The license is subject to all recorded deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions, encumbrances and claims of title of record that may affect the rights-of-way. Nothing in the license shall be deemed to grant, convey, create or vest in licensee a real property interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest or easement.

I. Reservation of City Rights. Nothing in the license shall be construed to prevent the City from grading, paving, repairing or altering any rights-of-way, constructing, laying down, repairing, relocating or removing City facilities or establishing any other public work, utility or improvement of any kind, including repairs, replacement or removal of any City facilities. If any of licensee’s utility facilities interfere with the construction, repair, replacement, alteration or removal of any rights-of-way, public work, City utility, City improvement or City facility, except those providing utility services in competition with a licensee, licensee’s facilities shall be removed or relocated as provided in BC 4.15.090(C), (D) and (E), in a manner acceptable to the City and consistent with industry standard engineering and safety codes.

J. Multiple Services.

1. A utility operator that provides or transmits or allows the provision or transmission of utility services and other services over its facilities is subject to the license and right-of-way fee requirements of this chapter for the portion of the facilities and extent of utility services delivered over those facilities. Nothing in this subsection (J)(1) requires a utility operator to pay the license, registration or right-of-way fee requirements owed to the City by a third party using the utility operator’s facilities.

2. A utility operator that provides or transmits more than one utility service over its facilities is not required to obtain a separate license or franchise for each utility service; provided, that it gives notice to the City of each utility service provided or transmitted and pays the applicable rights-of-way fee for each utility service.

K. Transfer or Assignment. Unless exempted by applicable State and Federal laws, the licensee shall obtain the written consent of the City prior to the transfer or assignment of the license. The license shall not be transferred or assigned unless the proposed transferee or assignee is authorized under all applicable laws to own or operate the utility system and the transfer or assignment is approved by all agencies or organizations required or authorized under Federal and State laws to approve such transfer or assignment. If a license is transferred or assigned, the transferee or assignee shall become responsible for fulfilling all the obligations under the license with respect to all facilities of the licensee at the time of transfer or assignment. A transfer or assignment of a license does not extend the term of the license.

L. Renewal. At least 90, but no more than 180, days prior to the expiration of a license granted pursuant to this section, a licensee seeking renewal of its license shall submit a license application to the City, including all information required in subsection B of this section and the application fee required in subsection C of this section. The City shall review the application as required by subsection D of this section and grant or deny the license within 90 days of submission of the application. If the City determines that the licensee is in violation of the terms of this chapter at the time it submits its application, the City may require that the licensee cure the violation or submit a detailed plan to cure the violation within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the City, before the City will consider the application or grant the license. If the City requires the licensee to cure or submit a plan to cure a violation, the City will grant or deny the license application within 90 days of confirming that the violation has been cured or of accepting the licensee’s plan to cure the violation.

M. Termination.

1. Revocation or Termination of a License. The City Council may terminate or revoke the license granted pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:

a. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;

b. Violation of any provision of the license;

c. Misrepresentation in a license application;

d. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs due the City after final determination of the taxes, compensation, fees or costs;

e. Failure to restore the rights-of-way after construction as required by this chapter or other applicable State and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations;

f. Failure to comply with technical, safety and engineering standards related to work in the rights-of-way; or

g. Failure to obtain or maintain any and all licenses, permits, certifications and other authorizations required by State or Federal law for the placement, maintenance or operation of the utility facilities.

2. Standards for Revocation or Termination. In determining whether termination, revocation or some other sanction is appropriate, the following factors shall be considered:

a. Whether the violation was intentional; 

b. The egregiousness of the violation;

c. The harm that resulted;

d. The utility operator’s history of compliance; and

e. The utility operator’s cooperation in discovering, admitting and curing the violation.

3. Notice and Cure. The City shall give the utility operator written notice of any apparent violations before terminating a license. The notice shall include a clear and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance and provide a reasonable time (no less than 20 and no more than 40 days) for the utility operator to demonstrate that the utility operator has remained in compliance, that the utility operator has cured or is in the process of curing any violation or noncompliance, or that it would be in the public interest to impose a penalty or sanction less than termination or revocation. If the utility operator is in the process of curing a violation or noncompliance, the utility operator must demonstrate that it acted promptly and continues to actively work on compliance. If the utility operator does not respond, the Public Works Director shall refer the matter to the City Council, which shall provide a duly noticed public hearing to determine whether the license shall be terminated or revoked. [BC 4.15.070, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.080 Construction and Restoration. 

A. Construction Codes. Utility facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local codes, rules and regulations, including without limitation the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, Chapter 9.05 BC and the City’s Engineering Design Manual. 

B. Construction Permits.

1. No person shall perform any work on utility facilities within the rights-of-way without first obtaining all required permits. The City shall not issue a permit for the construction, installation, maintenance or repair of utility facilities unless the utility operator of the facilities has registered and applied for and received the license required by this chapter, or has a current franchise with the City, and all applicable fees have been paid.

2. In the event of an emergency, a utility operator with a license pursuant to this chapter or its contractor may perform work on its utility facilities without first obtaining a permit from the City; provided, that, to the extent reasonably feasible, it attempts to notify the Public Works Department prior to commencing the emergency work and in any event initiates a permit application as soon as reasonably practicable, but not later than 12:00 noon of the next business day after commencing the emergency work. As used in this subsection, “emergency” means a circumstance in which immediate work is necessary to restore lost service or prevent immediate harm to persons or property.

3. Applications for permits to construct utility facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the City and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

a. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

b. The location and route of all utility facilities to be installed aboveground or on existing utility poles and, if the utility operator owns the existing utility poles, a comprehensive summary, including ownership, of any and all infrastructure currently attached to the pole. Unless approved in writing by the Public Works Director, the construction of new utility poles is prohibited. An existing utility pole that is damaged or failing may be repaired or replaced with a new utility pole of substantially similar dimensions and materials.

c. The location and route of all utility facilities on or in the rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route that are within the rights-of-way. Applicant’s existing utility facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing utility facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or rights-of-way.

d. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

4. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the verification of a qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. The Public Works Director may, in the Director’s sole discretion, require the verification of a registered professional engineer.

5. All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include an estimated start date and a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the Public Works Department.

6. Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount determined by resolution of the City Council.

7. If satisfied that the application, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter, the Public Works Department shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the utility facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

8. Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the Public Works Department not less than two business days in advance of any excavation or construction in the rights-of-way.

9. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the utility facilities. The Public Works Department and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

10. All construction activities must comply with the work hours and noise regulations of the City’s Engineering Design Manual.

11. All work that does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed or corrected at the sole expense of the permittee. The City is authorized to stop work in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

12. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the City rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within the rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved by the Public Works Department.

C. Performance Surety.

1. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement or agreed to in writing by the City, a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the City equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of the work within the rights-of-way of the City shall be provided before construction is commenced.

2. If applicable, the performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the City shall remain in force until substantial completion of the work, including restoration of rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction, as determined in writing by the City.

3. If applicable, the performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the City shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City:

a. Timely completion of the work;

b. That the work is performed in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

c. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City;

d. Restoration to City standards of the rights-of-way and other property affected by the work; and

e. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.

D. Injury to Persons or Property. A utility operator shall preserve and protect from injury or damage other utility operators’ facilities in the rights-of-way, the public using the rights-of-way and any adjoining property, and take other necessary measures to protect life and property, including but not limited to buildings, walls, fences, trees or facilities that may be subject to damage from the permitted work. A utility operator shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and shall comply with all applicable Americans with Disabilities Act requirements.

E. Restoration. A utility operator shall be responsible for all injury to persons or damage to public or private property resulting from its failure to properly protect people and property and to carry out the work.

1. When a utility operator, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any rights-of-way, it shall, at its own expense, promptly restore such ways or property to the same or better condition as existed before the work was undertaken, in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, unless otherwise directed by the City and as determined by the Public Works Department.

2. If weather or other conditions beyond the utility operator’s control do not permit the complete restoration required by the City, the utility operator shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the utility operator’s sole expense and the utility operator shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule may be subject to approval by the City.

3. If the utility operator fails to restore rights-of-way or property as required in this chapter, the City shall give the utility operator written notice and provide a period of time not less than 10 days and not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the utility operator fails to restore the rights-of-way or property as required in this chapter, the City shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the utility operator. In cases where the City believes that an emergency or threat to public safety exists, it may act without notice to and at the expense of the utility operator. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City within 30 days for the costs the City incurred.

F. Inspection. Every utility operator’s facilities shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable State and City codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Every utility operator shall cooperate with the City in permitting the inspection of utility facilities upon request of the City. The utility operator shall perform all testing, or permit the City to perform any testing at the utility operator’s expense, required by the City to determine that the installation of the utility operator’s facilities and the restoration of the rights-of-way comply with the terms of this chapter and applicable State and City codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

G. Coordination of Construction. All utility operators are required to make a good faith effort to both cooperate with and coordinate their construction schedules with those of the City and other users of the rights-of-way.

1. Prior to January 1st of each year, utility operators shall provide the City with a schedule of known proposed construction activities for that year in, around or that may affect the rights-of-way.

2. At the City’s request, utility operators shall meet with the City annually, or as determined by the City, to schedule and coordinate construction in the rights-of-way.

3. All construction locations, activities and schedules within the rights-of-way shall be coordinated as ordered by the Public Works Department to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. [BC 4.15.080, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.090 Location of Facilities.

A. Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or communications facilities are located underground within a right-of-way of the City, a utility operator with permission to occupy the same right-of-way shall locate its facilities underground at its own expense. This requirement shall not apply to facilities used for transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 50,000 volts or to pedestals, cabinets or other above-ground equipment of any utility operator. No such above-ground equipment, or any aerial facilities other than electric energy transmission wires in excess of 50,000 volts, shall be constructed without the written approval of the City, in addition to the permit required by BC 4.15.080(B).

B. Interference with the Rights-of-Way. No utility operator or other person may locate or maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the rights-of-way by the City, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the rights-of-way. All use of the rights-of-way shall be consistent with City codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

C. Relocation of Utility Facilities. 

1. When requested to do so in writing by the City, a utility operator shall, at no cost to the City, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facility within a right-of-way, including relocation of aerial facilities underground.

2. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the utility operator from requesting reimbursement or compensation from a third party, pursuant to applicable laws, regulations, tariffs or agreements. However, the utility operator shall timely comply with the requirements of this section regardless of whether or not it has requested or received such reimbursement or compensation.

3. The City shall coordinate the schedule for relocation of utility facilities and based on such effort, shall provide written notice of the time by which the utility operator must remove, relocate, change, alter or underground its facilities. If a utility operator fails to remove, relocate, change, alter or underground any utility facility as requested by the City and by the date reasonably established by the City, the utility operator shall pay all costs incurred by the City due to such failure, including but not limited to costs related to project delays, and the City may cause, using qualified workers in accordance with applicable State and Federal laws and regulations, the utility facility to be removed, relocated, changed, altered or undergrounded at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City within 30 days for the costs the City incurred.

D. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities.

1. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the Public Works Department, within 30 days following written notice from the City or such other time agreed to in writing by the Public Works Department, a utility operator and any other person that owns, controls or maintains any abandoned or unauthorized utility facility within a right-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove the facility and restore the right-of-way to City standards.

2. A utility system or facility is unauthorized under any of the following circumstances:

a. The utility facility is outside the scope of authority granted by the City under the license, franchise or other written agreement. This includes facilities that were never licensed or franchised and facilities that were once licensed or franchised but for which the license or franchise has expired or been terminated. This does not include any facility for which the City has provided written authorization for abandonment in place.

b. The facility has been abandoned and the City has not provided written authorization for abandonment in place. A facility is abandoned if it is not in use and is not planned for further use. A facility will be presumed abandoned if it is not used for a period of one year. A utility operator may attempt to overcome this presumption by presenting plans for future use of the facility to the Public Works Department, which will determine application of the presumption in its sole discretion.

c. The utility facility is improperly constructed or installed or is in a location not permitted by the construction permit, license, franchise or this chapter.

d. The utility operator is in violation of a material provision of this chapter and fails to cure such violation within 30 days of the City sending written notice of such violation, unless the City extends such time period in writing.

E. Removal by City.

1. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move the facilities of any utility operator or similar entity located within the rights-of-way of the City, without notice, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency. The City will use qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable State and Federal safety laws and regulations to the extent reasonably practicable without impeding the City’s response to the emergency.

2. If the utility operator fails to remove any facility when required to do so under this chapter, the City may remove the facility using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable State and Federal safety laws and regulations, and the utility operator shall be responsible for paying the full cost of the removal and any administrative costs incurred by the City in removing the facility and obtaining reimbursement. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within 30 days. The obligation to remove shall survive the termination of the license or franchise.

3. The City shall not be liable to any utility operator for any damage to utility facilities, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom, by the City or its contractor in removing, relocating or altering the facilities pursuant to subsection C, D or E of this section or undergrounding its facilities as required by subsection A of this section, or resulting from the utility operator’s failure to remove, relocate, alter or underground its facilities as required by those subsections, unless such damage arises directly from the City’s negligence or willful misconduct.

F. Engineering Designs and Plans. The utility operator shall provide the City with two complete sets of as-built plans in a form acceptable to the City showing the location of all its utility facilities in the rights-of-way after initial construction if the utility operator’s engineered plans materially changed during construction. The utility operator shall provide two updated complete sets of as-built plans upon request of the Public Works Department, but not more than once per year. [BC 4.15.090, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.100 Leased Capacity.

A utility operator may lease capacity on or in its systems to others; provided, that, upon request, the utility operator provides the City with the name and business address of any lessee. A utility operator is not required to provide such information if disclosure is prohibited by applicable law or a valid agreement between the utility operator and the lessee, provided that the utility operator takes reasonable steps to ensure that its lessees are in compliance with this chapter. [BC 4.15.100, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.110 Maintenance.

A. Every utility operator shall install and maintain all facilities in a manner that complies with applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules, regulations and policies. The utility operator shall, at its own expense, repair and maintain facilities from time to time as may be necessary to accomplish this purpose. 

B. If, after written notice from the City of the need for repair or maintenance, a utility operator fails to repair and maintain facilities as requested by the City and by the date reasonably established by the City, the City may perform such repair or maintenance using qualified personnel or contractors at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within 30 days. [BC 4.15.110, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.120 Vacation.

If the City vacates any rights-of-way, or portion thereof, that a utility operator uses, the utility operator shall, at its own expense, remove its facilities from the rights-of-way unless: (A) the City reserves a public utility easement, which the City shall make a reasonable effort to do provided that there is no expense to the City; or (B) the utility operator obtains an easement for its facilities. If the utility operator fails to remove its facilities within 30 days after a right-of-way is vacated, or as otherwise directed or agreed to in writing by the City, the City may remove the facilities using qualified workers in accordance with State and Federal laws and regulations at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within 30 days. [BC 4.15.120, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.130 Rights-of-Way Fee.

A. Except as set forth in subsection B of this section, every person that owns utility facilities in the City and every person that uses utility facilities in the City to provide utility service, whether or not the person owns the utility facilities used to provide the utility services, shall pay the rights-of-way fee for every utility service provided using the rights-of-way in the amount determined by resolution of the City Council.

B. A utility operator whose only facilities in the rights-of-way are facilities mounted on structures within the rights-of-way, which structures are owned by another person, and with no facilities strung between such structures or otherwise within, under or above the rights-of-way, shall pay the attachment fee set by City Council resolution for each attachment. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, the fee shall be paid annually, in arrears, for each year during the term of the license within 30 days after the end of each calendar year, and shall be accompanied by information sufficient to illustrate the calculation of the amount payable. The utility operator shall pay interest at a rate of nine percent per year for any payment made after the due date. 

C. Rights-of-way fee payments required by this section shall be reduced by any franchise fee payments received by the City, but in no case will be less than $0.00.

D. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, the fee set forth in subsection A of this section shall be paid quarterly, in arrears, for each quarter during the term of the license within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter, and shall be accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues, if applicable, and a calculation of the amount payable. The utility operator shall pay interest at a rate of nine percent per year for any payment made after the due date.

E. The calculation of the rights-of-way fee required by this section shall be subject to all applicable limitations imposed by Federal or State law.

F. The City reserves the right to enact other fees and taxes applicable to the utility operators subject to this chapter. Unless expressly permitted by the City in enacting such fee or tax, or required by applicable State or Federal law, no utility operator may deduct, offset or otherwise reduce or avoid the obligation to pay any lawfully enacted fees or taxes based on the payment of the rights-of-way fee or any other fees required by this chapter. [BC 4.15.130, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.140 Audits.

A. Within 30 days of a written request from the City, or as otherwise agreed to in writing by the City:

1. Every provider of utility service shall furnish the City with information sufficient to demonstrate that the provider is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and its franchise agreement, if any, including but not limited to payment of any applicable registration fee, rights-of-way fee or franchise fee.

2. Every utility operator shall make available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and intervals all maps, records, books, diagrams, plans and other documents maintained by the utility operator with respect to its facilities within the rights-of-way or public utility easements. Access shall be provided within the City unless prior arrangement for access elsewhere has been made with the City.

B. If the City’s audit of the books, records and other documents or information of the utility operator or utility service provider demonstrates that the utility operator or provider has underpaid the rights-of-way fee or franchise fee by three percent or more in any one year, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the cost of the audit, in addition to any interest owed pursuant to BC 4.15.130(D) or as specified in a franchise.

C. Any underpayment, including any interest or audit cost reimbursement, shall be paid within 30 days of the City’s notice to the utility service provider of such underpayment. [BC 4.15.140, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.150 Insurance and Indemnification.

A. Insurance.

1. All utility operators shall maintain in full force and effect the following liability insurance policies that protect the utility operator and the City, as well as the City’s officers, agents and employees:

a. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

i. Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

ii. Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and

iii. Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

b. Motor vehicle liability insurance for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

c. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

2. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon. The insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing and shall name, or the certificate of insurance shall name, as additional insureds the City and its officers, agents and employees. The coverage must apply as to claims between insureds on the policy. The utility operator shall provide the City 30 days’ prior written notice of any cancellation or material alteration of said insurance. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered, the utility operator shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage in the terms and amounts required. The utility operator may self-insure, or keep in force a self-insured retention plus insurance, for any or all of the above coverage.

3. The utility operator shall maintain on file with the City a certificate of insurance, or proof of self-insurance acceptable to the City, certifying the coverage required above.

B. Financial Assurance. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, before a franchise granted or a license issued pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the utility operator shall provide a performance bond or other financial security, in a form acceptable to the City, as security for the full and complete performance of the franchise or license, and for compliance with the terms of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss to the City because of any failure attributable to the utility operator to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the City. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required by BC 4.15.080(C).

C. Indemnification.

1. To the fullest extent permitted by law, each utility operator shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, employees, agents and representatives from and against any and all liability, causes of action, claims, damages, losses, judgments and other costs and expenses, including attorney fees and costs of suit or defense (at both the trial and appeal level, whether or not a trial or appeal ever takes place) that may be asserted by any person or entity in any way arising out of, resulting from, during or in connection with, or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failure to act or other misconduct of the utility operator or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or lessees in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its facilities, and in providing or offering utility services over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement. The acceptance of a license under BC 4.15.070 shall constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not. Upon notification of any such claim the City shall notify the utility operator and provide the utility operator with an opportunity to provide defense regarding any such claim.

2. Every utility operator shall also indemnify the City for any damages, claims, additional costs or expenses assessed against or payable by the City arising out of or resulting, directly or indirectly, from the utility operator’s failure to remove or relocate any of its facilities in the rights-of-way or easements in a timely manner, unless the utility operator’s failure arises directly from the City’s negligence or willful misconduct. [BC 4.15.150, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.160 Compliance.

Every utility operator shall comply with all applicable Federal and State laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City, heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the term of any license granted under this chapter. [BC 4.15.160, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.170 Confidential/Proprietary Information.

If any person is required by this chapter to provide books, records, maps or information to the City that the person reasonably believes to be confidential or proprietary, the City shall take reasonable steps to protect the confidential or proprietary nature of the books, records, maps or information to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law; provided, that all documents are clearly marked as confidential by the person at the time of disclosure to the City. The City shall not be required to incur any costs to protect such documents, other than the City’s routine internal procedures for complying with the Oregon Public Records Law. [BC 4.15.170, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.180 Equal Employment Opportunity/Diversity in Workforce/Minority Business Enterprises.

A. Equal Employment Opportunity.

1. The utility operator shall fully comply with applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State and local law. 

2. The utility operator shall maintain a policy that all employment decisions, practices and procedures are based on merit and ability without discrimination on the basis of an individual’s race, color, religion, age, sex, national origin, sexual orientation or disability.

B. Diversity in Workforce. The utility operator is expected to make a determined and good-faith effort to employ and advance in employment women, minorities and persons with disabilities.

C. Minority, Female and Emerging Small Business Enterprises. The utility operator is expected to make determined and good-faith efforts to use minority-owned, women-owned and emerging small businesses (MWESBs), along with service disabled veteran businesses, in its contracted expenditures, including, without limitation, contracts for the acquisition of goods, services, materials, supplies and equipment used in the construction, maintenance and operation of its utility facilities. In furtherance of the utility operator’s efforts in this area, the City will be available to consult with the utility operator in providing information on, and support regarding, certified MWESB enterprises. [BC 4.15.180, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.190 Penalties.

A. The City shall give the utility operator written notice of any violations and provide a reasonable time (no less than 20 and no more than 40 days) for the utility operator to remedy the violations. If the Public Works Director determines the utility operator is guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the license after the time to remedy has passed, the Public Works Director shall consider the standards found in BC 4.15.070(M)(2)(a) through (e) and fine the utility operator not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.

B. A determination made by the Public Works Director is a quasi-judicial decision and is not appealable to the City Council. Appeals from any determination made by the Public Works Director shall be solely and exclusively by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Washington County, as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial or other remedy the City may have at law or in equity for enforcement of this chapter. [BC 4.15.190, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.200 Severability and Preemption.

A. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be consistent with applicable Federal and State law, and shall be interpreted, to the extent possible, to cover only matters not preempted by Federal or State law.

B. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason declared or held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction or superseded by State or Federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event any provision is preempted by Federal or State laws, rules or regulations, the provision shall be preempted only to the extent required by law and any portion not preempted shall survive. If any Federal or State law resulting in preemption is later repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed to end the preemption, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding without further action by the City. [BC 4.15.200, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.15.210 Application to Existing Agreements.

To the extent that this chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented consistent with existing franchise agreements, this chapter shall apply to all existing franchise agreements granted to utility operators by the City. [BC 4.15.210, added by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


Chapter 4.20 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS

Sections:

4.20.010    Repealed.

4.20.020    Repealed.

4.20.030    Repealed.

4.20.040    Repealed.

4.20.050    Repealed.

4.20.060    Repealed.

4.20.070    Repealed.

4.20.080    Repealed.

4.20.090    Repealed.

4.20.100    Repealed.

4.20.110    Repealed.

4.20.120    Repealed.

4.20.130    Repealed.

4.20.140    Repealed.

4.20.150    Repealed.

4.20.160    Repealed.

4.20.170    Repealed.

4.20.180    Repealed.

4.20.190    Repealed.

4.20.200    Repealed.

4.20.210    Repealed.

4.20.220    Repealed.

4.20.230    Repealed.

4.20.240    Repealed.

4.20.250    Repealed.

4.20.260    Repealed.

4.20.270    Repealed.

4.20.280    Repealed.

4.20.290    Repealed.


4.20.010 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.010, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.020 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.020, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.030 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.030, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.040 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.040, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.050 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.050, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.060 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.060, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.070 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.070, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.080 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.080, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.090 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.090, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.100 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.100, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.110 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.110, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.120 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.120, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.130 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.130, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.140 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.140, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.150 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.150, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.160 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.160, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.170 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.170, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.180 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.180, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.190 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.190, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.200 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.200, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.210 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.210, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.220 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.220, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.230 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.230, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.240 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.240, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.250 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.250, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.260 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.260, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.270 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.270, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.280 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.280, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


4.20.290 Repealed.

[BC 4.20.290, added by Ordinance No. 4044, 4/20/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4684, 5/4/16]


Title 5 PUBLIC PROTECTION

Chapters:

5.01    Police Department

5.02    Alcohol

5.04    Injury to Library Materials

5.05    Nuisances

5.06    Forfeiture

5.07    Chronic Nuisance Premises

5.08    Offenses

5.09    Urban Chickens

5.10    Pigeons

5.12    Dog Control

5.14    Curfew

5.15    Noise

5.16    Civil Rights

5.17    Residential Picketing


Chapter 5.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

5.01.010    Authority.

5.01.020    Purposes.

5.01.030    Chief of Police.

5.01.040    Powers.


5.01.010 Authority.

The City Council hereby memorializes the existence of its Police Department as presently constituted, and provides that the same is continued undiminished under this ordinance. The Police Department remains a separate city "department" as that phrase is used at BC 1.01.020. [BC 5.01.010, added by Ordinance No. 4368, 9/19/05]


5.01.020 Purposes.

The Beaverton Police Department shall exercise, without alteration, all powers and duties previously held to enforce all applicable ordinances and other laws. These powers include, but are not limited to, detecting and preventing crime, apprehending offenders, preserving the peace, protecting lives and property, and performing community caretaking functions. [BC 5.01.020, added by Ordinance No. 4368, 9/19/05]


5.01.030 Chief of Police.

There is hereby memorialized and continued the position of Chief of Police as an official position of the city under the appointment power of the Mayor contained in Chapter 5 of the Charter of the City of Beaverton, Oregon. It is hereby declared that the Chief of Police is the principal law enforcement officer of the City of Beaverton. [BC 5.01.030, added by Ordinance No. 4368, 9/19/05]


5.01.040 Powers.

The Chief of Police shall, generally, possess and exercise such powers as follows by way of example:

A. Establish departmental policies and procedures in line with City Council goals. Plan and develop standards and programs based on an analysis of city growth, crime patterns, workload, staffing levels, and related economic, legislative and judicial influences to provide appropriate and effective law enforcement services to the community.

B. Have authority over and responsibility for the fiscal management of the Police Department. Manage and monitor approved budgets. Review requests for proposals and department expenditures.

C. Assign, supervise, and evaluate the work of subordinates consistent with union contracts and the City’s personnel manual. Hear grievances from and administer disciplinary action to department personnel. Provide interviewing and recommendations for department hiring and termination actions. Ensure adequate training within the department.

D. Supervise and assist in major departmental problems, crimes or accidents and perform such additional duties as may be assigned by the Mayor.

E. Prepare reports and advise the Mayor, Council, or City Attorney in regard to resolutions, ordinances, or other official actions pertaining to public safety. [BC 5.01.040, added by Ordinance No. 4368, 9/19/05]


Chapter 5.02 ALCOHOL

Sections:

I. USE AND SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR

5.02.005    Short Title.

5.02.010    Definitions.

5.02.015    Providing Liquor to Certain Persons Prohibited.

5.02.017    Providing Premises for the Consumption of Alcohol by Minors Prohibited.

5.02.020    Persons Not Allowed to Drink Alcoholic Liquor on Licensed Premises.

5.02.025    Purchase or Possession of Liquor by a Minor.

5.02.030    Lawful Consumption of Liquor by a Minor.

5.02.035    Loitering on Licensed Premises by Minors.

5.02.040    Minors Not Permitted to Drink or Loiter on Licensed Premises.

5.02.045    Permitting Minors on Licensed Premises.

5.02.050    Delivering or Selling Liquor by a Minor.

5.02.055    Sales by Unlicensed Persons Prohibited.

5.02.060    Bringing Alcoholic Liquor into Licensed Premises.

5.02.065    Disposal of Liquor Containers.

5.02.070    Lawful Hours of Sale.

5.02.075    Statement of Age as a Defense.

5.02.080    Liquor in Public Dance Hall.

5.02.083    Consumption of Alcoholic Liquor in Public Places Prohibited.

5.02.085    Nuisances.

5.02.090    Arresting Officer to Seize Property.

5.02.095    Responsibility of Licensee for Employees.

5.02.100    Penalty.

5.02.105    Liquor Commission to be Notified.

II. LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW

5.02.200    Short Title.

5.02.205    Scope of Provisions.

5.02.210    Definitions.

5.02.215    License Application.

5.02.220    Police Chief’s Duties.

5.02.225    Hearing Procedure.

5.02.230    Applicant Notice.

5.02.235    Public Notice.

5.02.240    Standards and Criteria.

I. USE AND SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR


5.02.005 Short Title.

BC 5.02.005 through 5.02.105 shall be known and may be cited as the “Alcoholic Liquor Use and Sale Ordinance,” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance.”


5.02.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this ordinance, the following mean:

Alcoholic liquor – Alcoholic beverages containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol and consumable by a human being.

Commission – The Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

Malt beverage – Alcoholic beverages containing more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, including sweet wines and all spirituous liquor.

Licensee – A person who has a license from the Commission to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor.

Licensed premises – The room or enclosure at the address for which a license has been issued by the Commission for serving, mixing, handling or selling alcoholic liquor.

Liquor Control Act – The State law as designated by ORS 471.027 and the Oregon Distilled Liquor Control Act as defined by ORS 472.020.

Minor – A person under 21 years of age.

Other responsible relative – An adult who is the spouse of a minor; an adult who is related to a minor and has taken over the parental duty of governing the minor’s actions; or a duly appointed, qualified and acting guardian who has taken over the parental duty of governing the minor’s actions.

Park – Any publicly owned real property placed under the jurisdiction of the City or Tualatin Hills Parks and Recreation District primarily for park or recreational purposes and located in the City.

Public place – A place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lobbies and other parts of apartment houses and hotels not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence and highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, and premises used in connection with public passenger transportation.

Sell – To solicit or receive an order, keep or expose for sale, deliver for value or in any way other than gratuitously, to peddle, keep with intent to sell, traffic in or procure or allow to be procured for another person for any consideration promised or obtained, directly or indirectly, or under any pretext or by any means.


5.02.015 Providing Liquor to Certain Persons Prohibited.

No person shall sell, give, furnish, serve or otherwise make alcoholic liquor available to:

A. A minor, except as provided in BC 5.02.030; or

B. A visibly intoxicated person.


5.02.017 Providing Premises for the Consumption of Alcohol by Minors Prohibited.

Subsection (3), (7) and (8) of ORS 471.410, Providing liquor to persons under 21 or to intoxicated persons; allowing consumption by minor on property; mandatory minimum penalties, as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.02.017, added by Ordinance No. 3827, 8/17/92; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.02.020 Persons Not Allowed to Drink Alcoholic Liquor on Licensed Premises.

A. No person shall allow a person who is visibly intoxicated to drink alcoholic liquor on a licensed premises.

B. No bartender shall drink alcoholic liquor or be under the influence of alcoholic liquor while on duty in a licensed premises.


5.02.025 Purchase or Possession of Liquor by a Minor.

A. Except as provided in BC 5.02.030, no minor shall attempt to purchase, consume, acquire or possess alcoholic liquor.

B. For purposes of this section, possession of alcoholic liquor includes acceptance or consumption of alcoholic liquor. This section does not prohibit acceptance or consumption of sacramental wine as part of a religious rite or service.


5.02.030 Lawful Consumption of Liquor by a Minor.

This ordinance shall not prohibit:

A. Any person from accepting or consuming sacramental wine as part of a religious rite or service; or

B. Any minor from having personal possession of alcoholic liquor when a parent or guardian of the minor consents to the possession and the minor is in a private residence accompanied by the parent or guardian. [BC 5.02.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3912, 10/3/94]


5.02.035 Loitering on Licensed Premises by Minors.

Except as provided in BC 5.02.045, no minor, whether or not accompanied by a parent or other responsible relative, shall enter, loiter or remain on a licensed premises that has been posted by the Commission to prohibit use by minors.


5.02.040 Minors Not Permitted to Drink or Loiter on Licensed Premises.

A. No licensee or licensee’s employee or agent shall permit a minor to:

1. consume alcoholic liquor on licensed premises, whether or not the alcoholic liquor is given to the minor by a parent or other responsible relative;

2. loiter on a licensed premises that has been posted by the Commission to prohibit use by minors, except as provided in BC 5.02.045;

3. remain on licensed premises, except as provided in BC 5.02.045;

B. The fact that a parent or other responsible relative accompanied a minor onto licensed premises shall not constitute a defense to a charge brought for violation of this section, except as provided in BC 5.02.045.


5.02.045 Permitting Minors on Licensed Premises.

A. The provisions of BC 5.02.035 and BC 5.02.040 shall not prohibit:

1. a minor from entering licensed premises for transacting business in the regular course of the minor’s lawful employment;

2. a minor from entering and remaining on a licensed premises when in the immediate company of the minor’s spouse who is 21 years of age or older.

B. This section shall not be construed to authorize a minor spouse to consume alcoholic liquor on licensed premises.


5.02.050 Delivering or Selling Liquor by a Minor.

A. Except as provided in subsection C, no minor, either personally or as an agent or employee of another, shall sell, offer for sale or deliver alcoholic liquor to any other person.

B. Except as provided in subsection C, no person shall employ, hire or engage a minor to sell, offer for sale or deliver alcoholic liquor.

C. An employee, 18 years of age or older, of a person who holds a package store license from the Commission may sell alcoholic liquor authorized by the license on the licensed premises.


5.02.055 Sales by Unlicensed Persons Prohibited.

No person shall sell alcoholic liquor without a license from the Commission. Sales by a licensee or licensee’s employee shall be only sales that are authorized by the license issued for the premises.


5.02.060 Bringing Alcoholic Liquor into Licensed Premises.

No licensee or licensee’s agent or employee shall keep or knowingly permit to be kept, brought or consumed on the licensed premises alcoholic liquor not allowed to be sold or served on the premises.


5.02.065 Disposal of Liquor Containers.

A. No licensee or licensee’s employees or agent shall permit empty or discarded containers of alcoholic liquor to be in the public view on the exterior of the licensed premises or in parking areas maintained in connection with the premises.

B. No person shall discard, throw away or dispose of an alcoholic liquor container, whether broken or not, on a street, alley, public grounds or public place.


5.02.070 Lawful Hours of Sale.

A. No package store licensee shall sell, dispense, deliver or permit the removal of alcoholic liquor from the licensed premises between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.

B. No retail malt beverage restaurant or dispenser shall sell, dispense, deliver or allow the consumption of alcoholic liquor on licensed premises or permit the removal of alcoholic liquor from licensed premises between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. [BC 5.02.070, amended by Ordinance No. 3312, 3/21/83]


5.02.075 Statement of Age as a Defense.

If a written statement of age and the information pertaining to the evidence which was exhibited to the permittee or licensee at the time the statement was made that is entered in writing on the statement, are offered as evidence in any administrative or criminal prosecution for sale or service of alcoholic liquor to a person not having reached 21 years of age, the permittee or licensee shall be found to have committed no crime or other wrong unless it is demonstrated that a reasonable person would have determined that the identification exhibited was altered or did not accurately describe the person to whom the alcoholic liquor was sold or served.


5.02.080 Liquor in Public Dance Hall.

No person shall possess, keep, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or consume alcoholic liquor in a public dance hall, or in a room or building used for public dancing, that is not licensed under the Liquor Control Act.


5.02.083 Consumption of Alcoholic Liquor in Public Places Prohibited.

A. No person shall consume alcoholic liquor or possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while in or upon any public place, unless authorized by the Commission or by subsection B of this section.

B. Alcoholic liquor may be consumed and an open container of an alcoholic beverage may be possessed within a park under the jurisdiction of the Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District, provided such consumption or possession takes place only as duly authorized by written permit issued by the Park District and, if required by state law, the activity has been licensed, in advance, for drinking or consumption purposes by the Commission.

C. For purposes of this section, a park is under the jurisdiction of the Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District, if the park is owned, managed or otherwise controlled by the Park District. [BC 5.02.083, amended by Ordinance No. 4228, 10/14/02]


5.02.085 Nuisances.

A room, house, building, boat, structure or place of any kind where alcoholic liquor is sold, manufactured, bartered or given away in violation of the law or where persons are permitted to drink alcoholic liquor in violation of the law or any place where alcoholic liquor is kept for sale, barter or gift in violation of the law and all alcoholic liquor, whether purchased from or through the Commission or purchased or acquired from any source, and all property, including bars, glasses, mixers, lockers, chairs, tables, cash registers, music devices, furniture, furnishings, equipment and all facilities for mixing, storing, serving or drinking alcoholic liquor kept or used in those places are declared to be a nuisance. A person who maintains or assists in maintaining a common nuisance is guilty of a violation of this ordinance.


5.02.090 Arresting Officer to Seize Property.

When an officer arrests a person for violation of this ordinance, the officer shall confiscate all property included in BC 5.02.085 and all alcoholic liquor on the premises that was being used or kept in violation of this ordinance. If the arrested person is convicted and the court finds that alcoholic liquor and other property were used in violation of this ordinance, forfeiture proceedings may be instituted as authorized by ORS 471.605 and 471.610.


5.02.095 Responsibility of Licensee for Employees.

Each licensee is responsible and liable to prosecution for violation of a provision of this ordinance that pertains to the licensed premises and for an act or omission of a servant, agent or employee of the licensee in violation of a provision of this ordinance.


5.02.100 Penalty.

Violation of any of the provisions of BC 5.02.005 to 5.02.105 is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $2,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 365 days, or both. Violation of a provision substantially similar to a state statute is punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute. [BC 5.02.100, amended by Ordinance No. 3532, 9/16/86; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.02.105 Liquor Commission to be Notified.

A. When a licensee or a person is convicted of a violation on a licensed premises, the municipal court shall notify the Commission of the conviction.

B. When the police department investigates and the Council adopts a recommendation concerning an applicant for an Oregon Liquor Control Commission license, pursuant to ORS 472.120 the applicant shall pay to the City a fee set by Council resolution.

II. LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW


5.02.200 Short Title.

BC 5.02.200 through 5.02.240 shall be known and may be cited as the “Liquor License Review Ordinance,” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance.”


5.02.205 Scope of Provisions.

BC 5.02.200 through 5.02.240 shall govern the procedures and criteria for consideration of liquor license applications and Council recommendation to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.


5.02.210 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 5.02.200 through 5.02.240 the following mean:

Application – The written request to the police chief to grant, modify or renew a liquor license.

Commission – the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

Police chief – The chief of the police department or the police chief’s designee.


5.02.215 License Application.

Any person or business requesting a Council recommendation to the Commission of a liquor license application shall make application upon suitable forms furnished by the police chief. The application shall contain:

A. The type of license applied for and a description of the nature of the business for which the application is made.

B. The name of the applicant, with address; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the business is a corporation, the name and address of the home office, and the name and address of the designated agent in the State if a foreign corporation, and the name and address of the local agent or representative who will be in charge of the business in the City.

C. The address of the location where the business will be located in the City.

D. The date of application.

E. Any other information the police chief or Council deems necessary for review.

F. The signature of the applicant or agent making the application.

The applicant shall be required to pay the fee established by the Council under BC 5.02.105 B.


5.02.220 Police Chief’s Duties.

A. Upon receipt of a completed liquor license application, the Police Chief shall review the application. The purpose of the review is to gather facts that are helpful in making an informed recommendation to the Council as to whether or not the Council should recommend approval of the application to the Commission. The scope of the Police Chief’s review may include any matter reasonably related to the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter or in State law relating to the issuance of the type of liquor license for which a person has applied. The Police Chief shall make a recommendation to the Council upon completion of the review. The Police Chief may conduct criminal history background checks in conjunction with the review. 

B. If the Police Chief finds that a review of the same or substantially similar issues has occurred within the previous 60 days and it is determined that the application does not warrant updated review, then the Police Chief may waive any fees as provided in BC 5.02.215, may waive review of the applicant as provided in BC 5.02.215 and may waive public notice as provided in BC 5.02.235. [BC 5.02.220, amended by Ordinance No. 3448, 5/20/85; amended by Ordinance No. 4633, 2/25/14]


5.02.225 Hearing Procedure.

A. If the police chief recommends approval of an application, the matter will be scheduled as a consent agenda item unless a Council member requests a public hearing. Upon request of a Council member or adverse recommendation by the police chief, a public hearing will be scheduled and notice given pursuant to BC 5.02.230.

B. The hearing will be presided over by the mayor or Council president pursuant to Beaverton Charter, Chapter Four.

C. The City and the applicant shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses and shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses presenting opposing testimony.

D. The applicant may be represented by legal counsel, but legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense.

E. The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence as alleged in the police chief’s recommendation, unless the Council waives the rule or unless the hearing is pursuant to a Council member request.

1. Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.

2. Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State.

3. Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State.

4. Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

F. After due consideration of all pertinent information and testimony the Council shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial evidence relative to the criteria in this Code and shall be final. In the case of an adverse recommendation, findings of fact shall be produced and forwarded to the Commission along with the Council recommendation against the application.


5.02.230 Applicant Notice.

Before the Council recommends denial of a liquor license application, notice of the public hearing must be given either personally or by registered or certified mail postmarked not later than ten days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain:

A. A statement of the time and place of the hearing;

B. A statement from the police chief of the matter(s) asserted or charged supporting the adverse recommendation or stating why the hearing was requested;

C. A statement that the applicant may be represented by legal counsel at the hearing, but legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense;

D. A statement that if the applicant desires to participate in the hearing, the police chief must receive notice in writing, no later than five working days prior to the hearing; and

E. A statement that if participation is requested by the applicant, that information on procedures and rights of parties may be obtained at the police chief’s office.


5.02.235 Public Notice.

A. In order to facilitate public participation in liquor license applications, the City shall cause to be published in a paper of general circulation in the City a notice specifying all liquor license applications by business name and address pending before the police chief. The City shall also provide a written notice of pending applications to recognized neighborhood associations as defined in BC 9.06.020D which are within one-half mile of an applicant. The notice shall inform the public that written comments will be accepted by the police chief.

B. In the event that a public hearing is scheduled, the City in addition to any regular Council notice provisions, shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a notice specifying a time, date and location of the hearing and business name and address of the applicant. The City shall also provide a written notice of pending hearings to recognized neighborhood associations as defined in BC 9.06.020D which are within one-half mile of an applicant. The notice shall inform the public that testimony may be given for or against the application.


5.02.240 Standards and Criteria.

The Council shall make its recommendation for approval, denial or modification of the liquor license application based on the Council’s evaluation of the relevant standards and criteria. The applicant shall be held strictly accountable for the conditions of the premises. The Council may recommend against the applicant if:

A. The application is incomplete;

B. The applicant neglects or refuses to provide in a timely manner any information reasonably requested by the police chief or Council;

C. The applicant provides false or misleading information to the police chief, Council or any City employee;

D. Public opinion weighs against the application. Public opinion may be received by written or oral comment. Public opinion will be evaluated in light of the reasons expressed and the extent to which the persons expressing it are likely to be affected by the issuance of the license. Greater weight will be given to opinions of persons residing, working or owning a business within a one-half mile radius of the premises. The number of persons expressing support or opposition will not, in and of itself, be controlling;

E. The applicant’s premises and the area nearby are heavily frequented by persons under 21 years of age unaccompanied by adults;

F. The applicant has been convicted of violating any of the alcoholic liquor laws of this State, general or local, or has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;

G. The applicant uses controlled substances or alcoholic beverages to excess;

H. The applicant is not of good repute or moral character;

I. The applicant has maintained, or allowed to exist a noisy, lewd, or disorderly establishment, or an establishment which creates or is a public nuisance under the ordinances of the City or laws of the State;

J. The applicant’s premises are not maintained in good repair, both interior and exterior, and kept clean and free of litter, rubbish or dirt;

K. The applicant’s premises are unsanitary;

L. The applicant or applicant’s premises fail to conform to, abide by, or comply with, City ordinances or regulations or State laws and regulations;

M. The applicant’s premises place unreasonable and/or excessive demand on City services, including law enforcement;

N. There are sufficient licensed premises in the locality set out in the application and the license is not demanded by public interest or convenience. If a reduction in dispenser licenses is warranted, the Council may make a decision based on reasonable comparisons of services, facilities and economic benefit to the area.

O. There is any other reason, which in the opinion of the Council, based on public health, safety, welfare, convenience or necessity, warrants an adverse recommendation. [BC 5.02.200 through 5.02.240, added by Ordinance No. 3310, 1/4/83]


Chapter 5.04 INJURY TO LIBRARY MATERIALS

Sections:

5.04.010    Injury to Library Materials.

5.04.015    Detention of Library Materials.

5.04.020    Fine.


5.04.010 Injury to Library Materials.

No person shall write upon, injure, deface, tear or destroy library materials belonging to the City Library. [BC 5.04.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.04.015 Detention of Library Materials.

No person shall knowingly detain any library materials belonging to the City Library for more than 30 days after notice in writing from the librarian, given after the expiration of time which by library regulations such materials may be kept. The notice shall bear upon its face a copy of this section and BC 5.04.020.


5.04.020 Fine.

A violation of BC 5.04.010 through 5.04.015 is a Class 2 Civil Infraction, to be processed in accordance with the procedure provided by in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050. However, the fine imposed shall not be more than $100.00. A finding that the infraction has been committed and the payment of the fine shall not be construed to constitute payment for library material, nor shall the person found to have committed the infraction be relieved of the obligation to return the material to the library.


Chapter 5.05 NUISANCES

Sections:

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

5.05.010    Short Title.

5.05.015    Definitions.

5.05.017    Sidewalks and Curbs; Abutting Property Owner’s Duties and Liabilities.

5.05.018    Unsafe Sidewalks, Curbs and Monolithic Curbs and Gutters.

II. ANIMAL NUISANCES

5.05.020    Dangerous Animals.

5.05.025    Livestock and Poultry.

5.05.030    Animals at Large.

5.05.033    Removal of Animal Excrement.

5.05.035    Removal of Carcasses.

5.05.037    Definitions.

5.05.040    Keeping of Certain Animals Prohibited.

5.05.043    Exceptions.

III. NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY

5.05.045    Repealed.

IV. NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH

5.05.050    Nuisances Affecting the Public Health.

V. NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY

5.05.075    Abandoned Iceboxes.

5.05.080    Attractive Nuisances.

5.05.081    Vacant Buildings.

5.05.085    Snow and Ice Removal.

5.05.090    Noxious Vegetation.

5.05.093    Graffiti.

5.05.095    Rubbish.

5.05.098    Vegetation and the Public Right-of-Way.

5.05.100    Purpose and Scope of BC 5.05.100 through 5.05.104.

5.05.101    Planting and Maintenance of Trees.

5.05.102    Standards for Maintenance and Removal of Trees.

5.05.103    City May Act on Notice.

5.05.104    Liability and Indemnity: Penalties.

5.05.105    Fences.

5.05.110    Surface Waters; Drainage.

5.05.115    Obstructing Public Right-of-Way.

5.05.116    Obstructing Public Easements.

5.05.117    Camping Prohibited on the Public Right-of-Way.

5.05.118    Notice of Campsite Cleanup and Storage of Personal Property.

VI. NUISANCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC PEACE

5.05.120    Definitions.

5.05.125    Radio and Television Interference.

5.05.130    Repealed.

5.05.133    Exterior Lighting.

5.05.135    Notices and Advertisements.

5.05.136    Posting Notices or Advertisements.

5.05.140    Declaration of Nuisance.

5.05.145    General Nuisance.

VII. VEHICLES AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

5.05.150    Discarded Vehicle.

5.05.152    Trucks in a Residential Area.

5.05.155    Prohibited Action.

5.05.160    Abatement of Vehicle Nuisances.

5.05.165    Disposition of Vehicle Nuisances.

VIII. ABATEMENT PROCEDURES

5.05.200    Abatement Notice.

5.05.205    Abatement by a Person Responsible.

5.05.210    Abatement by the City.

5.05.215    Assessment of Costs and Entry of Lien.

5.05.220    Abatement: Joint Responsibility.

5.05.225    Abatement: Noxious Vegetation.

5.05.227    Other Methods of Collection of Costs.

5.05.230    Summary Abatement.

5.05.255    Violations.

5.05.260    Separate Violations.

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS


5.05.010 Short Title.

BC 5.05.010 through 5.05.260 shall be known and may be cited as the “Nuisance Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance”.


5.05.015 Definitions.

For the purposes of this ordinance, the following mean:

Adjacent – Nearby or close to. A street tree shall be considered adjacent to property if the tree would be within the lateral boundaries of the property if those boundaries were extended to meet the nearest portion of roadway.

Animal at large – An animal off or outside the premises of the owner or person in charge of the animal, not restrained by a rope, line, leash, chain, or other similar means, or not under the immediate control, restraint, and command of the person or its owner.

Bicycle Path – The portion of the public right-of-way that is not part of a roadway and is designated by official signs or markings for use by persons riding bicycles.

City representative – The mayor or the mayor’s designee responsible for representing the City’s interest in a nuisance abatement proceeding.

Costs – The expense of removing, storing, or disposing of nuisances, including a charge of 20 percent of the expense for administrative overhead.

Discarded vehicle – A vehicle that is not operable on a public street, wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, abandoned or junked or major parts of discarded vehicles including, but not limited to, bodies, engines, transmissions and rear ends.

Person in charge of property – An agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of any construction project.

Person responsible – The person responsible for abating a nuisance includes:

A. the owner of the property;

B. the person in charge of property as defined above; or

C. the person who caused a nuisance to come into or continue in existence.

Pruning – Cutting or removing less than 20 percent of the branching structure of a plant in either the crown, trunk or root areas.

Public place – A building, way, place or accommodation, whether or not privately or publicly owned, open and available to the general public.

Public right-of-way – Land that by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is conveyed, reserved for or dedicated to the use of the general public for street, road or highway purposes, including curbs, gutters, parking strips, pedestrian ways, and sidewalks and bicycle trails.

Removal – Cutting or removing 20 percent or more of the crown, trunk or root system of a plant.

Roadway – The portion of the public right-of-way that is improved and designed for use by motor vehicles.

Sidewalk – The portion of the public right-of-way designed for preferential or exclusive use by a pedestrian.

Top or Topped – Cutting or removing the terminal leaders in the crown of an ornamental shade or flowering tree or conifer to an extent that removes the normal canopy and disfigures the tree.

Vehicle – Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationery rails or tracks. [BC 5.05.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3842, 4/12/93; Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.017 Sidewalks and Curbs; Abutting Property Owner’s Duties and Liabilities.

A. Property owners shall maintain at all times any sidewalk or curb adjacent to their land in a reasonably safe condition and shall be liable for any damage or injury by a failure to do so. Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended to alter the duties and liabilities imposed by this section or by BC 3.06.015.

B. No recourse whatsoever shall be had against the City, its Council, Mayor, employees or agents for damage or loss to person or property arising out of the negligent or otherwise harmful maintenance of any sidewalk or curb described in subsection A of this section.

C. A property owner described in subsection A of this section shall indemnify, defend and hold the City, its Council, Mayor, employees and agents harmless against any claim, suit or action made against the City, its Council, Mayor, employees and agents as a result of any person’s failure to fulfill the duty imposed by subsection A of this section. [BC 5.05.017, added by Ordinance No. 3540, 11/25/86; amended by Ordinance No. 3817, 6/29/92]


5.05.018 Unsafe Sidewalks, Curbs and Monolithic Curbs and Gutters.

A. No person owning real property shall cause or allow the sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in the abutting public right-of-way to present an unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property.

B. For purposes of this section, a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter shall be deemed to present an unreasonable risk of danger to person or property if, among other things:

1. Panels or pieces of same are displaced more than one-half inch from adjacent panels or pieces; or,

2. Entire pieces or panels are absent, or there exist pieces or panels broken into parts smaller than one square foot; or,

3. The grade from one piece or panel to the adjacent piece changes by more than one-half inch per foot in any direction; or,

4. Handicap access ramps or driveways deviate from the slopes and dimensions included in the standards and specifications set by the city engineer; or,

5. Curb pieces exist less than two feet in length; or,

6. Monolithic curb and gutter sections are cracked or broken longitudinally, or displaced one-half inch or more from the adjacent paving.

This list is not intended to be exclusive.

C. The existence of sidewalks, curbs or monolithic curbs and gutters in such condition as to present an unreasonable risk of danger to persons or property hereby is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in BC 5.05.200 et seq.

D. A person who owns property that abuts a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in such condition as to present an unreasonable risk of danger to persons or property is civilly liable for all claims arising from that condition notwithstanding the person’s notice of the condition and notwithstanding the time period allowed by law to correct same before abatement as a public nuisance. [BC 5.05.018, added by Ordinance No. 3605, 1/25/88]

II. ANIMAL NUISANCES


5.05.020 Dangerous Animals.

No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit an animal that is dangerous to the public health or safety to be exposed in public. If the animal is exposed in public, it may be taken into custody by the City and disposed of in accordance with the procedures provided by the Code for the disposition of personal property or for the impoundment of dogs, except that before the animal is released by the City, the municipal judge must find the proper precautions shall be taken to insure the public health and safety.


5.05.025 Livestock and Poultry.

Except for household pets and as otherwise permitted by the Code or other City ordinance, no person shall keep or maintain livestock or poultry within the City.


5.05.030 Animals at Large.

Except for animals of the species Felis Catus (domestic cat), no owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit the animal to be at large. Animals at large may be taken into custody by the City and disposed of in accordance with the procedures provided by the Code or other City ordinance for disposition of personal property or for the impoundment of dogs. BC 5.12.010 through 5.12.015 shall govern dogs at large. [BC 5.05.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.033 Removal of Animal Excrement.

Any person responsible for any animal, except for animals of the species Felis Catus (domestic cat), shall be in possession of tools for the removal of, and shall remove, excrement deposited by the animal in any public area not designed to receive those wastes, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking strips and public parks. [BC 5.05.033, added by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.035 Removal of Carcasses.

No person shall permit an animal carcass owned or controlled by the person to remain upon public property, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is necessary to remove or dispose of the carcass.


5.05.037 Definitions.

As used in BC 5.05.037 to 5.05.043, the following definitions apply:

Dangerous Animal – Any non-human animal that is of a wild or predatory nature, and constitutes an unreasonable danger to human life or property. A Dangerous Animal includes, but is not limited to, snakes of the family Pythonidae or Boinae, unless incapable of growing to eight feet or more in length; any alligator, crocodile or caiman; and any poisonous or venomous reptile.

Exotic Animal – Lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, ocelot, or any other cat not indigenous to Oregon, except the species Felis Catus (domestic cat); any monkey, ape, gorilla or other non-human primate, any wolf or other canine not indigenous to Oregon, except the species Canis Familiaris (domestic dog); or any bear, except the species Ursus Americanus (black bear).

Keep – To have physical custody or otherwise to exercise dominion and control over an object.

Physically Impaired Person – A person who is permanently physically impaired, whose physical impairment limits one or more of daily life activities, and who has a record of impairment and is regarded by health care practitioners as having such an impairment requiring the use of an assistance animal, including but not limited to blindness, deafness, and complete or partial paralysis.

Wild Animal – Antelope, bighorn sheep, black bear, cougar, deer, elk, moose, mountain goat, silver gray squirrel, beaver, bobcat, fisher, marten, mink, muskrat, otter, raccoon, fox, skunk, civet, bat or coyote. [BC 5.05.037, added by Ordinance No. 3675, 6/12/89; and amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93, and Ordinance No. 4229, 10/21/02]


5.05.040 Keeping of Certain Animals Prohibited.

Except as otherwise provided in BC 5.05.043, no person shall keep a wild, exotic or dangerous animal. [BC 5.05.040, added by Ordinance No. 3675, 6/12/89]


5.05.043 Exceptions.

A. BC 5.05.040 shall not apply to the keeping of a wild, exotic or dangerous animal by:

1. An educational or medical institution, if the animal is kept for the primary purpose of instruction, study or research;

2. A circus, carnival or other similar itinerant show business, if the animal is kept for the primary purpose of public entertainment;

3. A veterinarian employed by the federal government or currently licensed by the Oregon State Veterinary Examining Board, if the animal is kept for the primary purpose of diagnosis or treatment;

4. A physically impaired person, if the animal is kept for the primary purpose of assisting the physically impaired person in one or more daily life activities by performing such tasks as seeing, hearing, fetching dropped items, pulling a wheel chair, helping maintain balance, or rendering similar forms of assistance.

5. A public agency, if the animal is kept primarily for a public purpose.

B. BC 5.05.040 shall not apply to a person transporting a wild, exotic or dangerous animal directly to any of the institutions, businesses or individuals listed in subsection A of this section. [BC 5.05.043, added by Ordinance No. 3675, 6/12/89]

III. NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY


5.05.045 Repealed.

[BC 5.05.045, added by Ordinance No. 3913, 10/10/94; repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]

IV. NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH


5.05.050 Nuisances Affecting the Public Health.

No person shall cause or permit a nuisance affecting the public health on property the person owns or controls. The following are nuisances affecting the public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter:

A. Privies. An open vault or privy constructed and maintained within the City, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the State Health Division regulations.

B. Debris. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the City.

C. Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

D. Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream, or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes, or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

E. Food. Decayed or unwholesome food that is offered for human consumption.

F. Odor. Premises that are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or that are in an unsanitary condition.

G. Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.

H. Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks that are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor for which a special permit has not been obtained pursuant to BC 4.04.035.

I. Failure to Connect to City Sewer System. Failure to connect to City sewer system when the property requires sewage disposal pursuant to BC 4.04.030.

J. Slaughterhouses, Tanneries, and the Like. A slaughterhouse, tannery, rendering plant, glue manufacturing plant, or any other establishment that causes offensive odors.

V. NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY


5.05.075 Abandoned Iceboxes.

No person shall leave in a place accessible to children an abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or similar container which seals essentially air tight without first removing the door.


5.05.080 Attractive Nuisances.

A. No owner or person in charge of property shall permit on the property:

1. unguarded machinery, equipment, or other devices which are attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children;

2. lumber, logs, building material or piling placed or stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children; or

3. an open pit, quarry, cistern, or other excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children.

4. an exposed foundation or portion of foundation, any residue, debris or any other building or structural remains for more than 30 days after the destruction, demolition or removal of any building or portion of the building. [BC 5.05.080 A4, added by Ordinance No. 3364, 4/9/84]

B. This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to children. [BC 5.05.080B amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93.]


5.05.081 Vacant Buildings.

A. Definition. “Vacant building” as used herein means a building, or substantial portion thereof, that is unoccupied or has not actively been furnished and so used as a place of business or residence for more than 60 days. This includes manufactured housing and mobile homes, whether located in a mobile home park or not. A vacant building also includes any building under construction where no substantial work has taken place for more than 180 days. “Vacant building” does not include a building designed for storage, intermittent or similar types of use, if such building is secure from unauthorized entry, in good repair and does not otherwise constitute a nuisance. 

B. A vacant building, including adjoining yard areas, shall be maintained free of debris, garbage, graffiti, litter, portable toilets, rodents and standing water. 

C. A vacant building shall be kept secure from the unauthorized entry of persons by any effective methods. The following methods are deemed per se effective: 

1. Windows and doors with intact glass or panels and functional locking mechanisms that are kept locked. 

2. Exterior doors secured from the interior of the building by nailing or screwing to the doorframe at distances no greater than six inches on center. 

3. Intact walls and roof structures with no openings large enough for a person to enter. 

4. Openings lacking intact glass or panels that are in the basement or foundation, ground floor doors and windows, and any point of entry accessible from a porch, fire escape or other potential climbing point; providing resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of:

a. a solid sheet of 1/2" CDX plywood, 

b. cut to completely cover the opening,

c. if possible, recessed into the opening to reduce the possibility of prying it off and if not possible to recess, then reinforced with 2 x 4 braces on the inside and outside, secured with 3/8" rounded head carriage bolts, nuts and washers; with the rounded head on the weather side; as described in the National Arson Prevention Initiative’s “Board Up” procedures,

d. securely fastened by nails or screws no greater than twelve inches on center along each edge and within four inches of each corner, and

e. painted so as to minimize the appearance of vacancy and to provide protection from weather deterioration. 

5. Openings lacking intact glass or panels; located ten feet or more above any grade, porch, fire escape or other potential climbing point; providing resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of:

a. a solid sheet of 1/2" CDX plywood, 

b. cut to completely cover the opening,

c. recessed into the opening to reduce the possibility of prying it off, if possible,

d. securely fastened by nails or screws no greater than twelve inches on center along each edge and within four inches of each corner, and

e. painted so as to minimize the appearance of vacancy and to provide protection from weather deterioration. 

D. If windows, doors, or other openings of a vacant building are covered over with boards or panels, they must be maintained in a way that reduces the appearance of vacancy and protects the structure from weathering by painting in a color matching the rest of the structure or other reasonably equivalent protective and aesthetic measures. 

E. If an address has been assigned, a vacant building shall display address numbers on the exterior of the building that are plainly visible from the street. 

F. A vacant building that is not maintained according to the requirements of this section, or that has repeatedly been entered by unauthorized persons, or is allowed to be unsecured or open to entry by unauthorized persons, is declared a public nuisance and subject to abatement. Such abatement may include, without limitation, 

1. Measures to secure the building against unauthorized entry. 

2. Painting to reduce the appearance of vacancy and provide protection from weathering.

3. Removal of debris, garbage, graffiti, litter, portable toilets, rodents and standing water.

All costs incurred for abatement may be assessed against the owner of the property. 

G. A vacant building that has repeatedly been entered by unauthorized persons, or is allowed to be unsecured or open to entry by unauthorized persons may be subject to the requirements of BC Chapter 8.03 Abatement of Building Nuisances. 

H. It shall be a Class 1 Civil Infraction for any owner or person in charge of property to allow a vacant building to become a public nuisance, to fail to keep a vacant building secure from unauthorized entry by any effective methods, or to fail to maintain a vacant building according to the requirements of this section. [BC 5.05.081, added by Ordinance No. 4386, 4/10/06]


5.05.085 Snow and Ice Removal.

No owner or person in charge of property abutting on a public sidewalk shall permit:

A. Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first four hours of daylight after the snow has fallen; or

B. Ice to cover or remain on the sidewalk for more than four hours of daylight after the ice has formed without removing the ice or covering it with sand, ashes, or other suitable material to assure safe travel.


5.05.090 Noxious Vegetation.

A. The term “noxious vegetation” does not include vegetation that constitutes an agricultural crop, unless that vegetation is a health hazard or a fire or traffic hazard within the meaning of subsection (B) of this section. [BC 5.05.090A amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93.]

B. The term Noxious Vegetation includes:

1. weeds more than 12 inches high and/or that are going to seed;

2. grass more than 12 inches high and not within the exception stated in subsection A of this section;

3. poison oak;

4. poison ivy;

5. blackberry bushes that extend into a public thoroughfare or across a property line;

6. vegetation that is:

a. a health hazard;

b. a traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public thoroughfare or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.

7. the types of vegetation defined in Chapter 90 of the Development Code as nuisance, applicable to significant natural resource areas. [BC 5.05.090B amended by Ordinance No. 4224, 8/19/02; Ordinance No. 4412, 12/4/06]

C. No owner or person in charge of property shall allow noxious vegetation to be on the property or in the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare abutting on the property. [BC 5.05.090C amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93; BC 5.05.090D repealed by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.093 Graffiti.

No person shall place, or cause to be placed, graffiti upon any property in the City of Beaverton.

No owner or occupant of property shall allow graffiti to be on the property. Property upon which graffiti has been placed and has remained for more than seven (7) days is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the provisions of BC 5.05.230 relating to summary abatement.

A. Definitions. Graffiti: Any unauthorized drawing, inscription, etching, or scratching made on a wall, fence, building, sidewalk, or other structure, that is visible from public rights-of-way, bike paths, walking paths, sidewalks, publicly owned property, or premises open to the public. 

B. Graffiti Removal Required. The owner or occupant of any property in the City shall remove, or cause to be removed, any graffiti from such property within seven (7) days of the graffiti’s appearance. The failure of any owner or occupant of property to remove or to cause the removal of graffiti within seven (7) days shall be a Class 1 civil infraction. [BC 5.05.093, added by Ordinance No. 4380, 2/13/06]


5.05.095 Rubbish.

A. No person shall cause to be placed upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, or other substance that mars the property’s appearance, creates a stench or a fire hazard, detracts from the cleanliness or safety of the property, or constitutes an unreasonable danger to human life or property. Substances that mar the appearance of property, create a stench or a fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of property, or constitute an unreasonable danger to human life or property include, but are not limited to, the following items stored out-of-doors for more than 72 hours:

1. carpet,

2. upholstered furniture (unless designed and manufactured for outdoor use and impervious to rain), and

3. household appliances (including, but not limited to, clothes dryers, washing machines, ovens and stoves).

B. No person shall cause rubbish, trash, debris, or refuse to be placed in a dumpster, dropbox, garbage can, or other container unless the person either owns or has authority to use the container. [BC 5.05.095, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 4331, 11/16/04]


5.05.098 Vegetation and the Public Right-of-Way.

A. An owner or person in charge of property shall:

1. Keep any tree, bush or groundcover on the property from unreasonably interfering with any vehicular or pedestrian traffic occurring within the public right-of-way.

2. Trim or prune any tree or bush planted on the property so that no portion of the tree or bush is less than ten feet above any roadway or less than eight feet above any sidewalk or bicycle path.

3. Trim or prune any groundcover planted on the property so that no portion of the groundcover lies on any sidewalk, roadway or bike path.

B. No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand any dead, decaying, or hazardous tree or shrub that is a danger to any person or property, including any person or property within the public right-of-way. [BC 5.05.098, added by Ordinance No. 3842, 4/12/93]


5.05.100 Purpose and Scope of BC 5.05.100 through 5.05.104.

The purpose of BC 5.05.100 through 5.05.104 is to preserve trees in the public right-of-way or on public property as an important natural resource, to enhance the appearance of the City and private property values, to clearly define responsibility for the maintenance of trees in the public right-of-way and City property and to adopt professional standards for planting and maintenance for use by the City and by private property owners alike, all for purposes of the general public welfare. BC 5.05.100 through 5.05.104 may be referred to as the Public Tree Ordinance and may be referred to in the following sections as “this ordinance”. [BC 5.05.100, added by Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97]


5.05.101 Planting and Maintenance of Trees.

A. No person shall plant or remove any tree in the public right-of-way or on City property except as allowed by this ordinance.

B. The owner or occupant, or an agent for the owner or occupant, of property abutting the right-of-way may plant, treat, prune or replace any tree in that portion of the right-of-way abutting the property only in accordance with current tree maintenance standards established by the National Arborist Association, International Society of Arboriculture, or under the supervision of a person having a current, valid certification as an Arborist by the International Society of Arboriculture.

C. The owner of property abutting the public right-of-way shall be responsible for maintenance of all trees planted in the right-of-way between the edge of the roadway and the property line in accordance with the standards issued under this ordinance. As to trees planted in the right-of-way in conjunction with new development of property, the obligation imposed by this section shall commence after the City determines, and notifies the abutting owner, that the tree(s) is/are established.

D. The City shall be responsible for maintenance of trees located in the right-of-way along that portion of property which abuts a major arterial, minor arterial or major collector street as designated on the City’s Comprehensive Plan, if the abutting portion of such right-of-way:

1. Is separated from the property by a permanent barrier (such as a sound wall or fence) at least four feet in height; and,

2. Does not have direct pedestrian or vehicular access (such as a driveway) to the property; and,

3. Does not allow parking along the property allowing safe access for private maintenance; and,

4. Abuts property used for single-family residential purposes and not commercial, industrial, multi-family, and homeowner or unit owner common area uses.

The streets which have been identified for maintenance by the City, subject to the above criteria, are as follows: Farmington Road (east of Murray Boulevard to Lombard Avenue), Brockman Road, Greenway Avenue, 125th Avenue, Hall Boulevard, Denney Road, Watson Avenue, Hart Road (west of Murray Boulevard to City limits), Davis Road, 5th Street, Davies Road, Conestoga Drive, Downing Drive, 155th Avenue (Bonneville power line right-of-way to Davis Road), Allen Boulevard, Weir Road, Beard Road, Sexton Mountain Drive.

E. The obligation to maintain those trees as well as trees planted in the median of such roadway shall remain with the governmental unit which is obligated to maintain such roadway arterial or major collector.

F. Except as otherwise allowed under a tree preservation or landscape plan submitted as part of a development or subdivision application, any person desiring for any purpose to plant a tree in or upon any right-of-way shall perform such work according to the standards of the City’s Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy. [BC 5.05.101, added by Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97]


5.05.102 Standards for Maintenance and Removal of Trees.

A. Trees within the public right-of-way or on City property shall be pruned, damaging insects shall be controlled, disease shall be treated and the trees otherwise shall be maintained following the procedures and according to the standards of the City’s Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy. Trees within and without the public right-of-way shall be maintained so as not to obstruct the vision clearance area at intersections provided for in the Development Code, Ordinance 2050.

B. Trees within the public right-of-way shall be maintained so that no part of the tree occupies any portion of the area that is 14 feet or less above the surface of an arterial roadway as designated on the Comprehensive Plan, or 12 feet or less above the surface of any roadway not designated on the Comprehensive Plan as an arterial, or 8 feet or less above the surface of a sidewalk or bicycle or pedestrian path.

C. No tree within the public right-of-way or on City property shall be topped unless the tree interferes with overhead utility wires or street lights as determined by the owner of the utility or street lights, or unless topping is necessary to limit further damage to a tree already damaged by other causes as determined by the Mayor or designee.

D. A tree within the public right-of-way or on City property that presents an imminent risk of bodily injury or property damage may be removed on order of any public official having authority to enforce motor vehicle laws or fire or life safety codes at the location of the risk. As to emergency removal by any other person, it is an affirmative defense that a person removed or caused to be removed a tree within the right-of-way without obtaining a permit or direction to do so from an appropriate public official, because such removal was necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury; and the threatened injury was of such gravity that, according to ordinary standards of intelligence and morality, the desirability and urgency of avoiding the injury clearly outweighed the desirability of protecting the public’s interest in the tree.

E. Except as provided by subsection D of this section, no person shall remove or destroy a tree within the public right-of-way without a permit issued by the City upon the person’s application, on a form prescribed by the City, and payment of the required fee. Such permits shall obligate the person to replace the removed tree with a species approved by the City and to plant and maintain same according to the Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy, unless the Mayor or his designee upon request by the permittee determines it would not be in the public interest to do so. The City may require a person seeking a permit to remove or destroy a tree within the public right-of-way to give security for the cost of replacement and establishment.

F. No person shall excavate, place fill or compact the soil within the root zone of any tree in the public right-of-way except as expressly allowed by a City Site Development Permit. [BC 5.05.102, added by Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97]

Editor’s note:

BC 5.05.102 City immunity from liability (Ordinance No. 3842, 4/12/93) was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 3979 but remains effective as to all actions and omissions by any person occurring before the enactment of Ordinance No. 3979.


5.05.103 City May Act on Notice.

A. Upon notice to the Mayor or designee that any tree within the public right-of-way or on City property is infected with disease or infested with damaging insects or otherwise presents an imminent risk of personal injury or property damage or threatens the health of other trees, the City shall inform the abutting property owner responsible for maintenance of the tree(s), if any, of the person’s obligation to take appropriate measures under the City’s Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy to limit or remove the risk, including but not limited to destruction or removal of the tree under the terms of a permit to be issued by the City upon the person’s application. The City shall take appropriate measures under the same Policy with regards to trees that it maintains as provided by this ordinance.

B. Trees that present a risk of personal injury or property damage or that threaten the health of other trees, as described in subsection A of this section, and that are not maintained, or the risk or threat is not remedied, according to the Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated in the matter provided for in Sections 5.05.200 through 5.05.230 of this Code. Trees that present an unreasonable risk of such injury or damage or an immediate threat to the health of other trees may be summarily abated without prior notice to the abutting property owner.

C. No permit fee shall be charged for permits to remove trees as required by subsection A of this section.

D. The City in its discretion may, from time to time, cause the maintenance, destruction, removal or replanting of trees within the public right-of-way that are a nuisance partially or wholly at the City’s, not the abutting property owner’s, initiative and expense when it deems that the public interest so requires. [BC 5.05.103, added by Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97]


5.05.104 Liability and Indemnity: Penalties.

A. A person owning property abutting the public right-of-way shall be solely liable for, and shall hold the City harmless from and indemnify it against, any and all claims for personal or bodily injury or property damage including costs and attorney fees incurred in the defense of any such claim, arising out of the person’s failure to maintain trees in the right-of-way as required by this ordinance.

B. A violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a Class 1 civil infraction. In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedy available to it for a violation of this ordinance, the City may require the person committing the violation to pay the cost of repairing, restoring or replacing and re-establishing any and all trees damaged as a result of the violation. [BC 5.05.104, added by Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97]


5.05.105 Fences.

A. No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed wire fence on the property, or allow barbed wire to remain as part of a fence, along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high.

B. No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence or other electrified wire or material for the purpose of preventing or inhibiting entrance to or exit from property along a sidewalk or public way, or along the adjoining property line of another person.


5.05.110 Surface Waters; Drainage.

A. No owner or person in charge of any building or structure shall cause, suffer or permit rain water, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to allow concentrated water flow across the sidewalk.

B. The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building does not flow across the sidewalk.

C. The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in a proper state of repair all surface water conveyances so that flood carrying capacity is not diminished, flow is not diverted or concentrated, and permitted watercourse alterations or relocations are continuously preserved. [BC 5.05.110, amended by Ordinance No. 4412, 12/4/06; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


5.05.115 Obstructing Public Right-of-Way.

A. General Prohibition. Except as otherwise permitted by the Code or other City ordinance:

1. No person shall obstruct any public right-of-way, or portion of it, or place or cause to be placed on it anything tending to obstruct or interfere with the full and free use of the public right-of-way or in any degree interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

2. No person shall erect, construct, build, raise, place or maintain any post, pole, sign, wall, fence, tree, building, structure or any other object in or upon any public right-of-way.

3. No person in charge of property shall cause or permit to remain in front of the property upon the sidewalk or parking strip of the street next to the property, anything prohibited by this section or which otherwise restricts the public use of the public right-of-way.

B. Attachments to Poles or Trees. No person shall attach to any telephone pole, electric pole or other pole or post installed for or used by a public utility, or to any wire used by a public utility, or to any tree or post growing or located in a public right-of-way, any contrivance or device of any kind which is used for any purpose other than a public utility purpose.

C. Selling Prohibited. No person shall use a public right-of-way or public place for selling, storing or displaying merchandise or equipment.

D. Markings Prohibited Without Permit. No person, without first obtaining a permit from the City, shall solicit on a commercial or donation basis to place, or shall place or maintain, any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design or other marking upon any public right-of-way. Markings for the purpose of identifying survey, utility or construction locations are not subject to this subsection.

E. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:

1. Officers or employees of the City in the discharge of their official duties, or to work being performed by any person under contract with the City.

2. Fire hydrants, parking meters, traffic control devices, signs, notices or other similar objects authorized by the City or other competent public authority.

3. Bicycle storage racks approved by the City’s Traffic Commission.

4. Persons granted a franchise, license or other permission by the City to erect, construct, place and maintain utilities or other facilities or equipment in or upon the public right-of-way.

5. Mailboxes complying with the rules and regulations of the United States Postal Service; except that mailboxes and containers for the collection and storage of mail shall be so placed and maintained as to not endanger the life or safety of the traveling public or inhibit the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, regardless of when the situation should first come into existence.

6. Builders using a portion of the public right-of-way when necessary for building or construction purposes if a permit to do so has been obtained from the appropriate City official.

7. Merchandise, boxes, household goods, building materials or other articles in the actual course of receipt, delivery or removal if the items are removed from the public right-of-way within a reasonable period of time.

8. Ornamental trees, shrubs, grass or other landscaping within a landscape strip, if the landscaping does not constitute a nuisance, does not occupy any portion of the area that is 14 feet or less above the surface of an arterial roadway as designated on the Comprehensive Plan, or 12 feet or less above the surface of any roadway not designated on the Comprehensive Plan as an arterial, or eight feet or less above the surface of the sidewalk or bicycle or pedestrian path, conforms as to species and location with the City’s Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy, and complies with all other Code or City ordinance requirements. The City may use the planted area for any purpose whatsoever and may issue a permit to any applicant to encroach or to perform work on it. If the planted area is damaged or disturbed in the course of an authorized encroachment, it shall be removed and replaced by the permittee unless the permit specifically states otherwise and the owner of the abutting property is so notified in advance. [BC 5.05.115 E8, amended by Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97]

9. A basketball backboard, hoop, net and supporting apparatus, if affixed to the public right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of BC 9.01.200 through 9.01.235.

10. Newspaper tubes for home delivery of newspapers. The method of placement, design and quality of construction shall be approved by the Public Works Director, and the newspaper tubes shall be so placed and maintained as to not endanger the life or safety of the traveling public or inhibit the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, irrespective of when such situation should first come into existence. No tube for delivery of newspapers shall be placed or maintained over or within any sidewalk, and shall be located and placed on the same support as, or proximate to, the existing mailbox.

11. Festivity decorations if a permit for them has been issued under BC 9.01.010 through 9.01.060 and newspaper dispensing stands, sidewalk benches, transit shelters, and other similar facilities if a permit has been issued under BC 9.01.300 through 9.01.330. [BC 5.05.115 E11, amended by Ordinance No. 3373, 6/5/84; and Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

12. Temporary portable signs subject to size, height, placement, number, duration and other standards under the Beaverton Development Code, Chapter 60, Section 60.40.45.4.

F. Special Permits. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the mayor from granting a temporary special permit or otherwise permitting, on such terms the mayor considers proper, the use of public right-of-way for a block party or other purpose or for a civic, patriotic or special event of general public interest taking place within the City when it can be found that the event will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare, interest or safety. The procedure for granting permits shall be the same as that followed in granting parade permits, to the extent possible.

G. Violation of this section shall be subject to the provisions of BC 5.05.230 relating to summary abatement. [BC 5.05.115, amended by Ordinance No. 3814(2), 6/15/92; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12; amended by Ordinance No. 4709, 5/9/17]


5.05.116 Obstructing Public Easements.

A. No person shall obstruct any sewer or water easement, or portion of it, or place or cause to be placed on it or maintain or allow to remain on it anything tending to obstruct or interfere with the sewer or water easement. [BC 5.05.116 A, added by Ordinance No. 3354, 1/16/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3361, 4/3/84]

B. The City may authorize conditions which encumber its easements upon written authorization of officers, agents or employees having authority to grant the obstruction. [BC 5.05.116 B, added by Ordinance No. 3361, 4/3/84]


5.05.117 Camping Prohibited on the Public Right-of-Way.

A. City Council finds:

1. From time to time persons establish campsites on public rights-of-way;

2. Such persons, by such actions, create unsafe and unsanitary living conditions which pose a threat to the peace, health, and safety of themselves and the community; and

3. The enactment of this section is necessary to protect the peace, health, and safety of the City and its inhabitants.

B. As used in this section:

1. “To camp” means to set up or to remain in or at a campsite, for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live.

2. “Campsite” means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping matter, or any stove or fire, is placed, established, or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof.

3. “Public right-of-way” means any thoroughfare or area intended, designed, or used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

C. It is unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any public right-of-way, unless otherwise specifically authorized by this code or a declaration of the Mayor in emergency circumstances.

D. A violation of this section is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days or both.

E. A peace officer shall deliver a 72-hour written warning to a person that the peace officer has probable cause to believe that the person has violated subsection C of this section and that violation is a first offense. The written warning shall be personally delivered to the person named in the notice and the written warning must be in substantially the following form:

NOTICE

PLEASE READ THIS NOTICE CAREFULLY

Your campsite is in violation of Beaverton Code Section 5.05.117. You have 72 hours to stop camping and remove your campsite. You may be subject to fines and/or arrest if you do not stop camping and remove your campsite. Your vehicle may also be subject to a tow if it was used to commit a violation of Beaverton Code Section 5.05.117.

Name:    ___________________________ (name of person)

Date:    ___________________________ (date of notice)

Time:    ___________________________ (time of contact with peace officer)

Officer: ___________________________ (name of peace officer making contact)

Address: _________________________ (address to obtain more information)

Phone No.: ________________________ (contact information for the City)

F. A vehicle used to commit a violation of this section may be impounded if the person has received, within 30 days preceding the current violation, a citation for violating subsection C of this section.

G. The Police Chief shall submit an annual written report to the City Council about enforcement measures that were taken under this section upon passage of the ordinance codified in this section. The report must include, but is not limited to, information about the financial assistance offered, referrals to other agencies, warnings issued, citations issued, vehicles impounded, and the number of individuals arrested under this section and any challenges faced by the Beaverton Police Department with regard to enforcement of this section. [BC 5.05.117, added by Ordinance No. 4732, 6/12/18]


5.05.118 Notice of Campsite Cleanup and Storage of Personal Property.

A. As used in this section:

1. “Personal property” means any item that has apparent utility and is reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person. “Personal property” does not include items that have no apparent utility.

2. “Campsite” has the meaning provided in BC 5.05.117.

B. The Police Chief or a designee shall schedule a cleanup of illegal campsites on an as-needed basis.

C. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, before cleaning up an illegal campsite, the Police Chief or a designee shall post a notice adjacent to the campsite, written in English and Spanish, 24 hours in advance of the cleanup.

D. The Police Chief or a designee may clean up a campsite as necessary without notice if (1) an exceptional emergency exists, which includes possible site contamination by hazardous materials or an immediate danger to human life or safety; or (2) conditions of illegal activity other than camping have occurred.

E. The Police Chief or a designee shall take all unclaimed personal property and store the personal property for a minimum of 30 days during which it will be reasonably available to any individual claiming ownership. Any item that is in an unsanitary or hazardous condition may be immediately discarded upon removal of the item from the camping site. Weapons, drug paraphernalia and items that appear to be either stolen or evidence of a crime shall be retained by the Police Department.

F. The storage facility for personal property obtained under this section shall be reasonably secure and the location should be preferably served by public transportation.

G. At the time of the cleanup, written notice will be posted and distributed announcing the telephone number and an address where information on picking up the stored property can be obtained during normal business hours. [BC 5.05.118, added by Ordinance No. 4732, 6/12/18]

VI. NUISANCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC PEACE


5.05.120 Definitions.

A. “Outdoor recreational facilities” includes, but is not limited to, public ball diamonds, public playing fields, and public tennis courts. It includes facilities owned, operated, or maintained by the Tualatin Hills Park and Recreational District.

B. “Foot-candle” means a unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.

C. “Habitat benefit area” means an area of land that the City has designated as a habitat benefit area under the Development Code.

D. “Significant natural resource area” means resources identified in Volume III of the Comprehensive Plan as “significant” pursuant to Statewide Planning Goal 5. For the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area, it includes Class I and Class II riparian habitat areas and Class A and B upland wildlife areas as determined by Metro Council designation of these areas as regionally significant fish and wildlife habitat through Metro 13 implementation for areas brought within Metro UGB after December 28, 2005.

E. “Vegetative corridor” means a corridor adjacent to a water quality sensitive area that is preserved and maintained to protect the water quality functions of the water quality sensitive area.

F. “Water quality sensitive area” means existing or created wetlands; rivers, streams, and springs, whether flow is perennial or intermittent; natural lakes, ponds and in-stream impoundments. It does not include stormwater infrastructure; a vegetative corridor adjacent to the water quality sensitive area; an off-stream recreational lake, lagoon, fire pond or reservoir; or drainage ditches. [BC 5.05.120, added by Ordinance No. 4675, 2/16/16]


5.05.125 Radio and Television Interference.

A. No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design.

B. This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved, and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.


5.05.130 Repealed.

[BC 5.05.130, repealed by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.05.133 Exterior Lighting.

A. No person shall knowingly allow an exterior lighting fixture to shine light that unreasonably interferes with another person’s use or enjoyment of property. The light from an exterior lighting fixture is presumed reasonable if the light does not exceed one-half foot-candles at the person’s property line.

B. No person shall knowingly allow an exterior lighting fixture, wherever located, to shine light into or onto a significant natural resource area, vegetative corridor, water quality sensitive area, or habitat benefit area unless the lighting fixture is a full cut-off design that is shielded, hooded and oriented towards the ground.

C. This section does not apply to the following:

1. Outdoor recreational facilities;

2. Street lighting or lighting on paths, trails, and walkways; or

3. Facilities owned, operated, or maintained by school districts.

D. This section does not create a cause of action for damages and may not be asserted as the basis for a nuisance per se claim. [BC 5.05.133, added by Ordinance No. 3889, 3/28/94; amended by Ordinance No. 4412, 12/4/06; amended by Ordinance No. 4675, 2/16/16]


5.05.135 Notices and Advertisements.

[BC 5.05.135, amended by Ordinance No. 3320, 4/19/83; repealed by Ordinance No. 3357, 2/28/84]


5.05.136 Posting Notices or Advertisements.

A. No person shall affix, post, place, attach, secure, nail, staple, lay or otherwise deliver or cause to be delivered any placard, handbill, advertisement, leaflet, poster or printed material of any nature upon real or personal property when such property is legibly signed with a notice prohibiting such delivery. The notice required by this section shall be deemed adequate if it is not less than 10 square inches, is visible and legible from the place where the material was delivered and states “No Posting” or words of similar effect.

B. No person shall affix, post, place, attach, secure, nail, staple, lay or otherwise deliver or cause to be delivered any placard, handbill, advertisement, leaflet, poster or printed material of any nature upon public property unless a permit has been obtained from the mayor or the mayor’s designee.

C. No person shall affix, post, place, attach, secure, nail, staple, lay or otherwise deliver or cause to be delivered any placard, handbill, advertisement, product sample, leaflet, poster or printed material of any nature at a residence except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. [BC 5.05.136C, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

D. This section shall not be construed to limit the City regarding notices that are required by this Code or other City ordinances and shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the City regulating the use and location of signs and advertising. [BC 5.05.136D, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

E. This section shall not be construed to limit delivery of items regularly received through the United States Postal Service, nor the delivery of goods or services ordered by the owner, resident, or other person in charge of the property. [BC 5.05.136E, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

[BC 5.05.136, added by Ordinance No. 3409, 9/17/84.]


5.05.140 Declaration of Nuisance.

The acts, conditions, or objects specifically enumerated and defined in BC 5.05.010 through 5.05.136 are hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.260. [BC 5.05.140 amended by Ordinance No. 3451, 6/18/85; and Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.145 General Nuisance.

A. When, in the opinion of the City representative, a nuisance exists which is not specifically enumerated in this Code, a public hearing before the Council may be held for Council determination of whether a nuisance in fact exists. Every thing, substance, or act which is determined by the Council at a public hearing to be offensive, injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City shall be declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Code.

B. Prior to the public hearing the City representative shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the alleged nuisance and shall cause a notice to be forwarded to a person responsible at the person’s last known address. Any error in mailing shall not make the notice void and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

The notice shall contain:

1. A description of the real property by street address or otherwise on which the nuisance exists;

2. A general description of the thing, substance or act which is alleged to be a nuisance;

3. A statement outlining necessary corrective measures to abate the nuisance;

4. A statement that, unless the corrective measures are taken within ten days of the date of posting, that the City Council will schedule a public hearing for the purpose of determining on the record whether a nuisance in fact exists, and if it is decided that a nuisance does exist and is not abated within ten days after the Council’s determination or such time as the Council may set, the City may issue a civil infraction citation or may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be charged to the person responsible or assessed against the property or both;

5. The date of the proposed public hearing which shall be at least ten days later than the date of posting;

6. A statement that the person responsible may attend the public hearing and that the person or legal representative of the person may submit evidence and argument relative to the question of whether a nuisance exists.

C. If corrective measures are not taken within ten days of the date of posting, the City representative shall cause a notice to be forwarded to a person responsible and shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the alleged nuisance giving notice of a public hearing before the City Council. At the time set for the public hearing the Council will hear the matter de novo and may consider any material it deems relevant and probative. The Council shall allow argument by a person responsible or their legal representative and by the City representative. The Council shall make its decision based upon a determination of whether the thing, substance or act is offensive, injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City. The Council, after hearing the matter, may determine that no nuisance exists, determine that a nuisance exists and order its abatement, impose conditions on the person responsible, or delay the time for abatement of the nuisance. The Council shall make written findings in support of its decision when a nuisance is determined to exist, and its decision shall be final. [BC 5.05.145, added by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

VII. VEHICLES AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE


5.05.150 Discarded Vehicle.

A. The open accumulation and storage of a discarded vehicle is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. [BC 5.05.150A, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

B. No person shall store or permit the storing of a discarded vehicle upon private property within the City unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise dealing with junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city. [BC 5.05.150, amended by Ordinance No. 3526, 7/29/86]

C. The presence of a discarded vehicle on private or public property is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and result in the issuance of a civil infraction complaint. [BC 5.05.150C, added by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.152 Trucks in a Residential Area.

The existence of a truck with three or more axles or a truck with a gross weight exceeding 20,000 pounds in an area zoned residential, or adjacent to a residence, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, premature deterioration of residential roadways, noise problems, visibility problems for motorists, an attractive nuisance, and an appearance inconsistent with a residential atmosphere. Therefore, the existence of such a truck, if not at the location for the immediate purpose of picking up or delivering goods, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Code and result in the issuance of a civil infraction complaint. [BC 5.05.152, added by Ordinance No. 3526, 7/29/86]


5.05.155 Prohibited Action.

[BC 5.05.155, repealed by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]


5.05.160 Abatement of Vehicle Nuisances.

A. Vehicle nuisances shall be abated in accordance with the procedures under BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.220, except as otherwise provided herein.

B. Notice Requirements.

1. The notice provided for in BC 5.05.200 shall be affixed to the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen instead of being posted on real property.

2. In addition to the notice contents of BC 5.05.200, subsection C, notice regarding a discarded vehicle shall contain a statement that the vehicle must be removed from the City, or to the storage yard of a business enterprise dealing in discarded vehicles lawfully conducted within the City, or that the vehicle must be completely enclosed in a building. [BC 5.05.160, amended by Ordinance No. 3526, 7/29/86]

3. In addition to affixing the notice to the vehicle and mailing it to the person responsible, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the registered or legal owner, by registered or certified mail.


5.05.165 Disposition of Vehicle Nuisances.

Vehicles removed by the City pursuant to BC 5.05.150 through 5.05.160 shall be appraised and disposed of in accordance with BC 2.05.030 through 2.05.034.

VIII. ABATEMENT PROCEDURES


5.05.200 Abatement Notice.

A. If the City representative is satisfied that a nuisance as defined by this Code or any other City ordinance exists, the representative shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

B. At the time of posting, a copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the person responsible at the person’s last known address. [BC 5.05.200B, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

C. The notice to abate shall contain:

1. a description of the real property by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists;

2. a direction to abate the nuisance within ten days from the date of posting;

3. a description of the nuisance and a reference to the ordinance or Code section number involved;

4. a statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the City may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be charged to the person responsible or assessed against the property, or both;

5. a statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving written notice to the recorder within ten days from the date of posting;

6. a statement that failure to abate a nuisance may result in abatement by the City and/or the issuance of a civil infraction citation; [BC 5.05.200C6, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

7. if the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that all or part of the abatement costs not paid by the person responsible will be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

D. On completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

E. An error in the notice mailed shall not make the notice void and in such a case the posted notice shall be sufficient. [BC 5.05.200, amended by Ordinance No. 3451, 6/18/85]


5.05.205 Abatement by a Person Responsible.

A. Within ten days after the posting and mailing of the notice as provided in BC 5.05.200, a person responsible shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

B. A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall, within ten days after posting, file with the city recorder a written statement specifying the basis for protesting. The city recorder shall give the person responsible who files a written protest notice of the date and time when the Council will consider the abatement. The notice from the recorder shall be mailed by regular mail at least five days prior to the Council hearing. The failure to file a written statement waives any objection that the person may have to the finding that a nuisance exists or to the abatement of the nuisance by the City.

C. The statement shall be referred to the Council as part of the Council’s regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting or at such time as may be convenient. At the time set for the public hearing the Council will hear the matter de novo and may consider any material it deems relevant and probative. The Council shall allow argument by a person responsible or their legal representative and by the City representative. The Council shall make its decision based upon a determination of whether the thing, substance or act is offensive, injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City. The Council, after hearing the matter, may determine that no nuisance exists, determine that a nuisance exists and order its abatement, impose conditions on the person responsible, or delay the time for abatement of the nuisance. The Council shall make written findings in support of its decision when a nuisance is determined to exist, and its decision shall be final. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided.

D. If the Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, a person responsible shall abate the nuisance within ten days after the Council’s determination, unless the Council has delayed the time pursuant to subsection C. [BC 5.05.205, amended by Ordinance No. 3451, 6/18/85]


5.05.210 Abatement by the City.

A. If the nuisance has not been abated by a person responsible within the time allowed, the City may abate the nuisance or cause it to be abated. [BC 5.05.210A, amended by Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93]

B. The City representative charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property in accordance with law to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance. The City representative shall have the authority to dispose of all seized property in any manner deemed suitable and shall, if practical, attempt to obtain salvage value for material which per item has a fair market value in excess of $25.00 as determined by the City representative. Disposition of vehicles shall be in accordance with BC 5.05.165.

C. The finance director shall keep an accurate record of the costs incurred by the City in physically abating the nuisance. [BC 5.05.210, amended by Ordinance No. 3451, 6/18/85]


5.05.215 Assessment of Costs and Entry of Lien.

A. The code enforcement officer, by certified mail and regular first class mail, postage prepaid, shall send to the owner and the person responsible a notice stating:

1. The total cost of abatement pursuant to BC 5.05.015 including the cost of administrative overhead minus any salvage value pursuant to BC 5.05.210, subsection B;

2. That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days of the date of mailing of the notice;

3. That for the period until the 30-day notice has lapsed, the finance director shall temporarily enter the cost of abatement in the City’s lien docket;

4. That if the property owner or the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a written notice of objection may be filed with the City finance director not more than ten days after the date the notice was mailed.

In the event that the certified mail and regular first class mail, postage prepaid, is returned to the City by the postal service, then the code enforcement officer shall post the notice on the property in question or publish the notice two times in a newspaper of general circulation.

B. If an objection is received on or before the expiration of ten days after the date the notice was mailed, or the date the notice was posted or published, whichever is later, the finance director, in the regular course of business, shall hear any timely objection and determine the costs to be assessed. The finance director’s determination shall be by written order.

C. The property owner or person responsible may appeal the finance director’s decision to the City Council by making a written request to the city recorder within ten days of the finance director’s determination. If the costs of the abatement are not appealed in a timely manner and not paid within 30 days from the date the notice was mailed, or the date the notice was posted or published, whichever is later, an assessment of the costs of abatement shall be entered into the City’s permanent lien docket and shall become a final lien on the property from which the nuisance was abated. In the event of a timely objection or appeal, the assessment, if any, shall be entered upon conclusion of the objection or appeal process.

D. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements and shall bear interest at the rate established by Council resolution pursuant to BC 1.01.020. The interest shall begin to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

E. The City may include in one foreclosure proceeding as many accounts as the City may have against separate properties for abating nuisances pursuant to this chapter and may proceed to assess and collect single lot assessments against each of them in a single proceeding.

F. An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the total cost of abatement render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [BC 5.05.215, amended by Ordinance No. 3451, 6/18/85; Ordinance No. 4369, 10/17/05]


5.05.220 Abatement: Joint Responsibility.

If more than one person is responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the City in abating the nuisance.


5.05.225 Abatement: Noxious Vegetation.

Whenever procedures are instituted to abate a nuisance defined under BC 5.05.090, the required mailings of notice may be performed by use of ordinary mail. The notice may be supplemented with a statement that the City, for a given fee, will cut the noxious vegetation at the written request of the person responsible.


5.05.227 Other Methods of Collection of Costs.

The costs assessed for abatement of a nuisance may be collected pursuant to ORS 30.310 or 30.315.


5.05.230 Summary Abatement.

A. A City representative may proceed summarily to abate a nuisance that imminently endangers human life or property. Notwithstanding BC 5.05.200, a person responsible for the nuisance condition shall pay the cost of abatement incurred by the City pursuant to BC 5.05.210, and the property shall be subject to an assessment and placement of a lien in accordance with BC 5.05.215. [BC 5.05.230A amended by Ordinance No. 3842, 4/12/93; and Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97.]

B. Notwithstanding the procedures for abatement set forth in BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.215, any personal property, other than motor vehicles, found to be in violation of BC 5.05.115, may be immediately seized and removed by a representative of the City without prior notice to the owner of the personal property. Disposition of the personal property shall be made pursuant to BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.026, except that personal property which per item has a fair market value of less than ten dollars as determined by the code enforcement officer may be salvaged or disposed of in any manner determined suitable by the City representative, and any costs incurred in salvage, disposal or storage may be assessed against any responsible person.

C. The City representative shall send written notice of the seizure and removal of personal property which per item has a fair market value in excess of ten dollars to one or more of the following persons:

1. the person believed to be the owner or otherwise lawfully entitled to possession of the personal property seized if known; or

2. the owner of the real property adjacent to the location of the personal property at the time of seizure as determined by the records of Washington County Department of Records and Elections.

D. The notice shall contain the following:

1. a description of the property seized;

2. location of the property at the time of seizure;

3. date and time of day of seizure;

4. a citation of the specific Code section violated;

5. location where the property is stored;

6. summary of the rights to reclaim the property pursuant to BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.034;

7. the right to request a hearing;

8. date of mailing of the notice; and

9. any applicable charges imposed pursuant to BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.034.

E. A hearing may be requested within ten days of mailing of the notice. The hearing shall be before the municipal court according to the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050 as if a uniform infraction citation had been issued. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the City representative’s power to cause an infraction citation to be issued.

F. The hearing shall be limited to determination of the propriety of the seizure. Actual notice of the seizure is a waiver of the requirement of written notice. [BC 5.05.230, amended by Ordinance No. 3451, 6/18/85]


5.05.255 Violations.

A. Violation of this ordinance constitutes a Class l Civil Infraction and shall be processed according to the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each violation of a separate provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate civil infraction, and each day that a violation of a provision of this ordinance is committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate civil infraction. [BC 5.05.255, added by Ordinance No. 3842, 4/12/93]


5.05.260 Separate Violations.

A. Each day’s violation of a provision of this ordinance constitutes a separate offense.

B. The requirement to abate a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this ordinance, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance. [BC 5.05.260 amended by Ordinance No. 3842, 4/12/93; and Ordinance No. 3872, 11/1/93.]


Chapter 5.06 FORFEITURE

Sections:

5.06.010    Forfeiture.


5.06.010 Forfeiture.

A. Any real or personal property used to commit prohibited conduct or that is a proceed of prohibited conduct may be forfeited pursuant to the procedures and limitations provided in the State Forfeiture Act.

B. As used in this section:

1. The term “prohibited conduct” shall include violation of, solicitation to violate, attempt to violate or conspiracy to violate any provision of ORS 164.005 to 164.235, ORS 164.305 to 164.365, and ORS 164.395 to 164.415 relating to theft, burglary, arson, criminal mischief and robbery when the conduct constitutes either a felony or a misdemeanor, as those terms are defined in ORS 161.525 and 161.545, and is part of a pattern of prohibited conduct.

2. The term “pattern of prohibited conduct” shall mean engaging in at least two incidents of prohibited conduct that have the same or similar intents, results, accomplices, victims or methods of commissions or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteristics, and are not isolated incidents, provided at least one of such incidents occurred after the effective date of this ordinance and that the last of such incidents occurred within two years after a prior incident of prohibited conduct. [BC 5.06.010, added by Ordinance No. 3840, 3/1/93]


Chapter 5.07 CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES

Sections:

5.07.005    Short Title.

5.07.010    Legislative Findings.

5.07.020    Definitions.

5.07.030    Chronic Nuisance Prohibited.

5.07.035    Penalty.

5.07.040    Abatement of Chronic Nuisance.

5.07.050    Notice of Potential Chronic Nuisance.

5.07.055    Notice of Existing Chronic Nuisance.

5.07.060    Notice; Manner of Service.

5.07.065    Burdens of Proof; Affirmative Defenses.

5.07.070    Closure During Pendency of Action; Emergency Closures.

5.07.080    Enforcement of Closure Order; Costs.

5.07.090    Remedies Cumulative.

5.07.100    Severability.


5.07.005 Short Title.

BC 5.07.005 to 5.07.100 shall be known and may be cited as the “Chronic Nuisance Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this ordinance”. [BC 5.07.005, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.010 Legislative Findings.

The City Council finds that:

A. By virtue of its authority to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community, the City has the power to abate a public nuisance by way of an injunctive decree or order and to impose a penalty upon the person responsible for creating or maintaining a public nuisance.

B. The abatement of a single nuisance is ineffective in protecting the health, safety and welfare of the community at large when conditions or activities related to the use of property give rise to a series of public nuisances over time.

C. A process and means to hold property owners accountable for adverse conditions and activities that repeatedly occur in connection with their property is needed to help maintain and improve the quality of life in the city.

D. Pursuant to the City’s regulatory authority to help maintain and improve the quality of life in the city, this ordinance is enacted to establish the rights, duties and procedures necessary to hold property owners and persons in charge of property accountable for adverse conditions and activities that repeatedly occur in connection with their property. [BC 5.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.020 Definitions.

As used in this ordinance, the following mean:

A. Chronic Nuisance. Premises at or near which any combination of:

1. Three or more of the nuisance activities listed in subsection B of this section occurs during any 30-day period; or

2. Four or more of the nuisance activities listed in subsection B of this section occurs during any 90-day period; or

3. Six or more of the nuisance activities listed in subsection B of this section occurs during any 365-day period.

If nuisance activity occurs near the premises, acts or conditions on the premises must have substantially contributed to bring about the nuisance activity.

B. Nuisance Activity. To commit, to attempt to commit, to conspire to commit, or to solicit, coerce or intimidate another person to commit any conduct that constitutes a crime, as defined in ORS 161.515, under any of the following provisions of the Beaverton Code or the Oregon Revised Statutes:

1. BC 5.02.015(A) or ORS 471.410, relating to furnishing liquor to minors;

2. BC 5.02.015(B) or ORS 471.412, relating to serving liquor to visibly intoxicated persons;

3. BC 5.02.025 or ORS 471.430, relating to possession of liquor by minors;

4. BC 5.02.050 or ORS 471.478 to 471.482, relating to the sale of liquor by minors;

5. BC 5.02.055, 5.02.070 or ORS 471.405, relating to the unlicensed sale or delivery of liquor;

6. BC 5.02.083, relating to the consumption of liquor in public places;

7. BC 5.08.100 or ORS 163.160 through 163.185, relating to assault;

8. BC 5.08.105 or ORS 163.190, relating to menacing;

9. BC 5.08.110 or ORS 163.195, relating to reckless endangerment;

10. BC 5.08.115 or ORS 166.025, relating to disorderly conduct;

11. BC 5.08.127 or ORS 166.155 to 166.165, relating to intimidation;

12. BC 5.08.130 or ORS 166.065, relating to harassment;

13. BC 5.08.225 or ORS 166.630, relating to discharge of a weapon;

14. BC 5.08.300, relating to indecent exposure;

15. BC 5.08.305 or ORS 163.465, relating to public indecency;

16. BC 5.08.320 or ORS 163.415, relating to sexual abuse;

17. BC 5.08.325 or ORS 167.007 to 167.017, relating to prostitution;

18. BC 5.08.415 to 5.08.420 or ORS 164.345 to 164.365, relating to criminal mischief;

19. BC 5.08.424 or ORS 164.315 to 164.335, relating to arson and related offenses;

20. BC 5.08.500 or ORS 163.575, relating to the endangerment of the welfare of a minor;

21. BC 5.08.710 or ORS 164.805, relating to littering;

22. ORS 163.305 to 163.465, relating to sexual offenses;

23. ORS 167.117 or ORS 167.122 to 167.127, relating to gambling offenses;

24. ORS 475.005 to 475.285 and 475.940 to 475.995, relating to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act.

C. Person in Charge. A person, a representative or employee of the person who has lawful control of premises by ownership, tenancy, official position or other legal relationship, including but not limited to:

1. A person authorized to manage premises; and

2. A person authorized to enter into a rental agreement on behalf of another person in charge of premises.

D. Premises. Includes any building and any real property, whether privately or publicly owned. [BC 5.07.020, added by Ordinance No. 4020, passed 7/21/98]


5.07.030 Chronic Nuisance Prohibited.

A. No person in charge of premises shall allow those premises to become a chronic nuisance.

B. No person in charge of premises shall fail to prevent those premises from becoming a chronic nuisance. [BC 5.07.030, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.035 Penalty.

A. Any person who violates BC 5.07.030 commits a non- criminal offense punishable by a fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1250. Every combination of nuisance activities constituting a chronic nuisance is a separately punishable offense.

B. An action to impose a penalty for violation of BC 5.07.030 may be brought on behalf of the City by the city attorney. The action shall be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the Beaverton Municipal Court. The trial of any alleged violation under this section shall be provided by Oregon Laws 1993, Chapter 379, sections 1 to 5. However, no action to impose a penalty under this ordinance may be commenced against a government or governmental subdivision or agency, including a county, city or special district.

C. In determining the appropriate amount of any fine under this section, and in addition to any other factor the court deems relevant to consider, the court shall consider the following:

1. The nature and location of the chronic nuisance;

2. The frequency of the conduct constituting or principally contributing to the chronic nuisance;

3. The effect of the chronic nuisance upon the enjoyment of life, health and property on members of the community;

4. The efforts of any person in charge of premises to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the chronic nuisance;

5. The actual results of any actions taken by any person in charge of premises to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the chronic nuisance; and

6. The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the chronic nuisance, including bringing an enforcement proceeding. [BC 5.07.035, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.040 Abatement of Chronic Nuisance.

A. A chronic nuisance is a public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated as provided by this ordinance.

B. An action to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance within the City may be brought on behalf of the City by the city attorney. The action shall be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the Beaverton Municipal Court. The action shall be commenced and the complaint shall be served as provided in ORS 105.565(1) and 105.565(2). However, no action to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance under this ordinance may be commenced against a government or governmental subdivision or agency, including a county, city or special district. The trial of any action to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance shall be by the court without a jury.

C. A pleading to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance may include an additional or alternative count or claim that a person has violated BC 5.07.030 and is subject to the penalty provided under BC 5.07.035(A).

D. A person residing or doing business in the City may not bring an action under this ordinance on behalf of the City to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance. However, nothing herein limits any statutory or common-law right of a person to bring an action or other proceeding on the person’s behalf related to such chronic nuisance.

E. If the existence of a chronic nuisance is established in an action under this section, the court may enjoin the use giving rise to the chronic nuisance and abate such use as a public nuisance. The court issuing any injunction or abatement order shall retain jurisdiction over the subject matter and parties of the case for all purposes connected with the subject matter in dispute.

F. The court may enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate. An order, decree or judgment enjoining or abating a chronic nuisance under this section shall be in writing. The court shall prepare written findings of facts and conclusions of law to support the relief granted under this section to remedy the chronic nuisance.

G. An order enjoining or abating a chronic nuisance may direct that for up to 180 days, unless sooner released, the premises be closed and that the person in charge of the premises or their agent secure the premises against all use and occupancy.

H. In determining the appropriate means to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance, and in addition to any other factors the court deems relevant, the court shall consider the following:

1. The nature and location of the chronic nuisance;

2. The frequency of the conduct constituting or principally contributing to the chronic nuisance;

3. The effect of the chronic nuisance upon the enjoyment of life, health and property on members of the community;

4. The efforts of any person in charge of premises to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the chronic nuisance;

5. The actual results of any actions taken by any person in charge of premises to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the chronic nuisance; and

6. The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the chronic nuisance, including bringing an enforcement proceeding. [BC 5.07.040, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.050 Notice of Potential Chronic Nuisance.

A. When any lieutenant or other officer of greater rank of the Beaverton Police Department has reasonable grounds to believe any combination of:

1. Two or more of the nuisance activities listed in BC 5.07.020(B) of this ordinance have occurred at or near a premises during any 30-day period; or

2. Three or more of the nuisance activities listed in BC 5.07.020(B) of this ordinance have occurred at or near a premises during any 90-day period; or

3. Four or more of the nuisance activities listed in BC 5.07.020(B) of this ordinance have occurred at or near a premises during any 365-day period;

The lieutenant or other officer of greater rank may give written notice to a person in charge of the premises that the premises are in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance.

B. The notice allowed under this section shall contain information to the following effect:

1. The street address or a legal description sufficient to identify the premises.

2. A statement that (a) the premises are in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance, together with (b) a concise description of the nuisance activity upon which the statement is based and (c) a warning that failure to prevent the premises from becoming a chronic nuisance may result in the closure of the business for up to 180 days under the provisions of this ordinance.

3. A statement that a person in charge of the premises may meet with a representative of the Police Department and discuss ways that may prevent or eliminate the nuisance activity giving rise to the threatened chronic nuisance.

4. A statement that if a person in charge desires to meet and discuss the prevention or elimination of the nuisance activity giving rise to the threatened chronic nuisance, the person must respond to the lieutenant or other officer of higher rank within 10 days from the date of the notice to arrange the meeting.

5. A statement that a person in charge is not obligated to meet and discuss the prevention or elimination of the nuisance activity giving rise to the threatened chronic nuisance, but that the failure to promptly do so may increase the financial penalty or length of closure imposed by a court should the premises ever become a chronic nuisance. [BC 5.07.050, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.055 Notice of Existing Chronic Nuisance.

A. After providing notice of a potential chronic nuisance under BC 5.07.050, if the lieutenant or other officer of higher rank has reasonable grounds to believe the premises have become a chronic nuisance, the lieutenant or other officer of higher rank shall give written notice to a person in charge of the premises that the City considers the premises a chronic nuisance. The notice shall contain the following information:

1. The street address or a legal description sufficient to identify the premises.

2. A statement that the premises are considered a chronic nuisance, together with a concise description of the nuisance activity upon which the statement is based.

3. A statement that a person in charge of the premises may meet with a representative of the Police Department to devise a written plan to attempt to prevent or eliminate future nuisance activity at or near the premises.

4. A statement that if a person in charge of the premises desires to meet with a representative of the Police Department to devise a written plan to attempt to prevent or eliminate future nuisance activity at or near the premises, the person must respond to the lieutenant or other officer of higher rank within 10 days from the date of the notice to arrange the meeting.

5. A statement that the failure of a person in charge of the premises to promptly meet, discuss and devise a plan to prevent or eliminate future nuisance activity giving rise to a chronic nuisance may be a factor that increases the penalty or length of closure imposed by a court should the premises be found to be a chronic nuisance.

6. If after notification as provided in this section, but prior to the commencement of any action by the City pursuant to this ordinance, a person in charge of the premises prepares and submits to the City a written plan that the City believes is likely to prevent or eliminate future nuisance activity at or near the premises, the City may delay commencement of an action related to the chronic nuisance for not more than 90 days.

a. The City may elect to indefinitely postpone commencement of any action to enjoin or abate the chronic nuisance if, while the City is delaying commencement of an action related to the chronic nuisance, no new nuisance activity occurs at or near the premises. However, the decision to indefinitely postpone commencement of an action to enjoin or abate a chronic nuisance does not require the City to postpone commencement of an action to impose a penalty under this or any ordinance of the City.

b. The City may immediately commence an action to enjoin or abate the chronic nuisance and/or to impose a penalty under this ordinance if (1) a person in charge of the premises fails to prepare and submit a written plan that the City believes is likely to prevent or eliminate future nuisance activity at or near the premises, or (2) for any reason whatsoever, new nuisance activity occurs at or near the premises while the City is delaying commencement of an action related to the chronic nuisance.

B. The opportunity to meet and negotiate under this section does not compel a person to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession. A person in charge of premises has the burden to prepare and submit the written plan provided for in this section. [BC 5.07.055, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.060 Notice; Manner of Service.

Any notice required under this ordinance shall be delivered in a manner reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise a person in charge of premises of the contents of the notice and to afford the person a reasonable opportunity to respond to the notice.

A. Service of a notice may be made by:

1. Delivering the notice to the person to be served; or

2. Mailing the notice to the person to be served by first class mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, addressed to a person in charge at the address of the premises believed to be a chronic nuisance.

B. A copy of the notice required under BC 5.07.055 of this ordinance shall be posted at the premises if ten days has elapsed from the delivery or mailing of the notice to the person in charge and the person in charge has not responded.

C. Concurrent with the notice required under BC 5.07.055 of this section, the lieutenant or other officer of greater rank shall send a copy of the violation notice to the police chief. Any other documentation which the lieutenant or other officer of greater rank believes supports the closure of the premises and the imposition of civil penalties may be sent as well. The police chief may then request the city attorney to commence civil proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking such relief as may be deemed appropriate.

D. Failure to comply with provisions of this section relating to the service of notice shall not affect the validity of the notice or the existence of jurisdiction over the parties or subject matter if the court determines that a person in charge of the premises:

1. Had actual knowledge of the substance of the contents of the notice or

2. Deliberately avoided delivery or receipt of the notice. [BC 5.07.060, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.065 Burdens of Proof; Affirmative Defenses.

A. In any action under this ordinance, the City shall first bear the burden of producing sufficient evidence that a reasonable fact finder could find by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation of the ordinance has occurred or that a chronic nuisance exists. The burden of producing evidence shall then shift to the defendant.

B. The City has the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence its entitlement to a remedy enjoining the use giving rise to a chronic nuisance and abating such use as a public nuisance. However, in all proceedings, the City has the burden of proving only by a preponderance of the evidence its entitlement to a fine for violation of this ordinance.

C. In any action under this ordinance, it is an affirmative defense to be established by a preponderance of the evidence by a defendant that:

1. The defendant had no knowledge of the existence of the alleged chronic nuisance and a reasonable person under similar circumstances likewise would not; and

2. The defendant had no control of the alleged underlying nuisance activity and that a reasonable person under similar circumstances likewise would not.

D. It is no defense under this section that the chronic nuisance is contributed to by the acts of others over whom defendant has no control, if there still would be a chronic nuisance without such contribution. [BC 5.07.065, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.070 Closure During Pendency of Action; Emergency Closures.

The City may institute an action for a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction pursuant to ORCP 78 if a threatened or existing nuisance under this ordinance creates an emergency that requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare. In such instances, the notice requirements of this ordinance need not be fulfilled. [BC 5.07.070, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.080 Enforcement of Closure Order; Costs.

The court may authorize the City to physically secure the premises against use or occupancy in the event that the person in charge of premises fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the premises, all costs incurred by the City to effect a closure shall be allowed and recovered as provided under ORCP 68. As used in this subsection, “costs” include those reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the City for the physical securing of the premises. [BC 5.07.080, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.090 Remedies Cumulative.

Any penalty or remedy imposed pursuant to this ordinance is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty, sanction or remedy otherwise authorized by law. The abatement of a nuisance under this ordinance does not prejudice the right of any person to recover damages for its past existence. [BC 5.07.090, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


5.07.100 Severability.

The sections and subsections of this ordinance are severable. If any part of this ordinance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

A. The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional or invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid part; or

B. The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed according to the legislative intent. [BC 5.07.100, added by Ordinance No. 4020, 7/21/98]


Chapter 5.08 OFFENSES

Sections:

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

5.08.010    Definitions for BC 5.08.010 to 5.08.800.

5.08.015    Application of State Statutes.

5.08.020    Defenses and Burden of Proof.

II. DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND RELATED OFFENSES

5.08.100    Assault.

5.08.101    Vehicular Assault of a Bicyclist or Pedestrian.

5.08.102    Strangulation.

5.08.105    Menacing.

5.08.110    Reckless Endangerment.

5.08.111    Throwing Object off Overpass.

5.08.115    Disorderly Conduct.

5.08.120    Disobeying an Order to Disperse.

5.08.121    Public Fighting.

5.08.125    Loitering.

5.08.127    Intimidation.

5.08.130    Harassment.

5.08.133    Telephonic Harassment.

5.08.135    Abuse of Venerated Objects.

5.08.137    Abuse of a Memorial to the Dead.

5.08.140    Interfering with Public Transportation.

III. WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS

5.08.200    Definitions.

5.08.205    Carrying of Concealed Weapons.

5.08.210    Pointing Firearm at Another.

5.08.215    Unlawful Possession of Firearms.

5.08.217    Unlawful Carrying of a Loaded Firearm.

5.08.220    Persons Not Affected by BC 5.08.215 and 5.08.217.

5.08.225    Discharging a Weapon.

5.08.226    Unlawful Use of Mace, Tear Gas or an Electrical Stun Gun.

5.08.227    Seizure and Forfeiture of Weapons.

5.08.230    Possession of Hoax Destructive Device.

5.08.240    Unlawful Carrying of a Loaded Firearm.

5.08.250    Short Title.

5.08.255    Definitions.

5.08.260    Prohibitions.

5.08.265    Affirmative Defenses.

5.08.270    Penalties.

IV. SEXUAL AND RELATED OFFENSES

5.08.300    Indecent Exposure.

5.08.305    Public Indecency.

5.08.307    Private Indecency.

5.08.310    Prohibited Touching.

5.08.320    Sexual Abuse.

5.08.325    Prostitution.

V. OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY

5.08.400    Theft in the Second Degree.

5.08.401    Theft in the Third Degree.

5.08.402    Aggravated Theft of Services.

5.08.403    Theft of Services.

5.08.404    Criminal Possession of Rented or Leased Personal Property.

5.08.405    Trespass.

5.08.406    Trespass in the First Degree.

5.08.407    Trespass While in Possession of a Firearm.

5.08.408    Violating Privacy of Another.

5.08.410    Invasion of Personal Privacy.

5.08.413    Unlawful Entry into Motor Vehicle.

5.08.414    Criminal Trespass at a Sports Event.

5.08.415    Mischief.

5.08.420    Aggravated Mischief.

5.08.423    Computer Crime.

5.08.424    Reckless Burning.

5.08.425    Forgery.

5.08.427    Mail Theft or Receipt of Stolen Mail.

5.08.430    Unlawful Use of Slugs.

5.08.435    Fraudulent Use of a Credit Card.

5.08.440    Criminal Possession of a Forged Instrument.

5.08.445    Criminal Simulation.

5.08.450    Fraudulently Obtaining a Signature.

5.08.455    Negotiating a Bad Check.

5.08.460    Unlawful Videotape Recording.

5.08.465    Improper Use of an Emergency Reporting System.

5.08.470    Falsifying Business Records.

5.08.475    Misapplication of Entrusted Property.

5.08.480    Issuing a False Financial Statement.

5.08.485    Obtaining Execution of Documents by Deception.

VI. OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS

5.08.500    Endangering the Welfare of a Minor.

5.08.503    Posting of Signs Concerning Sale of Tobacco Devices.

5.08.505    Furnishing Obscene Materials to a Minor.

5.08.507    Failing to Supervise a Child.

5.08.510    Short Title for BC 5.08.510 through 5.08.522.

5.08.513    Definitions.

5.08.514    Minimum Package Size.

5.08.515    Failure to Supervise Sale of Tobacco Products.

5.08.516    Vendor-Assisted Sale of Tobacco Products.

5.08.517    Affirmative Defense.

5.08.520    Penalty.

5.08.522    Non-Retaliation.

5.08.525    Repealed.

5.08.530    Child Neglect.

5.08.535    Child Confined in Vehicle.

5.08.540    Misrepresentation of Age by Minor.

VII. OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL ADMINISTRATION

5.08.600    Unsworn Falsification.

5.08.602    False Swearing.

5.08.605    Obstructing Governmental Administration.

5.08.610    Repealed.

5.08.611    Interfering with Law Enforcement Animal.

5.08.615    Tampering with Public Records.

5.08.618    Failure to Provide Name and Date of Birth.

5.08.620    Impersonation.

5.08.621    Possession of False Law Enforcement Identification.

5.08.622    False Representation.

5.08.625    False Reports.

5.08.626    Giving False Information to a Peace Officer for a Citation or Arrest Warrant.

5.08.630    Resisting Arrest.

5.08.635    Escape.

5.08.640    Interference with Police and Fire Communications.

5.08.645    Refusing to Assist An Officer.

5.08.650    Failure to Appear in the Second Degree.

5.08.655    Hindering Misdemeanor Prosecution.

5.08.657    Compounding a Felony.

5.08.660    Interfering with a Police Officer.

5.08.661    Interfering with a Firefighter or Emergency Medical Technician.

5.08.662    Interfering with Making a Report.

5.08.665    Repealed.

5.08.670    Tampering with Physical Evidence.

5.08.675    Tampering with Public Records.

5.08.680    Official Misconduct in the Second Degree.

5.08.685    Official Misconduct in the First Degree.

5.08.690    Misuse of Confidential Information.

VIII. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

5.08.700    Cruelty to Animals.

5.08.701    Sexual Assault of an Animal.

5.08.702    Animal Abuse in the Second Degree.

5.08.703    Animal Abuse in the First Degree.

5.08.704    Animal Neglect in the Second Degree.

5.08.705    Soliciting Drinks.

5.08.706    Animal Neglect in the First Degree.

5.08.707    Unlawful Possession of a Domestic Animal.

5.08.708    Animal Abandonment.

5.08.709    Forfeiture of Rights in Mistreated Animals.

5.08.710    Littering.

5.08.712    Placing Offensive Substances on Property.

5.08.715    Possession of Less Than One Ounce of Marijuana.

5.08.716    Possession of Less Than One Ounce of Marijuana within 1,000 Feet of a School.

5.08.717    Frequenting a Place Where Controlled Substances are Used.

5.08.718    Falsifying Drug Test Results.

5.08.719    Providing Drug Test Falsification Equipment.

5.08.720    Unlawful Possession of Inhalants.

5.08.721    Unlawful Distribution of Cigarettes.

5.08.730    Unlawful Directing of Light from a Laser Pointer.

5.08.735    Improper Repair of a Vehicle Inflatable Restraint System.

5.08.740    Possession of Burglary Tool or Theft Device.

5.08.760    Attempt.

5.08.765    Solicitation.

5.08.770    Conspiracy.

5.08.800    Penalties.

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS


5.08.010 Definitions for BC 5.08.010 to 5.08.800.

The definitions contained in the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as now constituted, are incorporated into this code. A definition provided under state law and made applicable to a provision of the Oregon Revised Statutes that is incorporated by reference into this code at BC 5.08.010 to 5.08.800 applies in similar manner to those provisions of BC 5.08.010 to 5.08.800. [BC 5.08.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3531, 9/16/86; Ordinance No. 3580, 9/22/87; Ordinance No. 3694, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 3789, 10/7/91; Ordinance No. 3871, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 3948, 12/18/95; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.015 Application of State Statutes.

A. Provisions of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as now constituted, relating to principles (ORS 161.005 to 161.067), criminal liability (ORS 161.085 to 161.125), parties to crime (ORS 161.150 to 161.175), justification (ORS 161.190 to 161.275) and responsibility (ORS 161.290 to 161.400), fines for corporations (ORS 161.655), and effect of non-payment of fines, restitution or costs (ORS 161.685) apply to offenses defined and made punishable by BC 5.08.010 to 5.08.800. Reference contained therein to an offense defined by the Oregon Revised Statutes and incorporated herein shall be deemed a reference to the provision of this code that incorporates by reference the offense defined by the Oregon Revised Statutes.

B. Except as otherwise expressly provided, or unless the context requires otherwise, the provisions of this section shall govern the construction of and punishment of any offense defined outside of BC 5.08.010 to 5.08.800, as well as the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. [BC 5.08.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3530, 9/9/86; Ordinance No. 3790, 10/7/91; Ordinance No. 3870, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 3947, 12/18/95; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.020 Defenses and Burden of Proof.

A. When a defense, other than an affirmative defense, is raised at trial, the City has the burden of disproving the defense beyond a reasonable doubt.

B. When a defense, declared to be an affirmative defense by Chapter 743, Oregon Laws 1971, as now constituted, is raised at a trial, the defendant has the burden of proving the defense by a preponderance of the evidence.

C. The City is not required to negate a defense unless it is raised by the defendant, either by providing the City, before commencement of trial, with written notice of intent to rely on the defense, or by providing affirmative evidence of the defense by a defense witness in the defendant’s case in chief.

D. ORS 161.475, defenses to solicitation and conspiracy, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

E. ORS 161.485, multiple convictions barred in inchoate crimes, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

F. ORS 164.035, defenses to theft, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

G. ORS 167.335, exemption from ORS 167.315 to 167.330, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. Reference therein to ORS 167.315 to 167.330 shall be deemed a reference to BC 5.08.702 to 5.08.706. [BC 5.08.020, added by Ordinance No. 3534, 8/16/86; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]

II. DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND RELATED OFFENSES


5.08.100 Assault.

ORS 163.160, assault in the fourth degree, subsections (1) and (2), as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.100, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.101 Vehicular Assault of a Bicyclist or Pedestrian.

2001 Oregon Laws, Chapter 635, Section 5, Vehicular Assault of a Bicyclist or Pedestrian, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.101, added by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.102 Strangulation.

ORS 163.187, strangulation, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.102, added by Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.105 Menacing.

ORS 163.190, menacing, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.105, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.110 Reckless Endangerment.

ORS 163.195, recklessly endangering another person, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.110, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.111 Throwing Object off Overpass.

ORS 166.649, throwing object off overpass in second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.111, added by Ordinance No. 3867, 11/1/93; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.115 Disorderly Conduct.

ORS 166.025, disorderly conduct, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.115, amended by Ordinance No. 3584, 11/30/87; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.120 Disobeying an Order to Disperse.

[BC 5.08.120, repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.121 Public Fighting.

[BC 5.08.121, added by Ordinance No. 3321, 5/3/83; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.125 Loitering.

[BC 5.08.125, repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.127 Intimidation.

ORS 166.155, intimidation in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.127 added by Ordinance No. 3656, 3/6/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3697, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.130 Harassment.

ORS 166.065, harassment, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.130, amended by Ordinance No. 3471, 10/7/85; Ordinance No. 3581, 9/22/87; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.133 Telephonic Harassment.

ORS 166.090, telephonic harassment, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.133, added by Ordinance No. 3581, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.135 Abuse of Venerated Objects.

ORS 166.075, abuse of venerated objects, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.135, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.137 Abuse of a Memorial to the Dead.

ORS 166.076, abuse of a memorial of the dead, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.137, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.140 Interfering with Public Transportation.

ORS 166.116, interfering with public transportation, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.140, added by Ordinance No. 3882, 2/14/94; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]

III. WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS


5.08.200 Definitions.

[BC 5.08.200 amended by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.205 Carrying of Concealed Weapons.

Except as to those provisions relating to the jurisdiction of justice courts, ORS 166.240, carrying of concealed weapons, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.205 amended by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.210 Pointing Firearm at Another.

[BC 5.08.210 amended by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.215 Unlawful Possession of Firearms.

[BC 5.08.215 amended by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.217 Unlawful Carrying of a Loaded Firearm.

[BC 5.08.217, amended by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.220 Persons Not Affected by BC 5.08.215 and 5.08.217.

[BC 5.08.220, amended by Ordinance No. 3658, 3/20/89; Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.225 Discharging a Weapon.

A. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm into or across a public place or while located in a public place.

B. No person shall intentionally discharge a pellet gun, BB gun, bow and arrow, sling shot, or other similar weapon that expels a projectile by means other than by the action of smokeless powder.

C. This section shall not prohibit the discharge of a firearm or a weapon that expels a projectile by means other than by the action of smokeless powder while at a reasonably safe and regularly operated firing range.

D. This section does not prohibit the discharge of a replica firearm displayed in accordance with the replica firearms ordinance or the discharge of a weapon that expels a projectile by means other than by the action of smokeless powder, so long as the projectile expelled upon discharge is one of the following:

1. A commercially manufactured spherical projectile which contains paint and which is designed to break and splatter upon impact, commonly known as a “paintball”;

2. A commercially manufactured spherical projectile with a diameter between and including 5.98 and 8 millimeters, constituted of common styrene plastic or biodegradable plastic, weighing no more than 0.36 gram per sphere. 

E. A person who violates this section commits a Class B misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.225, added by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4423, 2/26/07]


5.08.226 Unlawful Use of Mace, Tear Gas or an Electrical Stun Gun.

ORS 163.212, unlawful use of an electrical stun gun, tear gas or mace in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.226, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.227 Seizure and Forfeiture of Weapons.

The unlawful possession of a firearm, the unlawful carrying of a concealed weapon or loaded firearm, and the unlawful discharging of a weapon are a nuisance. Any weapon taken from the person or a vehicle of any person unlawfully possessing, carrying or discharging the same is a nuisance, and shall be surrendered to the police department and disposed of pursuant to the procedures provided at ORS 166.280. [BC 5.08.227, added by Ordinance No. 3703, passed December 27, 1989]


5.08.230 Possession of Hoax Destructive Device.

Subsections (1), (2) and (4) of ORS 166.385, possession of hoax destructive device, as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.230, added by Ordinance No. 4009, passed 6/16/98]

Editor’s note:

BC 5.08.230 Unlawful Display of Fireworks, added by Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89, was repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96


5.08.240 Unlawful Carrying of a Loaded Firearm.

A. No person in a public place shall carry a firearm upon the person unless all ammunition has been removed from the chamber and from the cylinder, clip or magazine.

B. Subsection A of this section does not apply to or affect:

1. A law enforcement officer in the performance of official duty.

2. A member of the military in the performance of official duty.

3. A person licensed to carry a concealed handgun.

4. A person authorized to possess a loaded firearm while in or on a public building under ORS 166.370.

5. Any person summoned by any law enforcement officer to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while said person so summoned is actually engaged in assisting the officer.

6. A corrections officer while transporting or accompanying an individual convicted of or arrested for an offense and confined in a place of incarceration or detention while outside the confines of the place of incarceration or detention.

7. When authorized by the officer’s employer, a parole and probation officer, as defined in ORS 181.610, may carry a firearm while engaged in official duties if the officer has completed: (1) A firearms training program recognized by the Board on Public Safety Standards and Training; and (2) A psychological screening.

8. An armed private security officer, proprietary security manager or security contractor certified and permitted by the Department of Public Safety Standards and Training to possess a firearm while in the performance of their duties.

C. A person who violates this section commits a Class A misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.240, added by Ordinance No. 4084, 2/7/00]


5.08.250 Short Title.

BC 5.08.250 through 5.08.270 shall be known and may be cited as the “replica firearms ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance.” [BC 5.08.250, added by Ordinance No. 4423, 2/26/07]


5.08.255 Definitions.

For the purposes of this ordinance the following terms have the stated meanings:

“Blaze orange tip” means either a plastic plug or a permanent marking which is colored blaze orange, which covers the barrel of a replica firearm from the muzzle end for a depth of at least six millimeters, the placement of which is required by federal law.

“Laser pointer” means a device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye.

“Period-authentic historical reenactment” means a reenactment of past events in which the use of historically accurate uniforms and equipment predominates.

“Replica firearm” means any device that substantially resembles a firearm or can reasonably be perceived to be an actual firearm. A device that substantially resembles a firearm or can reasonably be perceived to be an actual firearm shall not be deemed a replica firearm if:

A. The device is constructed entirely of opaque materials colored bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright blue or bright purple, either singly or in combination with other listed colors; or 

B. The device is constructed entirely of transparent or translucent materials that permit unmistakable observation of the complete contents of the device; or

C. The device is constructed entirely of a mixture of materials described in subsections (A) and (B) of this definition.

“Replica firearm merchant” means a retail operation, such as a hobby shop, sporting goods store, or firearms store, that is a place of sale to ultimate consumers of replica firearms for direct consumption, operating in a commercial structure or storefront, with premises open to the general public during business hours.

“School premises” means the real property comprising a public or private elementary, secondary or career school attended primarily by minors. [BC 5.08.255, added by Ordinance No. 4423, 2/26/07]


5.08.260 Prohibitions.

A. No person shall possess a replica firearm in a public place.

B. No person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence point or discharge a replica firearm at another person, said other person being located in a public place.

C. No person shall possess on school premises a device that otherwise would be a replica firearm but for the fact that: 

1. The device is constructed entirely of opaque materials colored bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright blue or bright purple, either singly or in combination with other listed colors; or 

2. The device is constructed entirely of transparent or translucent materials that permit unmistakable observation of the complete contents of the device; or

3. The device is constructed entirely of a mixture of materials described in subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section. [BC 5.08.260, added by Ordinance No. 4423, 2/26/07]


5.08.265 Affirmative Defenses.

A. A defendant may establish by a preponderance of the evidence an affirmative defense to a charge of violating BC 5.08.260(A) that:

1. The defendant possessed the replica firearm in a public place other than on school premises and the replica firearm was completely concealed within an opaque container;

2. The defendant possessed the replica firearm on school premises, the defendant was an employee or agent of the school acting within his or her official duties, and the replica firearm was completely concealed within an opaque container;

3. The defendant was employed as a peace officer as defined in ORS 133.005 and possessed the replica firearm within his or her official duties;

4. The defendant possessed the replica firearm while using or intending to use it in connection with the production of a motion picture, television program, theatrical presentation or period-authentic historical reenactment, and one or more of the following circumstances is present:

a. The production was taking place or was to take place on a stage in an auditorium, including an auditorium on school premises, for which the general admission of an adult to the particular production required the purchase of a ticket; or

b. All of the persons involved in the production were at least 18 years of age; or

c. One or more person involved in the production held a valid membership in the Associated Actors and Artistes of America (4As) or the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, Moving Picture Technicians, Artists and Allied Crafts of the United States, Its Territories and Canada (IATSE); or

d. The production of the period-authentic historical reenactment took place under the express authorization or direct control or active participation of a governmental entity, a federal tax exempt organization or a nonprofit organization duly registered with either the Oregon Department of Justice or Office of the Secretary of State, and the production of the reenactment did not create unreasonable public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;

5. The defendant possessed the replica firearm where all the following conditions are present:

a. The replica firearm is possessed in the course of commerce, or for service or repair, by a replica firearm merchant, or a patron or wholesaler of such a merchant; and

b. The replica firearm is possessed within the merchant’s commercial storefront or structure in which the merchant’s business is located; and

c. The replica firearm merchant holds a current, valid city of Beaverton business license; and

d. The replica firearm does not bear an attached laser pointer.

B. A defendant may establish by a preponderance of the evidence an affirmative defense to a charge of violating BC 5.08.260(B) that:

1. The defendant was employed as a peace officer as defined in ORS 133.005 and pointed or discharged the replica firearm within his or her official duties;

2. The defendant pointed or discharged the replica firearm in connection with the production of a motion picture, television program, theatrical presentation or period-authentic historical reenactment, and one or more of the following circumstances is present:

a. The production was taking place or was to take place on a stage in an auditorium, including an auditorium on school premises, for which the general admission of an adult to the particular production required the purchase of a ticket; or

b. All of the persons involved in the production were at least 18 years of age; or

c. One or more person involved in the production held a valid membership in the Associated Actors and Artistes of America (4As) or the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, Moving Picture Technicians, Artists and Allied Crafts of the United States, Its Territories and Canada (IATSE); or

d. The production of the period-authentic historical reenactment took place under the express authorization or direct control or active participation of a governmental entity, a federal tax exempt organization or a nonprofit organization duly registered with either the Oregon Department of Justice or Office of the Secretary of State, and the production of the reenactment did not create unreasonable public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm. 

C. A defendant may establish by a preponderance of the evidence an affirmative defense to a charge of violating BC 5.08.260(C) that:

1. The defendant possessed the device on school premises, the defendant was an employee or agent of the school acting within his or her official duties, and the device was completely concealed within an opaque container;

2. The defendant was employed as a peace officer as defined in ORS 133.005 and possessed the device on school premises within his or her official duties;

3. The defendant possessed the device while using or intending to use it in connection with the production of a motion picture, television program, theatrical presentation or a period-authentic historical reenactment, and one or more of the following circumstances is present:

a. The production was taking place or was to take place on a stage in an auditorium, including an auditorium on school premises, for which the general admission of an adult to the particular production required the purchase of a ticket; or

b. All of the persons involved in the production were at least 18 years of age; or

c. One or more person involved in the production held a valid membership in the Associated Actors and Artistes of America (4As) or the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, Moving Picture Technicians, Artists and Allied Crafts of the United States, Its Territories and Canada (IATSE); or

d. The production of the period-authentic historical reenactment took place under the express authorization or direct control or active participation of a governmental entity, a federal tax exempt organization or a nonprofit organization duly registered with either the Oregon Department of Justice or Office of the Secretary of State, and the production of the reenactment did not create unreasonable public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm. [BC 5.08.265, added by Ordinance No. 4423, 2/26/07]


5.08.270 Penalties.

A. Except as provided in subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section, violation of BC 5.08.260 is a Class A violation punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00.

B. Violation of BC 5.08.260(A) or (B) is a Class A violation punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 if the unlawfully possessed, pointed or discharged replica firearm bears an attached laser pointer or has had its blaze orange tip removed or covered with paint, tape, or similar opaque substance.

C. Violation of BC 5.08.260(A) or (B) is a Class C misdemeanor if the offense occurs on or within 1,000 feet of school premises.

D. Violation of BC 5.08.260(A), (B) or (C) is a Class A misdemeanor if within five years to the date of the current offense the defendant has been convicted previously of a violation of BC 5.08.260(A), (B) or (C) or a counterpart thereof in another jurisdiction.

E.  In addition to and not in lieu of any other sentence a court may impose, a court may require a defendant convicted under BC 5.08.260 to forfeit any rights of the defendant in the device or replica firearm unlawfully possessed, pointed or discharged. [BC 5.08.270, added by Ordinance No. 4423, 2/26/07]

IV. SEXUAL AND RELATED OFFENSES


5.08.300 Indecent Exposure.

A. No person shall expose his or her genitalia while in a public place or place visible from a public place, if the public place is open or available to persons of the opposite sex.

B. A person who violates this section commits a Class B misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.300, added by Ordinance No. 3879, 2/14/94; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98]


5.08.305 Public Indecency.

ORS 163.465, public indecency, subsections (1) and (2)(a), as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.305, amended by Ordinance No. 3333, 10/3/83; Ordinance No. 3341, 10/19/83; Ordinance No. 3529, 9/9/86; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.307 Private Indecency.

ORS 163.467, private indecency, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.307, added by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.310 Prohibited Touching.

[BC 5.08.310, repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.320 Sexual Abuse.

A. ORS 163.415, sexual abuse in the third degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 163.315, incapacity to consent, ORS 163.325, ignorance or mistake as a defense, and ORS 163.345, age as a defense in certain cases, as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.320, added by Ordinance No. 3655, 3/6/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.325 Prostitution.

ORS 167.007, prostitution, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.325, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]

V. OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY


5.08.400 Theft in the Second Degree.

ORS 164.045, theft in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.400, amended by Ordinance No. 3362, 4/3/84; Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.401 Theft in the Third Degree.

ORS 164.043, theft in the third degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.401, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.402 Aggravated Theft of Services.

ORS 164.125, theft of services, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. This section shall apply if the aggregate total value of services that are the subject of the theft is $50 or more but is under $750. [BC 5.08.402, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.403 Theft of Services.

ORS 164.125, theft of services, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. This section shall apply if the aggregate total value of services that are the subject of the theft is under $50. [BC 5.08.403, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.404 Criminal Possession of Rented or Leased Personal Property.

ORS 164.140, criminal possession of rented or leased personal property, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. This section shall apply if the aggregate total value of the personal property not returned is under $500. [BC 5.08.404, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.405 Trespass.

ORS 164.245, criminal trespass in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.405, amended by Ordinance No. 3359, 2/13/84; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.406 Trespass in the First Degree.

ORS 164.255, trespass in the first degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.406, added by Ordinance No. 3326, 6/13/83; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.407 Trespass While in Possession of a Firearm.

ORS 164.265, criminal trespass while in possession of a firearm, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.407, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.408 Violating Privacy of Another.

A. A person commits the crime of violating the privacy of another if the person knowingly enters the land, dwelling, or other property of another, and while thus situated looks through or attempts to look through a window, door or transom of a dwelling, with the intent to violate the privacy of another.

B. The provisions of this section do not apply to:

1. Any activity undertaken in the course of bona fide law enforcement or corrections activity or necessary to the proper functioning of the criminal justice system.

2. Bona fide fire, life safety, first responder, or other rescue activity in response to reports of, actual, imminent, or threatened physical injury or property damage.

C. As used in this section, except as the context requires otherwise:

1. “Enter” means entry into or upon the land, dwelling or other property of another without the permission of the owner thereof or other person entitled to possession, or at times when the entrant is not otherwise licensed or privileged to enter, or in a manner that violates a covenant, condition, or other restriction upon the person of the person’s use of the land, dwelling or other property.

2. “Dwelling” means a building that in whole or in part, on either a regular or intermittent basis, is intended for occupancy by a person lodging therein. Where a building consists of separate dwelling units, including but not limited to separate apartments or rented rooms, each unit is, in addition to being a part of such building, a separate dwelling.

3. “Land” means privately-owned real property upon and within the bounds of which stands a dwelling or other building, including the yards or landscaped areas surrounding or adjacent to a dwelling or building. Varying ownerships may comprise a given piece of land.

4. “Violate the privacy of another” refers to a person’s act of obtaining views of another person in the other person’s dwelling in a manner that violates a privacy interest of the other person protected under state or federal law.

D. Violating the Privacy of Another is a Class A Misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.408, added by Ordinance No. 4182, 11/5/01]


5.08.410 Invasion of Personal Privacy.

A. ORS 163.700, invasion of personal privacy, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 163.702, exceptions to ORS 163.700, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.410, amended by Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.413 Unlawful Entry into Motor Vehicle.

ORS 164.272, unlawful entry into motor vehicle, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.413, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.414 Criminal Trespass at a Sports Event.

A. ORS 164.274, definitions for ORS 164.276 and 164.278, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 164.276, authority to sports official to expel persons from sports event, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

C. ORS 164.278, criminal trespass at a sports event, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.414, added by Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.415 Mischief.

ORS 164.345, criminal mischief in the third degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.415, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.420 Aggravated Mischief.

ORS 164.354, criminal mischief in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.420, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.423 Computer Crime.

Subsections (1), (4), and (5)(a) of ORS 164.377, computer crime, as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.423, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.424 Reckless Burning.

ORS 164.335, reckless burning, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.424, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.425 Forgery.

ORS 165.007, forgery in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this Code. [BC 5.08.425, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.427 Mail Theft or Receipt of Stolen Mail.

ORS 164.160, definitions; ORS 164.162, mail theft or receipt of stolen mail; ORS 164.164, defense in prosecution under ORS 164.162; applicability of ORS 164.162 as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.427, added by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.430 Unlawful Use of Slugs.

ORS 165.047, unlawfully using slugs, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.430, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.435 Fraudulent Use of a Credit Card.

ORS 165.055, fraudulent use of a credit card, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. This section shall apply if the aggregate total amount of property or services the person obtains or attempts to obtain is under $750. [BC 5.08.435, added by Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.440 Criminal Possession of a Forged Instrument.

ORS 165.017, criminal possession of a forged instrument in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.440, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.445 Criminal Simulation.

ORS 165.037, criminal simulation, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.445, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.450 Fraudulently Obtaining a Signature.

ORS 165.042, fraudulently obtaining a signature, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.450, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.455 Negotiating a Bad Check.

ORS 165.065, negotiating a bad check, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.455, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.460 Unlawful Videotape Recording.

ORS 164.875, unlawful videotape recording, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.460, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.465 Improper Use of an Emergency Reporting System.

ORS 165.570, improper use of an emergency reporting system, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.465, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.470 Falsifying Business Records.

ORS 165.080, falsifying business records, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.470, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.475 Misapplication of Entrusted Property.

ORS 165.095, misapplication of entrusted property, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.475, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.480 Issuing a False Financial Statement.

ORS 165.100, issuing a false financial statement, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.480, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.485 Obtaining Execution of Documents by Deception.

ORS 165.102, obtaining execution of documents by deception, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.485, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]

VI. OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS


5.08.500 Endangering the Welfare of a Minor.

ORS 163.575, endangering the welfare of a minor, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.500, amended by Ordinance No. 3699, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.503 Posting of Signs Concerning Sale of Tobacco Devices.

ORS 163.580, posting of signs concerning sale of smoking devices, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.503, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.505 Furnishing Obscene Materials to a Minor.

[BC 5.08.505, amended by Ordinance No. 3317, 4/12/83; repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.507 Failing to Supervise a Child.

ORS 163.577, failing to supervise a child, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.507, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]

Editor’s note:

    BC 5.08.510 Sending obscene materials to a minor;

    BC 5.08.515 Exhibiting obscene performance to a 	minor;

    BC 5.08.520 Displaying obscene materials to minors;

    BC 5.08.525 Defenses in prosecuting under BC 5.08.505 through 5.08.520 repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96.


5.08.510 Short Title for BC 5.08.510 through 5.08.522.

BC 5.08.510 to 5.08.522 shall be known and may be cited as the “Tobacco Ordinance” and may also be referred to as “this ordinance.” [BC 5.08.510, added by Ordinance No. 3983, 6/10/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.513 Definitions.

For the purpose of this ordinance the following mean:

Cigarette – Any roll for smoking, made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of whether the tobacco is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material, except where such wrapper is wholly or in the greater part made of tobacco and 1,000 such rolls weigh over three pounds.

Employee – A person who engages to furnish work or services to an employer for remuneration, financial or otherwise. The term includes an independent contractor retained by the employer.

Employer – Any entity or individual who engages a person to perform work or services for which compensation is given in periodic payments or otherwise, even though the relationship of the person so engaged to the employer may be an independent contractor for other purposes.

Self-Service Display – The display of tobacco or tobacco products at a business establishment that allows public access to the tobacco or tobacco products without the assistance of an employee of the business establishment.

Strict Liability, Without Regard to Fault – A form of liability imposed without regard to a person’s mental state and under which the existence or absence of fault is not material to the determination of a person’s legal responsibility.

Tobacco Products – Cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking.

Vendor-Assisted Tobacco Sale – The sale of tobacco or tobacco products to a retail buyer wherein only the vendor has access to the tobacco or tobacco products offered for sale, and the delivery of the tobacco or tobacco products from the vendor to the buyer occurs only after completion of the sale thereof. [BC 5.08.513, added by Ordinance No. 3983, 6/10/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4215, 6/24/02]


5.08.514 Minimum Package Size.

A. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or permit to be sold any container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes.

B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to:

1. Tobacco vending machines exempt from city regulation pursuant to state law, including under ORS 167.404;

2. A person who offers for sale, sells or permits to be sold tobacco or tobacco products while in a retail business that is:

a. Primarily engaged in the sale of tobacco or tobacco products and

b. Posted as off-limits to minors;

3. A restaurant posted as off-limits to minors or in an area of a restaurant posted as off-limits to minors under the rules of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; or

4. A bar or tavern posted as off-limits to minors under the rules of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. [BC 5.08.514, added by Ordinance No. 4215, 6/24/02]


5.08.515 Failure to Supervise Sale of Tobacco Products.

A person shall be held strictly liable, without regard to fault, for the commission of the offense of failing to supervise the sale of tobacco products if the person is an employer of an employee who distributes, sells or causes to be distributed or sold tobacco products in any form to a person under 18 years of age. [BC 5.08.515, added by Ordinance No. 3983, 6/10/97]


5.08.516 Vendor-Assisted Sale of Tobacco Products.

A. No person shall offer for sale, sell or permit to be sold any tobacco or tobacco products by means of a self-service display or by any means other than by a vendor-assisted tobacco sale.

B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to:

1. Tobacco vending machines exempt from city regulation pursuant to state law, including under ORS 167.404;

2. A person who offers for sale, sells or permits to be sold tobacco or tobacco products while in a retail business that is:

a. Primarily engaged in the sale of tobacco or tobacco products and

b. Posted as off-limits to minors;

3. A restaurant posted as off-limits to minors or in an area of a restaurant posted as off-limits to minors under the rules of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; or

4. A bar or tavern posted as off-limits to minors under the rules of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. [BC 5.08.516, added by Ordinance No. 4215, 6/24/02]


5.08.517 Affirmative Defense.

In a prosecution of a person for violation of BC 5.08.515, it is an affirmative defense to be established by a preponderance of the evidence by the defendant that:

A. Prior to the commission of the offense, the person had trained all the person’s employees who may sell tobacco products that:

1. The sale and distribution of tobacco products to any person under 18 years of age is illegal; and

2. The age of a person who is purchasing tobacco products must be verified by means of photographic identification containing the bearer’s date of birth, unless the purchaser is older than 26 years of age; and

B. At the time of the commission of the offense, the employee who sold or caused tobacco products to be distributed to a person under 18 years of age had appropriately verified the purchaser’s age through the examination of photographic identification, but was shown convincingly false or altered identification that a reasonable person would not have determined was altered or inaccurate in its description of the person to whom the tobacco products were sold or distributed. [BC 5.08.517, added by Ordinance No. 3983, 6/10/97]


5.08.520 Penalty.

Any person who violates BC 5.08.514, BC 5.08.515 or BC 5.08.516 commits a non-criminal violation punishable by a fine of not more than $300. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty or sanction otherwise authorized by law. [BC 5.08.520, added by Ordinance No. 3983, 6/10/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4215, 6/24/02]


5.08.522 Non-Retaliation.

No employer shall discharge, demote, suspend, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant or customer reports, testifies, assists or participates in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing regarding an alleged violation of this ordinance. Any person claiming to be aggravated by an unlawful act under this section shall have a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages and other such remedies as may be appropriate. [BC 5.08.522, added by Ordinance No. 4215, 6/24/02]


5.08.525 Repealed.

[BC 5.08.525, added by Ordinance No. 3983, 6/10/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4215, 6/24/02]


5.08.530 Child Neglect.

ORS 163.545, child neglect in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.530, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.535 Child Confined in Vehicle.

A. No person who has control or custody of a child under eight years of age shall lock or confine, or leave the child unattended, or permit the child to be locked or confined, or left unattended in a vehicle for a period of time longer than 15 consecutive minutes.

B. A peace officer, finding a child confined in violation of the terms of this section, may enter the vehicle and remove the child, using such force as is reasonably necessary to effect an entrance to the vehicle.

C. A person who violates this section commits a Class A violation. [BC 5.08.535, amended by Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.540 Misrepresentation of Age by Minor.

No person shall:

A. Being less than a certain, specified age, knowingly represent that the person is of any age other than the person’s true age with the intent of securing a right, benefit or privilege that by law is denied to persons under that certain, specified age; or

B. Being unmarried, knowingly represent that the person is married with the intent of securing a right, benefit or privilege that by law is denied to an unmarried person.

VII. OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL ADMINISTRATION


5.08.600 Unsworn Falsification.

ORS 162.085, unsworn falsification, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.600, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.602 False Swearing.

A. ORS 162.075, false swearing, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 162.095, defenses to perjury and false swearing limited, ORS 162.105, retraction as defense, and ORS 162.115, corroboration of falsity required, as now constituted, are hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.602, added by Ordinance No. 3826, 8/17/92; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.605 Obstructing Governmental Administration.

ORS 162.235, obstructing governmental administration, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.605, amended by Ordinance No. 3516, 6/10/86; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.610 Repealed.

[BC 5.08.610, amended by Ordinance No. 3868, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.611 Interfering with Law Enforcement Animal.

ORS 167.337, interfering with law enforcement animal, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.611, added by Ordinance No. 3420, 12/4/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.615 Tampering with Public Records.

[BC 5.08.615, repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.618 Failure to Provide Name and Date of Birth.

A. No person shall knowingly fail to provide a name and date of birth to a peace officer having probable cause to believe the person has committed a violation offense.

B. A person who violates this section commits a Class C misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.618, added by Ordinance No. 3479, 12/17/85; amended by Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98]


5.08.620 Impersonation.

ORS 162.365(1)-(3)(a),impersonation, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.620, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.621 Possession of False Law Enforcement Identification.

ORS 162.369, possession of false law enforcement identification card, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.621, added by Ordinance No. 3866, 11/1/93; amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.622 False Representation.

A. No person shall falsely represent to another that the person is acting as an employee, agent or representative of the City or that the City endorses or sanctions the actions of that person.

B. A person who violates this section commits a Class C misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.622, amended by Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98]


5.08.625 False Reports.

ORS 162.375, initiating a false report, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.625, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.626 Giving False Information to a Peace Officer for a Citation or Arrest Warrant.

ORS 162.385, giving false information to a peace officer for a citation or arrest warrant, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.626, added by Ordinance No. 3422, 12/11/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3468, 10/8/85; Ordinance No. 3695, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.630 Resisting Arrest.

ORS 162.315, resisting arrest, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.630, amended by Ordinance No. 3696, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98]


5.08.635 Escape.

ORS 162.145, escape in the third degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.635, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.640 Interference with Police and Fire Communications.

ORS 166.095, misconduct with emergency telephone calls, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.640, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.645 Refusing to Assist An Officer.

ORS 162.245, refusing to assist a peace officer, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.645, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.650 Failure to Appear in the Second Degree.

A. ORS 162.195, failure to appear in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 162.193, failure to appear; counsel for defendant cannot be witness; exception, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. Reference therein to ORS 162.195 shall be deemed a reference to this section. [BC 5.08.650, amended by Ordinance No. 3706, 2/5/90; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.655 Hindering Misdemeanor Prosecution.

A. No person shall intentionally hinder the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of a person who has committed a crime punishable as a misdemeanor, or intentionally assist a person who has committed a crime punishable as a misdemeanor in profiting or benefitting from the commission of the crime by:

1. Harboring or concealing such person; or

2. Warning such person of impending discovery or apprehension; or

3. Providing or aiding in providing such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension; or

4. Preventing or obstructing by means of force, intimidation or deception, anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or apprehension of such person; or

5. Aiding such person in securing or protecting the proceeds of the crime.

B. A person who violates this section commits a Class C misdemeanor. [BC 5.08.655, added by Ordinance No. 3880, 2/14/94; amended by Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98]


5.08.657 Compounding a Felony.

A. ORS 162.335, compounding a felony, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 162.345, defenses for hindering or compounding limited, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.657, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.660 Interfering with a Police Officer.

ORS 162.247, interfering with police, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.660, added by Ordinance No. 3881, 2/14/94; amended by Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.661 Interfering with a Firefighter or Emergency Medical Technician.

ORS 162.257, interfering with a firefighter or emergency medical technician, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.661, added by Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.662 Interfering with Making a Report.

ORS 165.572, interfering with the making of a report, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.662, added by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.665 Repealed.

[BC 5.08.665, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.670 Tampering with Physical Evidence.

ORS 162.295, tampering with physical evidence, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.670, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.675 Tampering with Public Records.

ORS 162.305, tampering with public records, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.675, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.680 Official Misconduct in the Second Degree.

ORS 162.405, official misconduct in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.680, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.685 Official Misconduct in the First Degree.

ORS 162.415, official misconduct in the first degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.685, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.690 Misuse of Confidential Information.

ORS 162.425, misuse of confidential information, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.690, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]

VIII. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES


5.08.700 Cruelty to Animals.

[BC 5.08.700, repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.701 Sexual Assault of an Animal.

A. ORS 167.333, sexual assault of an animal, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 167.334, evaluation of person convicted of violation ORS 167.333, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.701, added by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.702 Animal Abuse in the Second Degree.

ORS 167.315, animal abuse in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.702, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.703 Animal Abuse in the First Degree.

ORS 167.320(1)B(3), animal abuse in the first degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.703, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.704 Animal Neglect in the Second Degree.

ORS 167.325, animal neglect in the second degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.704, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.705 Soliciting Drinks.

[BC 5.08.705, repealed by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.706 Animal Neglect in the First Degree.

ORS 167.330, animal neglect in the first degree, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.706, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.707 Unlawful Possession of a Domestic Animal.

ORS 167.332, unlawful possession of a domestic animal, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.707, added by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.708 Animal Abandonment.

ORS 167.340, animal abandonment, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.708, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.709 Forfeiture of Rights in Mistreated Animals.

ORS 167.350, forfeiture of rights in mistreated animals; costs; disposition of animal, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. Reference therein to ORS 167.315 to 167.330 and 167.340 shall be deemed a reference to BC 5.08.702 to 5.08.706 and 5.08.708. [BC 5.08.709, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


5.08.710 Littering.

ORS 164.805, offensive littering, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.708, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.712 Placing Offensive Substances on Property.

ORS 164.785, placing offensive substances in waters, on highways or other property, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.712, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.715 Possession of Less Than One Ounce of Marijuana.

Subsection (4)(f) of ORS 475.992, prohibited acts generally; penalties; affirmative defense for certain peyote uses, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.715, amended by Ordinance No. 3698, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.716 Possession of Less Than One Ounce of Marijuana within 1,000 Feet of a School.

ORS 475.999(2)(a)(b), “Penalty for manufacture or delivery of controlled substance within 1,000 feet of school,” as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.716, added by Ordinance No. 4151, 4/9/01]


5.08.717 Frequenting a Place Where Controlled Substances are Used.

ORS 167.222, “Frequenting a Place Where Controlled Substances are Used,” as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.717, added by Ordinance No. 4151, 4/9/01]


5.08.718 Falsifying Drug Test Results.

ORS 475.981, falsifying drug test results, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.718, added by Ordinance 4196, 2/11/03; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.719 Providing Drug Test Falsification Equipment.

ORS 475.982, providing drug test falsification equipment, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.719, added by Ordinance 4196, 2/11/03; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.720 Unlawful Possession of Inhalants.

ORS 167.808, unlawful possession of inhalants, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.720, added by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.721 Unlawful Distribution of Cigarettes.

ORS 323.482(1), (2), (2)(a) and (3)-(6), unlawful distribution of cigarettes, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.721, added by Ordinance 4196, 2/11/03; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.730 Unlawful Directing of Light from a Laser Pointer.

ORS 163.709, unlawful directing of light from a laser pointer, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.730, added by Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00]


5.08.735 Improper Repair of a Vehicle Inflatable Restraint System.

ORS 167.822, improper repair of a vehicle inflatable restraint system, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.735, added by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.740 Possession of Burglary Tool or Theft Device.

ORS 164.235, possession of burglary tool or theft device, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.661, added by Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


5.08.760 Attempt.

A. ORS 161.405, “attempt” described, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 161.425, impossibility not a defense, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

C. ORS 161.430, renunciation as a defense to attempt, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.760, amended by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.765 Solicitation.

A. ORS 161.435, “solicitation” described, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 161.440, renunciation as a defense to solicitation, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.765, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.770 Conspiracy.

A. ORS 161.450, “conspiracy” described, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

B. ORS 161.455, conspiratorial relationship, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

C. ORS 161.460, renunciation as a defense to conspiracy, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code.

D. ORS 161.465, duration of conspiracy, as now constituted, is hereby incorporated into this code. [BC 5.08.770, added by Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96]


5.08.800 Penalties.

A. Violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class A misdemeanor is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $6,250, imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both.

B. Violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class B misdemeanor is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $2,500, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.

C. Violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class C misdemeanor is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $1,250, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both.

D. Unless otherwise provided, violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class A violation is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $720.

E. Unless otherwise provided, violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class B violation is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $360.

F. Unless otherwise provided, violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class C violation is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $180.

G. Unless otherwise provided, violation of any provision of BC 5.08.100 to 5.08.770 designated as a class D violation is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $90.

H. The amount otherwise established by law for any specific fine violation. [BC 5.08.800, amended by Ordinance No. 3311, 3/1/83; Ordinance No. 3321, 5/3/83; Ordinance No. 3326, 6/13/83; Ordinance No. 3375, 6/19/84; Ordinance No. 3420, 12/4/84; Ordinance No. 3422, 12/11/84; Ordinance No. 3433, 2/25/85; Ordinance No. 3479, 12/17/85; Ordinance No. 3535, 9/16/86; Ordinance No. 3581, 9/22/87; Ordinance No. 3582, 9/22/87; Ordinance No. 3655, 3/6/89; Ordinance No. 3656, 3/6/89; Ordinance No. 3698, 11/6/89; Ordinance No. 3703, 12/18/89; Ordinance No. 3826, 8/17/92; Ordinance No. 3866, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 3867, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 3879, 2/14/94; Ordinance No. 3880, 2/14/94; Ordinance No. 3881, 2/14/94; Ordinance No. 3882, 2/14/94; Ordinance No. 3957, 6/10/96; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


Chapter 5.09 URBAN CHICKENS

Sections:

5.09.010    Applicability.

5.09.015    Locational Requirements.

5.09.020    Number of Chickens Permitted.

5.09.025    Enclosures.

5.09.030    Prohibitions. 

5.09.035    Interpretation.

5.09.040    Penalties.

5.09.045    Nuisance Abatement and Other Remedies.


5.09.010 Applicability.

Residents of the City shall be allowed to keep chickens, subject to the requirements of this chapter. This chapter does not apply to the commercial production of eggs or chickens, which is governed by the Beaverton Development Code. [BC 5.09.010, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.015 Locational Requirements.

A. Chickens shall only be kept upon property which is no less than 5,000 square feet and occupied by a detached single-family dwelling or duplex. 

B. Chickens shall only be kept upon property which is the principal residence of the owner of the birds. Tenants and renters of property may keep chickens with the written permission of the property owner. 

C. Chickens and chicken enclosures shall not be located in any area between the dwelling and the front property line.

D. Enclosures shall not be located closer than 20 feet to a neighboring dwelling. [BC 5.09.015, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.020 Number of Chickens Permitted.

A. No more than four hens may be kept on any one property within the City of Beaverton.

B. No roosters may be kept within the City of Beaverton.

C. Chicks up to 12 weeks old may be kept indoors as household pets. [BC 5.09.020, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.025 Enclosures.

A. Chickens shall be kept within a secure enclosure at night. During daylight hours, chickens shall be kept within a secure enclosure unless under direct supervision within a fenced yard.

B. Enclosures shall be kept clean, dry, free of noticeable odors, and in good repair.

C. Enclosures shall prevent the entry of rodents and predators and shall effectively contain and protect the chickens. [BC 5.09.025, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.030 Prohibitions.

A. The keeping of roosters is prohibited.

B. Allowing chickens to enter adjoining properties is prohibited.

C. Chickens shall be kept for personal, noncommercial use only. No person shall sell eggs or engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for commercial purposes.

D. The keeping of chickens in such a manner as to cause a nuisance, as defined in BC Title 5 or under applicable law, is prohibited.

E. It is not permitted to slaughter a chicken on a residential property. [BC 5.09.030, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.035 Interpretation.

The provisions of this chapter are in addition to and not in lieu of any other requirements imposed under another code provision, City ordinance, law or regulation having application in the City. If a conflict occurs with another code provision or regulation, the most conservative provision or regulation shall apply. [BC 5.09.035, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.040 Penalties.

A. Violation of this chapter constitutes a Class 3 civil infraction and shall be processed according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.10 BC.

B. Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate infraction.

C. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies available to the city under BC 5.09.045. [BC 5.09.040, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


5.09.045 Nuisance Abatement and Other Remedies.

In addition to the penalties provided for in BC 5.09.040, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter is considered a public nuisance and may be abated summarily, or in accordance with the abatement procedures set forth in this code, or by any other legal means available to the City. [BC 5.09.045, added by Ordinance No. 4549, 8/16/10]


Chapter 5.10 PIGEONS

Sections:

5.10.010    Definitions.

5.10.015    Prohibited Activities.

5.10.020    Permits Required.

5.10.025    Enclosures.

5.10.030    Number of Pigeons Permitted.

5.10.035    Interpretation.

5.10.040    Penalties.

5.10.045    Abatement and Other Remedies.


5.10.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045, the following mean:

Mayor – The mayor or the mayor’s designee.

Dwelling – Any building or premises used for human habitation other than that of the owner of the pigeons.

Enclosure – A coop, loft, building, or any other structure wherein pigeons are housed, harbored, kept, maintained, or sheltered.

Owner – A person who owns, keeps, has custody of, possesses harbors or exercises control over a pigeon.

Unbanded pigeon – A pigeon that lacks a metal or plastic ring attached to its leg which bears a means of identifying its owner.


5.10.015 Prohibited Activities.

A. No person shall be the owner of unbanded pigeons in the City.

B. All pigeons shall be confined by the owner in an approved pigeon enclosure, except during reasonable periods of time for exercise or racing purposes.

C. No owner shall allow pigeons belonging to the owner to perch or rest upon any building, structure or property, other than an approved enclosure, or to disturb the comfort and repose of residents in the neighborhood by any noise, odor, trespass or damage to their property.


5.10.020 Permits Required.

A. No person shall be the owner of any pigeons without first obtaining a permit from the mayor. The mayor shall issue a permit with such reasonable conditions as the mayor considers necessary to ensure humane treatment of the pigeons and compliance with the provisions of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045 and any other applicable Code provisions, City ordinance, law or regulation. Each permit shall have attached to it a copy of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045. The permit shall be signed by the owner and a duplicate copy retained and filed by the mayor.

B. The mayor may revoke or suspend any permit for failure of the permittee to comply with the terms of the permit or the provisions of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045, pursuant to BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066.


5.10.025 Enclosures.

Enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from all offensive odors and shall be equipped with a trapping device that allows the pigeons to enter the loft but not escape from it.


5.10.030 Number of Pigeons Permitted.

A. No owner shall keep or maintain more than 200 pigeons on any one lot, parcel or tract of land in the City, provided that:

1. not more than 50 pigeons may be kept if they are confined in an enclosure located not less than 30 feet from any dwelling;

2. not more than 100 pigeons may be kept if they are confined in an enclosure located not less than 50 feet from any dwelling;

3. not more than 150 pigeons may be kept if they are confined in an enclosure located not less than 100 feet from any dwelling;

4. two hundred pigeons may be kept if they are confined in an enclosure located not less than 150 feet from any dwelling.


5.10.035 Interpretation.

The provisions of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045 are in addition to and not in lieu of any other requirements imposed under another Code provision, city ordinance, law or regulation having application in the city.


5.10.040 Penalties.

A. Violation of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045 constitutes a Class 3 Civil Infraction and shall be processed according to the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each violation of a separate provision of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045 shall constitute a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045 is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate infraction.

C. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies available to the city under BC 5.10.045.


5.10.045 Abatement and Other Remedies.

In addition to the penalties provided for in BC 5.10.040, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of BC 5.10.010 through 5.10.045 is considered a public nuisance and may be abated summarily, or in accordance with the abatement procedures set forth in this code, or by any other legal means available to the city.


Chapter 5.12 DOG CONTROL

Sections:

5.12.010    Adoption of Dog Control Ordinance.

5.12.015    Amendments to Dog Control Ordinance.


5.12.010 Adoption of Dog Control Ordinance.

A. The dog control ordinance of Washington County, Ordinance 306, enacted June 11, 1985, by the Board of County Commissioners, is by this reference incorporated into and made a part of this code as the dog control ordinance of the city, except as hereinafter specifically amended, modified or deleted, and shall be known and may be cited as the “City Dog Control Ordinance”. Violation of Ordinance No. 306, as it is now or as hereafter constituted, and any amendments thereto shall be an offense against the City.

B. One copy of Washington County Ordinance No. 306 as it is now or hereafter constituted, and any amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the city recorder. [BC 5.12.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3515, 6/10/86]


5.12.015 Amendments to Dog Control Ordinance.

Washington County Ordinance No. 306 is amended and changed in the following particulars:

A. References to “Washington County,” “Board of County Commissioners,” “County Counsel,” “District Court,” “District Judge” and other similar references are amended to read “City of Beaverton,” “Council,” “city attorney,” “municipal court of Beaverton,” “municipal judge of Beaverton” and other City positions as appropriate.

B. Section 4, relating to powers and duties of dog control officers is amended to delete paragraphs A2-A9.

C. Section 6, relating to licensing of dogs, is deleted.

D. Section 9, relating to revocation of kennel or pet shop licenses, is deleted.

E. Section 11, relating to claims for livestock killed by dogs, is amended to delete paragraphs B, C and D.

F. Section 12, the repealing clause, is deleted.

G. Section 13, relating to penalties is amended to read:

1. “A violation of any provision of the City Dog Control Ordinance, except as otherwise stated in this section, is a Class 2 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

2. “Each day a person is in violation of the City Dog Control Ordinance is considered a separate offense.

3. “In addition to any penalty imposed by subsection A of this section, a court may order the impoundment and destruction of any dog found to be vicious, dangerous, or found to have killed, injured or chased livestock.

4. Violation of section 5(A)5 is a Class 1 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

H. Section 14, relating to enforcement procedures, is deleted.

I. Section 15, relating to fees, is deleted.

J. Section 17, relating to the effective date, is deleted. (BC 5.12.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3515, 6/10/86]


Chapter 5.14 CURFEW

Sections:

5.14.005    Short Title.

5.14.010    Definitions.

5.14.015    Prohibition of Certain Minors Being in Public Places During Certain Times.

5.14.020    Hours of Curfew.

5.14.025    Prohibition of Parents from Allowing Minors to Be in Public Places During Curfew Hours.

5.14.030    Custody of Minors Violating Curfew.

5.14.035    Affirmative Defenses.

5.14.040    Penalty.


5.14.005 Short Title.

BC 5.14.005 through 5.14.040 shall be known and may be cited as the “Curfew Ordinance,” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance”. [BC 5.14.005, added by Ordinance No. 3633, 8/15/88]


5.14.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this ordinance, the following mean:

Minor – A person who is under 18 years of age.

Parent – the natural or adoptive father or mother of a dependent child or the stepfather or stepmother of a dependent child, when such stepparent has a legal obligation to support the child.

Public Place – includes any public roadway or any premises open to the general public, whether the premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises.

Unemancipated – certain rights of majority have not been conferred pursuant to state law.


5.14.015 Prohibition of Certain Minors Being in Public Places During Certain Times.

No unemancipated minor shall be in a public place during the hours of curfew specified in BC 5.14.020 of this ordinance, unless accompanied or visually supervised by a parent or a person 18 years of age or over who is authorized to have care and custody of the minor either by law or by a parent of the minor, provided, however that no minor shall be prohibited from being in a public place while engaged in traveling to or from a place of employment or an educational, religious or similar activity.


5.14.020 Hours of Curfew.

A. As to minors under 14 years of age:

1. During the months September through May, the hours of curfew shall be between 9:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, except that on any day immediately preceding a day for which no public school is scheduled in the city, the curfew shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.

2. During the months June through August, the hours of curfew shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.

B. As to minors 14 years of age or older:

1. During the months September through May, the hours of curfew shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, except that on any day immediately preceding a day for which no public school is scheduled in the city, the curfew shall be between 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.

2. During the months June through August, the hours of curfew shall be between 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.


5.14.025 Prohibition of Parents from Allowing Minors to Be in Public Places During Curfew Hours.

No parent of a minor shall allow or fail to prohibit such minor to be in a public place in violation of BC 5.14.015.


5.14.030 Custody of Minors Violating Curfew.

Any minor who violates any provision of this ordinance may be taken into temporary custody as provided by ORS 419.760 and may be subjected to further proceedings as provided therein.


5.14.035 Affirmative Defenses.

The following are affirmative defenses to the offenses described in BC 5.14.015 and 5.14.025, to be proved by the defendant by a preponderance of the evidence:

A. That the minor was accompanied by a parent or by a person 18 years of age or over who was authorized to have care and custody of the minor either by law or by a parent of the minor; or

B. That the minor was engaged in traveling to or from a place of employment or an educational, religious or similar activity.


5.14.040 Penalty.

Violation of BC 5.14.025 of this ordinance constitutes a Class 1 civil infraction to be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050. [BC 5.14.005 through 5.14040 added by Ordinance No. 3633, 8/15/88]


Chapter 5.15 NOISE

Sections:

5.15.005    Short Title.

5.15.010    Legislative Findings.

5.15.015    Definitions.

5.15.020    Purpose.

5.15.025    Loud or Raucous Noise Prohibited.

5.15.030    Specific Noises Prohibited.

5.15.035    Exemptions.

5.15.040    Penalties.

5.15.045    Severability.


5.15.005 Short Title.

This section to BC 5.15.045 shall be known and may be cited as the “Noise Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 5.15.005, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.010 Legislative Findings.

The City Council finds that:

A. Loud or raucous noise degrades the environment of the City to a degree that is harmful to the health, welfare, and safety of its residents and visitors; interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; interferes with the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of the home; and may cause or aggravate health problems.

B. The effective control of loud or raucous noise is essential to the health and welfare of the City’s residents and visitors, and to the conduct of normal pursuits of life, including recreation, work and communication.

C. The use of sound-amplification devices may create loud and raucous noise that may, in a particular manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace, and well-being of residents and visitors of the City.

D. The obligation to draft regulations that affect speech in a content-neutral fashion is of paramount importance to protect the freedom of expression under the Oregon and Federal constitutions. This chapter enacts narrowly drawn, content-neutral regulations that are to be interpreted as such so as not to infringe upon constitutionally protected rights. [BC 5.15.010, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.015 Definitions.

A. “Alarm system” has the meaning as provided in BC 7.15.015.

B. “False alarm” has the meaning as provided in BC 7.15.015.

C. “Highway” means every public way, road, street, thoroughfare, and place, including bridges, viaducts, and other structures in the City, open, used, or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right.

D. “Noise-sensitive area” includes, but is not limited to, a sleeping facility, or real property normally used as a school, church, hospital, or public library.

E. “Person” has the meaning as provided in BC 1.01.020.

F. “Plainly audible” means any sound that can be heard by a reasonable individual of ordinary sensitivities using his or her unaided hearing faculties, including understandable spoken words, comprehensible musical rhythms, and vocal sounds other than words.

G. “Premises open to the public” includes any premises open to the general public for the use of motor vehicles whether the premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises.

H. “Public space” means any real property or structures on real property, owned by a government entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not limited to, parks and other recreational areas.

I. “Residential area” means an area of the City that is designated as a residential land use district under the City’s Development Code.

J. “Residential care facility” means a living facility for more than five nonrelated individuals, which provides specialized care, supervision, treatment or training, or a combination of these for residents. This use classification includes but is not limited to assisted living facilities, congregate care facilities, nursing homes, convalescent homes and sanatoriums.

K. “Sleeping facility” includes, but is not limited to, a residential dwelling, hotel, motel, or residential care facility. [BC 5.15.015, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.020 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the residents and visitors of Beaverton through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety, or causes public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to reasonable individuals of ordinary sensitivity. [BC 5.15.020, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.025 Loud or Raucous Noise Prohibited.

A. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued:

1. Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise within the jurisdictional limits of the City; or

2. Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable individuals of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the City; or

3. Within the jurisdictional limits of the City, any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any individuals within the residential area from which said noises are heard, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of residents or their guests, or operators or customers in places of business.

B. Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud or raucous noise include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. The proximity of the sound to a sleeping facility;

2. The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is heard;

3. The time of day or night the sound occurs;

4. The duration of the sound;

5. Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;

6. Whether the sound is created by a sound-amplification device; or

7. If the sound occurs in a residential area between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., whether the sound exceeds 50 dBA at a point within the property line of the noise-sensitive area nearest the noise source. [BC 5.15.025, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.030 Specific Noises Prohibited.

The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this chapter. It includes, but is not limited to:

A. Unreasonable Noises. The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion, or vibration in any residential dwelling, place of business, or upon any highway, park, or other place or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion, or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent noise-sensitive areas or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted from this provision.

B. Sound Amplification Devices. Except as allowed by a City special event permit, the unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a sound-amplifying device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays in the following areas:

1. Within or adjacent to a noise-sensitive area.

2. Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real property line of the public space from which the sound emanates, and is unreasonably loud or raucous.

C. Yelling, Shouting, and Similar Activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in a residential area or in a public place, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable individuals of ordinary sensitivities. This subsection is to be applied only to those situations where the disturbance is not a result of the content of the communication but due to the volume, duration, location, timing, or other factors not based on content.

D. Construction and Similar Activities.

1. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of a building in a residential area or within 300 feet of a noise-sensitive area, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of the public welfare and safety, and then only with an emergency permit granted by the building official for a period not to exceed 10 days. The permit may be renewed for periods of five days while the emergency continues to exist.

2. The owner of property may do work on property actually occupied by the owner between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. without obtaining an emergency permit as required by this subsection.

E. Noise-Sensitive Areas. The creation of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise adjacent to any noise-sensitive area while it is in use, and which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the noise-sensitive area or which disturbs the individuals in the noise-sensitive area.

F. Blowers and Similar Devices. In a residential area or noise-sensitive area, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, or any internal combustion engine; provided, that the noise from the blower, power fan or internal combustion engine can be heard across the property line from which it emanates.

G. Commercial Establishments Adjacent to Residential Property. Unreasonably loud or raucous noise from the premises of any commercial establishment, including any outdoor area which is part of or under the control of the establishment, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which is plainly audible at the nearest property line of a noise-sensitive area.

H. Vehicle Horns, Signaling Devices and Similar Devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, on any motor vehicle on a highway or premises open to the public for more than 10 consecutive seconds. The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, as a danger warning, is exempt from this prohibition.

I. Loading or Unloading. The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence.

J. Nonemergency Signaling Devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than 10 consecutive seconds in any hourly period. The reasonable sounding of such devices by houses of religious worship, seasonal contribution solicitors, or by the City for traffic control purposes are exempt from the operation of this subsection.

K. Emergency Signaling Devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding of any emergency signaling device, including fire alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsections (K)(1) and (2) of this section.

1. The testing of an emergency signaling device occurring between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed five minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more than once in any calendar month.

2. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any alarm system that terminates within 15 minutes of activation unless an emergency exists. If a false alarm occurs more than twice in a calendar month, then the owner or person responsible for the alarm system shall be in violation of this chapter.

L. Radios, Televisions, Boomboxes and Similar Devices. The use or operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any individual other than the player or operator of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and:

1. Which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of residents and passers-by, or is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the device in a commercial area or public space; or

2. Which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of residents in a residential area or noise-sensitive area.

M. Animals and Birds. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls, or otherwise cares for the animal or bird. [BC 5.15.030, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.035 Exemptions.

Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the provisions of BC 5.15.030 and are in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth in that section.

A. Motor vehicles on highways or premises open to the public; provided, that the prohibition in BC 5.15.030(H) continues to apply.

B. Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health or significant loss of property.

C. Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or alarm systems used to signal an emergency, provided the prohibition under BC 5.15.030(K) continues to apply.

D. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting individuals to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.

E. Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on the behalf of the City, State, or Federal government, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when public welfare and convenience renders it impractical to perform the work between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

F. Reasonable activities conducted on school playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events.

G. Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting events, and other similar outdoor events, provided that a special event permit has been obtained from the City beforehand. [BC 5.15.035, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.040 Penalties.

A. Violation of this chapter constitutes a Class I civil infraction and shall be processed according to the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate civil infraction, and each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter is committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate civil infraction.

C. A finding that a person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this chapter shall not act to relieve the person from the provisions of this chapter.

D. A Beaverton municipal judge may impose a fine of not more than $1,000 if a judge determines that (1) the person violated this chapter and (2) the person has violated this chapter in the preceding 24 months. The fine may be adjusted by Council through resolution.

E. Any fines assessed pursuant to this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. [BC 5.15.040, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


5.15.045 Severability.

The sections and subsections of this chapter are severable. If any part of this chapter is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

A. The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional or invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid part; or

B. The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed according to the legislative intent. [BC 5.15.045, added by Ordinance No. 4679, 3/1/16]


Chapter 5.16 CIVIL RIGHTS

Sections:

5.16.005    Short Title.

5.16.010    Policy.

5.16.015    Definitions.

5.16.020    Unlawful Employment Practices.

5.16.025    Unlawful Real Property Transactions Practices.

5.16.030    Unlawful Public Accommodation Practices.

5.16.040    Exceptions.

5.16.050    Administration and Enforcement.

5.16.060    Severability.


5.16.005 Short Title.

BC 5.16.005 through 5.16.060 shall be known and may be cited as the “Civil Rights Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “Chapter 5.16.” [BC 5.16.005 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.010 Policy.

It is the policy of the City of Beaverton to eliminate discrimination based on race, religion, color, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, gender identity and source of income. Such discrimination threatens not only the rights and privileges of Beaverton citizens, but menaces the institutions and foundation of our community. Furthermore, the Mayor and City Council find that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity exists in the City of Beaverton and that state law does not clearly prohibit such discrimination. It is the intent of the Mayor and Council, in the exercise of their powers for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare and for the maintenance of peace and good government, that every individual shall have an equal opportunity to participate fully in the life of the city and that discriminatory barriers to equal participation in employment, housing, and public accommodation be removed. [BC 5.16.010 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.015 Definitions.

As used in Chapter 5.16, except where the context otherwise requires (Any term used but not defined in Chapter 5.16 shall be interpreted consistently with definitions provided in Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 659A (2003)):

Gender Identity – A person’s actual or perceived sex, including a person’s identity, appearance, expression, or behavior with respect to actual or perceived sex, whether or not that identity, appearance, expression or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person’s sex at birth.

Sexual Orientation – Actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality. [BC 5.16.015 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.020 Unlawful Employment Practices.

It shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer to discriminate on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin, age (if the individual is 18 years of age or older), mental or physical disability, sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.030, 659A.100 to 659A.142. [BC 5.16.020 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.025 Unlawful Real Property Transactions Practices.

It shall be an unlawful real property transaction practice for any person to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or source of income by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.145 or 659A.421. [BC 5.16.025 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.030 Unlawful Public Accommodation Practices.

It shall be an unlawful public accommodation practice for a person to discriminate on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or source of income, by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.142 or ORS 659A.400 to 659A.409. [BC 5.16.030 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.040 Exceptions.

A. The prohibitions in Chapter 5.16 against discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity do not apply to:

1. The leasing or renting of space within a church, temple, synagogue, religious school, or other facility used primarily for religious purposes.

2. The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within an individual living unit which is owned by the lessor as his or her primary residence.

B. The prohibitions in Chapter 5.16 against discriminating on the basis of source of income do not prohibit:

1. Inquiry into and verification of a source or amount of income.

2. Inquiry into, evaluation of, and decisions based on the amount, stability, security, or creditworthiness of any source of income.

3. Screening prospective purchasers and tenants on bases not specifically prohibited by this chapter or by state or federal law.

4. Refusal to contract with a governmental agency under 42 U.S.C. §1437f(a) “Section 8.”

C. The prohibitions in BC 5.16.025 against discriminating on the basis of age do not apply to housing for older persons, as defined in ORS 659A.421(7)(b) and (c).

D. The prohibitions in BC 5.16.030 against discriminating on the basis of age or familial status do not apply to the use of special rates or services or to the promotion of business through the issuance of special rates for families with children, or persons 55 years of age or older.

E. Reasonable and appropriate accommodations shall be made to permit all persons access to restrooms consistent with their expressed gender. However, the prohibitions in Chapter 5.16 against discriminating on the basis of gender identity do not prohibit:

1. Health or athletic clubs or other entities that operate gender-specific facilities involving public nudity such as showers and locker rooms, from requiring an individual to document their gender or transitional status. Such documentation can include but is not limited to a court order, letter from a physician, birth certificate, passport, or driver’s license.

2. Valid employer dress codes or policies, so long as the employer provides, on a case-by-case basis, for reasonable accommodation based on the health and safety needs of persons protected on the basis of gender identity. [BC 5.16.040 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.050 Administration and Enforcement.

A. Enforcement of all or any part of Chapter 5.16 shall be governed by the procedures established in ORS Chapter 659A. The Mayor may adopt rules pursuant to BC 1.02.010 to implement enforcement and administration of this section.

B. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful employment practice under BC 5.16.020 or any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice under subsections 5.16.025 or 5.16.030 relating to selling, renting or leasing real estate or discrimination in public accommodations, may file a complaint with the Commissioner under procedures established in ORS 659A.820.

C. The Commissioner may then proceed and shall have the same enforcement powers under Chapter 5.16, and if the complaint is found to be justified the complainant shall be entitled to the same remedies, as those provided under ORS 659A.835 to 659A.865.

D. Any order issued by the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor and Industries under Chapter 5.16 shall be deemed as one issued by a municipal judge and shall be fully enforceable by the city.

E. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory act under the provisions of Chapter 5.16 shall have a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages and such other remedies as may be appropriate. Election of remedies and other procedural issues relating to the interplay between administrative proceedings and private rights of action shall be decided as provided for in ORS 659A.870 to 659A.890. The court may grant such relief as it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, such relief as is provided in ORS 659A.885. [BC 5.16.050 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


5.16.060 Severability.

The invalidity or lack of enforceability of any terms or provisions of this Ordinance or any part thereof shall not impair or otherwise affect in any manner the validity, enforceability or effect of the remaining terms of this Ordinance. [BC 5.16.060 added by Ordinance No. 4330, 11/16/04]


Chapter 5.17 RESIDENTIAL PICKETING	

Sections:

5.17.005    Short Title.

5.17.010    Legislative Findings.

5.17.015    Definitions.

5.17.020    Targeted Residential Picketing Activity Prohibited.

5.17.025    Private Right of Action.

5.17.030    Penalty.

5.17.035    Severability.


5.17.005 Short Title.

This section to BC 5.17.035 shall be known and may be cited as the “Residential Picketing Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 5.17.005, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


5.17.010 Legislative Findings.

City Council finds:

A. The preservation and protection of the right to privacy and the enjoyment of tranquility, well-being, and a sense of security in the home are in the public interest and critically important to public health, safety and welfare in the City.

B. Picketing that is targeted at the occupants and neighbors of a particular residential dwelling who do not welcome such activity may harass and intimidate the occupants and neighbors, is inherently and unreasonably offensive to and intrusive upon the occupants’ and neighbors’ right to privacy, and may cause the occupants and neighbors of the residential dwelling to experience unreasonable emotional distress.

C. Unwelcome and targeted picketing creates a “captive audience” because the occupants and neighbors of a residential dwelling cannot readily move to another residential dwelling in order to avoid the unwelcome picketing being directed at them.

D. This “captive audience” situation and the protection of the right to tranquility, well-being and privacy requires the enactment of a reasonable time, place, and manner restriction upon unwelcome picketing targeted at a particular residential dwelling.

E. This chapter is intended to establish a reasonable time, place, and manner restriction that reconciles and protects the First Amendment rights of picketers to peacefully communicate and express their ideas with the right of persons to enjoy the right to tranquility, well-being and privacy in their residential dwellings.

F. This chapter is not intended to preclude the right to picket in a residential area generally and in such a manner that does not target a particular residential dwelling. [BC 5.17.010, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


5.17.015 Definitions.

A. “Picketing activity” means the posting of a person or group for a demonstration or protest.

B. “Targeted picketing activity” means picketing activity that is targeted at a residential dwelling and either (1) proceeds on a definite course or route in front of or about that residential dwelling, or (2) is stationary in front of or about the residential dwelling. It does not preclude:

1. Picketing that is not targeted at a particular residential dwelling; or

2. General marching or walking through residential neighborhoods. [BC 5.17.015, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


5.17.020 Targeted Residential Picketing Activity Prohibited.

A person shall not engage in targeted picketing activity within 250 feet of a residential dwelling in the City. [BC 5.17.020, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


5.17.025 Private Right of Action.

Any person who is aggrieved by an act prohibited by BC 5.17.020 may bring an action for damages, injunctive or declaratory relief, as appropriate, in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has violated, has conspired to violate, or proposes to violate the provisions of this chapter. [BC 5.17.025, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


5.17.030 Penalty.

A person who violates BC 5.17.020 commits a Class 1 civil infraction. The Class 1 civil infraction shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050. Any fines pursuant to this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. [BC 5.17.030, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


5.17.035 Severability.

The sections and subsections of this chapter are severable. If any part of this chapter is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

A. The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional or invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid part; or

B. The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed according to the legislative intent. [BC 5.17.035, added by Ordinance No. 4678, 3/1/16]


Title 6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

6.02    Uniform Traffic Ordinance

6.04    Off-Road Vehicles

6.05    Vehicles

6.06    Towing Operators

6.10    Truck Route


Chapter 6.02 UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

6.02.010    Short Title.

6.02.020    Applicability of State Traffic Laws.

6.02.030    Definitions.

II. TRAFFIC ISSUE PROCESS

6.02.050    Title and Purpose.

6.02.055    Definitions.

6.02.060    Standards.

6.02.065    Procedures.

6.02.070    Existing Traffic Control Devices.

6.02.075    Road Closures.

6.02.080    Designation of a Residential Permit Parking District or Amendment of an Existing Residential Permit Parking District.

6.02.085    Designation of Parking Management Zones.

III. ADMINISTRATION

6.02.100    Powers of the Council.

6.02.110    Repealed.

6.02.120    Repealed.

6.02.130    Repealed.

6.02.140    Repealed.

6.02.150    Repealed.

IV. GENERAL REGULATIONS

6.02.200    Rules of the Road.

6.02.205    Earphones.

6.02.210    Crossing Private Property.

6.02.215    Exhaust Brakes.

6.02.220    Repealed.

6.02.230    Rollerskates, Sleds, etc.

6.02.240    Damaging Sidewalks and Curbs.

6.02.250    Obstructing Streets.

6.02.270    Parks.

6.02.280    Repealed.

6.02.290    Repealed.

V. PARKING REGULATIONS

6.02.300    Method of Parking.

6.02.305    Prohibited Parking in Specified Places.

6.02.310    Prohibited Parking or Standing.

6.02.320    Prohibited Parking of Vehicles for Vending Purposes.

6.02.322    Definitions for BC 6.02.323 and 6.02.324.

6.02.323    Prohibited Vehicle Camping.

6.02.324    Permitted Vehicle Camping.

6.02.325    Prohibited Repair of Vehicle.

6.02.330    Use of Loading Zone.

6.02.340    Unattended Vehicles.

6.02.350    Standing or Parking of Buses and Taxicabs.

6.02.360    Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.

6.02.370    Lights on Parked Vehicle.

6.02.380    Exemption.

VI. PERMIT PARKING AREAS

6.02.390    Downtown and Residential Permit Parking Districts.

VII. BICYCLES

6.02.400    Repealed.

6.02.410    Repealed.

6.02.420    Repealed.

6.02.430    Impounding of Bicycles.

6.02.440    Repealed.

VIII. PEDESTRIANS

6.02.500    Use of Sidewalks.

6.02.510    Pedestrian Must Use Available Crosswalk.

6.02.520    Right Angles.

IX. PARADES

6.02.600    Prohibited Activity.

6.02.610    Exemption.

6.02.620    Parade Permit.

6.02.625    Denial of Permit.

6.02.630    Notification of Decision.

6.02.635    Police Chief Authorized to Promulgate Rules.

6.02.640    Appeal to Council.

6.02.650    Offenses Against Parade.

6.02.660    Permit Revocable.

6.02.670    Funeral Processions.

X. PARKING CITATIONS AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY

6.02.700    Parking Citation on Illegally Parked Vehicle.

6.02.710    Owner Responsibility.

6.02.720    Parking Enforcement Officers.

XI. HEARINGS FOR PARKING CITATIONS

6.02.800    Repealed.

6.02.801    Registered Owner Presumption.

6.02.802    Proof by Preponderance.

6.02.803    Procedures without Hearing for Parking Violations.

6.02.805    Repealed.

6.02.810    Repealed.

6.02.815    Repealed.

6.02.820    Repealed.

6.02.825    Repealed.

6.02.830    Repealed.

6.02.840    Repealed.

6.02.845    Repealed.

6.02.850    Repealed.

6.02.855    Repealed.

6.02.890    Repealed.

6.02.900    Penalties.

I. GENERAL PROVISIONS


6.02.010 Short Title.

BC 6.02.010 to 6.02.900 shall be known and may be cited as the “Beaverton Uniform Traffic and Parking Ordinance” and may also be referred to as “this ordinance.” [BC 6.02.010, amended by Ordinance No. 4053(1), 8/3/99; amended by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.020 Applicability of State Traffic Laws.

A. Violation of a provision of the Oregon Vehicle Code, as now constituted, is an offense against this city, punishable as provided by state law.

B. A reference in any ordinance, resolution, Code section or regulation of the City to any section of the Oregon Revised Statutes repealed by Oregon Laws 1983, Chapter 338, Section 978, or Oregon Laws 1985, Chapter 16, Section 475, is deemed a reference to the comparative section of Oregon Laws 1983, Chapter 338, Sections 1 981, and Oregon Laws 1985, Chapter 16, Sections 1 477, as shown in “Introduction to Oregon Vehicle Code 1986 87,” prepared by the Judicial Education Committee of the Oregon Judicial Conference. [BC 6.02.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3342, 10/24/83; Ordinance No. 3467, 9/17/85; Ordinance No. 3478, 12/17/85; Ordinance No. 3511, 6/4/86; Ordinance No. 3579, 9/22/87; Ordinance No. 3692, 10/9/89; Ordinance No. 3791, 10/7/91; Ordinance No. 3869, 11/1/93; Ordinance No. 3946, 12/18/95; Ordinance No. 4009, 6/16/98; Ordinance No. 4108, 5/8/00; Ordinance No. 4196(23), 2/11/02; Ordinance No. 4307, 5/11/04]


6.02.030 Definitions.

A. In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following mean:

Abandoned Vehicle – A vehicle left in circumstances demonstrating its owner never intends to return.

A. A motor vehicle shall be deemed an Abandoned Vehicle under this definition if it remains upon any street or public property for a period in excess of 48 hours and the motor vehicle:

1. Reasonably appears incapable of self propulsion; or

2. Does not display a current registration plate or a current trip permit; or

3. Is on a street and is not registered to a person at the address of property on the same side of the street that abuts the part of the street upon which the motor vehicle is located; or

4. Is on public property other than a street without the consent of the owner, occupant and any other person in lawful possession of the public property.

B. A trailer shall be deemed an Abandoned Vehicle under this definition if it remains upon any street or public property for a period in excess of 24 hours and:

1. The trailer does not display a current registration plate or a current trip permit, unless exempt from registration under provision of Oregon law; or

2. Is on a street and no right of control over the trailer exists in a person or relative of a person who owns property or resides at property that is on the same side of the street that abuts the part of the street upon which the trailer is located; or

3. Is on public property other than a street without the consent of the owner, occupant and any other person in lawful possession of the public property.

Block – That portion of street frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets.

Bus stop – A space on the edge of a street designated by sign for use by buses loading or unloading passengers.

Business district – Any area of the City designated as a commercial district by the Development Code.

Driveway – Any alley or access drive to public or private property from a street. The term driveway shall include all portions of the curb that have been sloped, tapered and/or depressed to accommodate vehicle movement.

Emergency – For purposes of BC 6.02.320, a situation where an unforeseen combination of circumstances calls for immediate action in order to avoid damage to a vehicle or where a vehicle was rendered inoperable, but does not include a situation where the vehicle is left standing in excess of 24 hours.

Holiday – New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day designated by the Council to be a holiday.

Loading zone – A space on the edge of a street designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.

Mayor – The mayor or the mayor’s designee.

Motor vehicle – A vehicle that is self propelled or designed for self propulsion.

Parade – A gathering of at least ten persons or ten vehicles or both traveling more than 100 feet on public streets, sidewalks or alleys for a common purpose of public demonstration.

Police chief – The chief of the police department or the police chief’s designee.

Street – Every public way, road, highway thoroughfare and place, including bridges, viaducts and other structures, open, used or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right.

Taxicab stand – A space on the edge of a street designated by sign for use by taxicabs.

Traffic lane – That area of the street used for the movement of a single lane of traffic.

Vehicle – Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. [BC 6.02.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3278, 8/17/82; Ordinance No. 3971, 1/7/97; Ordinance No. 4053, 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4223(1), 8/19/02; Ordinance No. 4507, 4/20/09]

II. TRAFFIC ISSUE PROCESS


6.02.050 Title and Purpose.

The City Traffic Engineer and Traffic Commission each is authorized to approve and direct the implementation of restrictions and other devices, such as warnings, on public roadway uses that are determined necessary and in the public interest. Issues pertaining to parking and the permit parking areas of this code that are processed through the Traffic Issue Process may have information provided by City staff and persons appointed by the Mayor to advise on such matters. Such authority is subject to review and approval by the City Council in accordance with procedures established herein. BC 6.02.050 through 6.02.085 shall be known and may be referred to herein as the “Traffic Issue Process.” [BC 6.02.050, added by Ordinance No. 4026, passed 11/5/98; amended by Ordinance No. 4445, 8/13/07]


6.02.055 Definitions.

For purposes of this ordinance the following terms are defined:

A. City Traffic Engineer – The City employee designated by the Mayor to perform the functions of City Traffic Engineer under this ordinance, or the City employee assigned by the City Traffic Engineer to perform such functions.

B. Development review issue – A development review issue is any issue involving parking restrictions, traffic calming devices or restrictions to traffic operations that has been proposed in a development application, or imposed or approved through the design review process by the Facilities Review Committee, the Board of Design Review, the Planning Commission or the City Council.

C. Emergency Issue – Any traffic restriction, issue or condition which creates a substantial risk of loss, damage, interruption of public services or threat to public health or safety that could not have been reasonably foreseen and requires prompt response to remedy the condition, and which, had it been reasonably foreseen, would have been a major issue.

D. Extreme Hazard – An emergency issue that represents a serious hazard or immediate threat to the safety of all persons using the public roadway.

E. Minor Issue – A minor issue is any traffic control issue that is not a major issue and not a development review issue. Minor issues include but are not limited to:

1. Approval of the installation of warning signs, directional signs, and signs giving notice of existing laws;

2. Approval of design details for traffic controls to implement the direction of the City Council, to implement Traffic Commission recommendations approved by the City Council or to comply with State or Federal regulations;

3. Approval of design details for traffic controls on new facilities which have been authorized by the Facilities Review Committee, the Board of Design Review, the Planning Commission or the City Council;

4. Parking restrictions, traffic calming or restrictions to traffic operations imposed for a period of less than 30 days to control traffic during special events or during periods of construction on or adjacent to the roadway;

5. Approval of parking restrictions that extend for a distance of less than 50 feet along a street.

F. Major Issue – A major issue is any issue involving parking restrictions, traffic calming devices or restrictions to traffic operations except development review issues and traffic controls installed for a period of less than 30 days’ duration. A “Major issue” includes, but is not limited to:

1. Parking restrictions, provided such restrictions extend for at least 50 feet along a street.

2. Restrictions to traffic movements, such as one-way roadways and turn prohibitions;

3. Assignment of right-of-way at an intersection by the installation of STOP signs or YIELD signs or similar restrictions;

4. The control of traffic at any location by the means of traffic signals;

5. Establishment of speed limits, including recommendations on speed limits provided to other agencies to establish speed limits;

6. Restrictions to the use of a public roadway by any kind or class of vehicle or by pedestrians;

7. Establishment of truck routes;

8. Installation of a crosswalk at a location not controlled by a STOP sign, YIELD sign, or traffic signal;

9. Prohibition or restriction to pedestrian crossing;

10. Prohibition of vehicle passing;

11. Establishment of a school zone where reduced speed limits are established during designated times;

12. Installation of traffic calming devices;

13. Closure of an existing roadway;

14. Restrictions of existing access to adjoining properties;

15. Installation of pavement markings or other devices to delineate traffic lanes or bicycle lanes on a roadway where traffic lanes have not previously been delineated;

16. Designation or modification of a residential permit parking district.

17. Citywide policies on traffic; and

18. Any issue referred to the Traffic Commission by the City Council, the Mayor or the City Traffic Engineer.

G. Residential permit parking district – A geographic area within the City designated as a permit parking district.

H. Traffic calming – The installation of speed bumps, traffic circles or similar devices intended to discourage speeding or to discourage through traffic.

I. Traffic controls – All signs, signals, markings, and devices placed on, over, or adjacent to a roadway to regulate, warn, or guide traffic or to regulate parking. [BC 6.02.055, added by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98; amended by Ordinance No. 4205(1)(2), 5/13/02]


6.02.060 Standards.

A. Decisions by the City Traffic Engineer, Traffic Commission and City Council shall be based on the following standards and criteria:

1. All proposed traffic control devices, all proposed restrictions to traffic operations or parking, and all proposed traffic calming features governed by this ordinance shall endeavor to:

a. provide for safe vehicle, bicycle and, where allowed, pedestrian movements;

b. help ensure orderly and predictable movement of vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians;

c. meet the overall circulation needs of the City;

d. accommodate the parking needs of residents and businesses in a safe and equitable fashion;

e. assure safe access and reasonable response times for emergency vehicles;

f. be structurally suitable for all intended purposes;

g. carry anticipated traffic volumes safely; and

h. comply with Federal and State regulations.

2. All proposed new traffic devices shall be based on the standards of the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)” and the “Oregon Supplements to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices” as adopted or in effect at the time of consideration of the issue;

3. All decisions shall comply with officially approved policies of the City Council, including but not limited to policies and objectives set forth in the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

B. The City Traffic Engineer shall decide issues of street design. [BC 6.02.060, added by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]


6.02.065 Procedures.

A. General. A person who wishes to propose new traffic controls or revisions to existing traffic controls shall present such proposal in writing to the City Traffic Engineer in accordance with this section. Alternatively, consideration of new traffic controls or changes to existing traffic controls may be initiated by motion of the City Council or the Traffic Commission or by the City Traffic Engineer. The procedures to be followed for making a decision on a traffic issue depend on the category of issue involved. The City Traffic Engineer shall decide in what category an issue falls. The process to be followed for categories of traffic issues is as set forth in this subsection.

1. Minor Issues. Any issue that qualifies as a minor issue shall be reviewed by the City Traffic Engineer. Where there is a request for review of a minor issue, the City Traffic Engineer shall provide a written response that shall include an explanation of any action taken or recommended and the reasons therefor. The City Traffic Engineer shall send a copy of the written response to the requesting party by regular mail. Where no request is received for review of the decision, the City Traffic Engineer’s decision is the final City decision on minor issues. Any person may appeal the decision of the City Traffic Engineer on an issue to the Traffic Commission. Such appeal must be in writing, must include a reference to the subject and date of the City Traffic Engineer’s written response and the grounds for objecting to the City Traffic Engineer’s decision. Unless the appeal is submitted by a member of the City Council or the Traffic Commission, a fee as established by resolution of the Council to cover the cost of processing and presenting the matter to the Traffic Commission shall accompany the appeal. Review by the Traffic Commission shall be conducted in the same manner as review of major issues. The written decision of the Traffic Commission shall be placed on the City Council’s agenda for consent or for Council, by motion, to review the matter. Council action on the proposal is the final decision.

2. Major Issues. Any proposal that qualifies as a major issue shall be scheduled by the City Traffic Engineer for review by the Traffic Commission. Prior to Traffic Commission review, the City Traffic Engineer shall provide an opportunity for review of each major issue by the Police Chief, the Operations Director and the Fire Marshal or their designees. All written comments received shall be sent to the Traffic Commission. The issue shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Traffic Commission if the City Traffic Engineer determines that a public hearing is appropriate or if the Traffic Commission directs that the matter be scheduled for a public hearing or if any person makes written request to the City Traffic Engineer for a public hearing. The procedure for the conduct of such hearing shall be as set forth in subsection B. If no public hearing is scheduled, the matter may be approved on the consent agenda of the Traffic Commission and sent to the City Council for final approval.

3. Emergency Issue. Any issue that qualifies as an emergency issue may be scheduled for review by the City Council without the Traffic Commission first reviewing the matter, if the Mayor deems such action to be in the public interest. Notice of Council consideration shall be provided in accordance with requirements of State law for announcing a meeting of the City Council. Notice of the Council consideration of such issue shall also be provided by regular mail or other methods designed to give advance notice to the Traffic Commission and the chair of each NAC directly affected by the proposed action.

4. Extreme Hazard. Any issue that qualifies as an extreme hazard may be determined immediately by any of the following officials: the City Traffic Engineer, the Operations Director or the Mayor without prior review or consideration by the Traffic Commission or the City Council. The official taking action under this provision shall as soon as practicable thereafter, but no later than 48 hours, advise the other officials and the City Council of such action and the circumstances. Within 90 days after notifying the City Council, any traffic controls installed under the extreme hazard process shall be removed unless the City Traffic Engineer has scheduled the issue for review by the Traffic Commission. In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the Police Department or the Fire District may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance.

B. Hearings. The following procedures shall govern the conduct of hearings by the Traffic Commission and on appeal from Traffic Commission decisions, by the City Council, except as otherwise specifically provided.

1. Notification. Except as otherwise provided in subsections A and F of this section, notice of the hearing shall be provided at least twenty (20) days before the hearing in the following manner:

a. by regular mail to the person who submitted the proposal or appealed the City Traffic Engineer’s response to the proposal, to the chair of the NAC whose boundaries include or are adjacent to the location of the proposed action, to any person who has requested notice, and by internal distribution to members of the City Council;

b. by posting at City Hall, the City Library and the Beaverton (central) Post Office;

c. by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; and

d. by posting at or near the site of the proposed action with signs of sufficient number, size and location so as to be visible to a passing motorist.

Failure to provide notice in the manner set forth herein shall not invalidate any action or decision made by the decision-maker.

2. Notice Contents. Notice shall include the nature of the proposed change; date, time, place and purpose of the hearing; and the name and telephone number of the City staff person who may be contacted to obtain additional information.

3. Conduct of the Hearing. The Chair, or the Chair’s designee, shall open the hearing by stating the general nature of the proposal followed by a summary of these procedures. Written minutes of the hearings body’s proceedings shall be prepared, approved and maintained. Minutes shall accurately reflect the names of hearings body members present, the substance of any matter discussed and views of participants and the vote and result of any motion or other action. The hearings body may by rule establish time limits on testimony to be observed during a hearing, subject to the right of the Chair, with the hearings body’s consent, to amend or waive the time limits. As a general guideline, if the Chair decides to increase or decrease the time limits for testimony, the Chair shall do so in equal proportion for both the person who submitted the proposal or appeal and the person who opposes the proposal. An audio recording shall be made of each meeting.

The Chair shall next call for presentation of the City Traffic Engineer’s report. The City Traffic Engineer’s report shall list the applicable substantive criteria and shall explain the reasons behind the recommendation, or decision in the case of an appeal.

The Chair shall state that evidence and testimony must be directed to the criteria in BC 6.02.060, determined to be applicable by the City Traffic Engineer or other criteria, current City, Metro, Tri-Met, State of Oregon or Federal laws or policies, which the person believes to apply to the decision.

The Chair shall call for testimony from the person who submitted the proposal or the person who appealed the City Traffic Engineer’s or Traffic Commission’s response to the proposal.

The Chair shall call for evidence or testimony from other interested parties.

Prior to the conclusion of the hearing, any participant may request a continuance of the hearing for the purpose of presenting additional evidence or testimony regarding the application. The hearings body upon its own motion may continue the hearing to a time and date certain. No additional notice of a continued hearing is required if the hearings body announces the continuation of the hearing to a date, time and place certain. The decision on whether to continue the hearing rests solely with the hearings body.

At the conclusion of the deliberations, the hearings body shall make an oral decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposal or the appeal of the proposal based upon the applicable standards and criteria and the evidence and testimony in the record. The hearings body may also refer the matter to the City Traffic Engineer for further review and may retain jurisdiction over the decision. The hearings body’s oral decision is not a final decision. At any time prior to the adoption of the final order pursuant to paragraph 4 of this subsection, the hearings body may, after approving a motion to reconsider, modify or change the oral decision or choose to reopen the hearing, or both.

4. A final written order of the Traffic Commission decision shall be signed by the Chair on behalf of the Commission. The final written order shall consist of a brief statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explains the justification for the decision based upon the criteria, standards and facts set forth. The order shall also contain or incorporate by reference any conditions of approval deemed necessary or appropriate by the hearings body. A proposed order may be prepared by the City Traffic Engineer or by the prevailing party subject to review and approval of the City Traffic Engineer.

5. In the absence of a properly filed Notice of Intent to Appeal, the Traffic Commission’s decision shall appear on the City Council’s agenda as a consent item following the expiration of the appeal period. Upon approval by the Council, the decision shall be considered final. Prior to approval, the City Council may, by motion, decide to conduct its own hearing. Any hearing by the City Council shall be in accordance with Subsections E through H of this section.

6. Notice of the Traffic Commission’s decision shall be sent by regular mail to the person who submitted the proposal or appeal of the proposal and to all persons who testified either orally or in writing before the hearings body. The notice shall be sent within 3 calendar days after the signing of the final written order by the Chair. The notice shall include the date (of the notice), a brief summary of the final decision, a geographical reference to the location of the traffic issue, a statement that a copy of the final written order is available for review at City offices and in the case of notice of a Traffic Commission decision, a statement that the decision may be appealed by filing a written Notice of Intent to Appeal with the City Recorder within ten calendar days of the date of the final written order and a reference to the requirements for filing a Notice of Intent to Appeal contained in subsection C of this section.

C. Appeals to the City Council. A final decision of the Traffic Commission may be appealed to the City Council by the person who submitted the proposal or the appeal of the proposal or by any person who appeared before the Traffic Commission either orally or in writing regarding the proposal. An appeal shall be made by filing a Notice of Intent to Appeal with the City Recorder within ten (10) days of the date of the Traffic Commission’s final written order. A Notice of Intent to Appeal shall be in writing and shall contain:

1. A reference to the proposal, the number and date of the final written order;

2. A statement that demonstrates that the appellant is the person who submitted the proposal or appeal of the proposal, or appeared either orally or in writing in front of the Traffic Commission;

3. The name, address, and signature of the appellant or the appellant’s representative;

4. An appeal fee as established by resolution of the Council, unless the appeal is filed by the Mayor or a local government agency or unless the fee is waived by motion and order of the City Council; and

5. A discussion of the specific issues raised for Council’s consideration and the specific reasons why the appellant contends that the decision by the Traffic Commission is incorrect or not in conformance with the applicable criteria.

D. Rejection of Appeals. The City Recorder shall reject the appeal if it is not filed within the 10 day appeal period or in the proper form or does not include the filing fee, as required by or set forth in subsection C of this section. If the City Recorder rejects an appeal, the City Recorder shall so notify the appellant by regular mail. Such notification shall include a brief explanation of the reason why the City Recorder rejects the appeal. The decision of the City Recorder to reject an appeal pursuant to this section is a final City decision as of the date of the letter and is not subject to appeal to the Traffic Commission or the City Council. The appellant shall be allowed to correct a failure to comply with subsection C of this section, if the correction can be made and is made within the 10 day appeal period provided in subsection C of this section.

E. Record of Proceedings. Following receipt of a Notice of Intent to Appeal filed in compliance with subsection C of this section, the City Traffic Engineer shall prepare a record for Council review containing:

1. all staff reports and memoranda prepared regarding the proposal that were presented to the Traffic Commission;

2. minutes of all Traffic Commission proceedings at which the proposal was considered;

3. all written testimony and all exhibits, maps, documents or other written materials presented to the City Traffic Engineer and the Traffic Commission during the proceedings on the proposal; and

4. the final written order of the Traffic Commission.

A transcript of the Traffic Commission proceedings is not required, however any person who appeared before the Traffic Commission may prepare a certified transcript of all or any part of the Traffic Commission proceedings at that person’s own expense, and such certified transcript shall be accepted into evidence and considered by the City Council.

F. Notice of Appeal Hearing. Except for an emergency action, written notice of the appeal hearing before the City Council shall be sent by regular mail no later than 14 days prior to the date of the hearing to the appellant, the person who submitted the proposal if different from the appellant, and all persons who testified either orally or in writing before the Traffic Commission. In the case of an emergency action, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at any time prior to the start of the hearing. Notice contents shall be in accordance with subsection B.2 of this section. In addition, the notice shall state that a copy of the decision being appealed, the proposal and all documents and evidence contained in the record and the applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost; and include a general statement of the requirements for submission of testimony and procedure for conduct of the hearing.

G. Scope of City Council Review of Appeals. City Council review of appeals shall be on the record. Any person may testify before the City Council, but testimony will be limited to issues previously raised before the Traffic Commission. Council on its own motion may hold a de novo hearing that would allow new evidence to be presented.

H. Conduct of the Appeal Hearing. The Council shall conduct a hearing on appeal in accordance with Beaverton Code 2.11.010. The Council may affirm, reverse, modify in whole or in part, affirm the proposal with one or more conditions or remand the action or decision of the Traffic Commission. A final written order of the Council shall be prepared and presented to the Council for approval. [BC 6.02.065, added by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98; amended by Ordinance No. 4225(2), 9/9/02]


6.02.070 Existing Traffic Control Devices.

Official traffic control devices installed prior to the adoption of this ordinance are lawfully authorized. [BC 6.02.070, added by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]


6.02.075 Road Closures.

A. Procedure. A request for a road closure shall be processed as a major issue under BC 6.02.065 A.2, unless the request is part of a development review issue as defined in BC 6.02.055.

B. Eligibility Criteria. In order to recommend a road closure, the Traffic Commission must find that the road closure meets all of the following eligibility criteria in addition to the standards of BC 6.02.060(A):

1. The subject road is classified in the Comprehensive Plan as a “local” street.

2. Documentation has been submitted indicating that neighborhood users of the street support the proposed road closure. The documentation shall include written expressions of interest or a record of testimony at a public meeting. Neighborhood user of the street is defined as a person who, from their trip origin, can enter or use the subject street or street section without first traveling on or crossing a collector or arterial street.

3. A change in traffic patterns has substantially increased traffic volumes beyond acceptable levels that could not have been reasonably anticipated, or has created a substantial safety issue that cannot be resolved by other means.

4. Closure of the subject street will not substantially increase the traffic volumes on other local streets, will not substantially diminish safety on other streets, and will not substantially increase vehicle miles traveled.

C. Survey. If the Traffic Commission and City Council determine that a road closure request satisfies the standards and criteria for closure, a survey shall be conducted by the City to verify the extent of support from neighborhood users of the street. The survey area shall be conclusively determined by the City Traffic Engineer prior to the commencement of the survey, and shall generally include all properties where a person from their trip origin can enter or use the subject street or street section without first traveling on or crossing a collector or arterial street. For each tax lot within the survey area, one person may respond as a representative of the property owner(s). In addition, for each residential unit and each business in the survey area, if the occupant of the unit is not the property owner, one person may respond as a representative of the tenant(s) of the unit.

1. The City shall mail a response form to all the identified property owners, households, and business owners in the survey area. The response form shall provide a place for a respondent(s) to indicate whether the respondent favors or opposes the proposed closure and shall include a deadline of 30 days from the City’s mailing date for return of the response form. The mailing shall also include a description of the proposed road closure and a neutral list of arguments for and against the proposed road closure. Failure of any person to receive a response form shall not invalidate survey results.

2. The road closure will continue to be considered only if responses in favor of the proposal are received from at least two-thirds of all those who were mailed a response form.

D. Test Period. If the results of the survey indicate that at least two-thirds of all those who were mailed a response form support the proposed road closure, the street shall be closed for a test period of at least 120 days. The test period shall be conducted at a time that, in the opinion of the City Traffic Engineer, reflects peak traffic volumes on weekdays, weekends, and seasonable peaks as appropriate.

E. Request for Permanent Closure. Following the 120-day test period, the City Traffic Engineer shall initiate a request for permanent street closure to be considered as a major issue under BC 6.02.065(A)(2). [BC 6.02.075, added by Ordinance No. 4096, 3/27/00]


6.02.080 Designation of a Residential Permit Parking District or Amendment of an Existing Residential Permit Parking District.

To protect residential areas from polluted air, excessive noise, and refuse related to use of motor vehicles by persons not residing in such residential areas, to protect residents of such areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to and from their residences, to preserve the residential character of these areas, and to enable timely emergency services, the City may designate and from time to time amend residential permit parking districts in accordance with this section.

A. Procedure.

1. A request to designate a residential permit parking district or amend an existing residential permit parking district shall be processed as a major issue.

2. If a request is received, the City shall initiate the required studies in subsection C of this section to determine if the proposed area meets the standards.

B. Fees.

1. For each residential permit parking district established under this section, the Traffic Commission shall recommend a parking permit fee based on the cost to implement and administer the district.

2. The final written order shall include the fee.

3. The fee shall not exceed the City’s costs to administer and enforce the permit program.

C. Standards. In addition to the standards of BC 6.02.060 A, designation of a residential permit parking district or amendment to an existing district shall require the following findings:

1. The boundary of the proposed residential permit parking district or amendment to an existing district includes one or more public streets and all properties abutting the street(s) to be shown by a text description and a drawing.

2. At least 75% of the available parking spaces on the public streets within the proposed district boundaries are occupied at least four days per week for at least 16 weeks in any 52 week period. If parking spaces are not marked, the City shall determine the number of available parking spaces.

3. Designation of a residential permit parking district or an amended designation will not diminish traffic safety, substantially increase vehicle miles traveled, or cause occupancy of available parking spaces in any adjacent residential area to rise to the levels stated above in item 2 of this subsection.

4. A survey conducted by the City shows that persons representing the owners of at least two thirds of all residential properties within the district have responded in favor of the proposal. The survey shall include both a textual and graphic description of the proposed district boundary, and shall be mailed to the owner of record for each property. Only one response shall be accepted for each residential property within the proposed district. The survey area for an amended designation shall be limited to only those properties within the proposed amended area.

a. The survey form shall solicit responses in favor or in opposition to the proposal.

(i) The response form shall also include the option to abstain from supporting or opposing the proposal.

(ii) When the respondent chooses to abstain, that property shall be deducted from the total number of properties prior to calculating the two thirds majority.

(iii) Responses that do not show if the respondent favors or opposes the proposed district shall not be counted in determining the required majority.

(iv) A response must be received no later than 30 days from the date of mailing to be counted.

b. Failure of any person to receive a response form shall not invalidate survey results.

D. Obtaining a Residential Parking Permit. A person wishing to obtain a vehicle parking permit authorized by this subsection shall abide by the applicable provisions of BC 6.02.390. [BC 6.02.080, added by Ordinance No. 4205(3), 5/13/02]


6.02.085 Designation of Parking Management Zones.

The City Council may adopt parking management zones as recommended and processed through the Traffic Issue Process of this code. Such management zones shall serve patrons, encourage mixed-use development, and support desired economic uses within that zone.

A.  Regional Center Old Town Parking Zones 1 and 2.

1. Zone 1 is 3rd Street (between Tucker Avenue and Watson Avenue), Watson Avenue (between 3rd Street and Broadway Street), Broadway Street (between Watson Avenue and East Avenue), Hall Boulevard (between Broadway Street and Farmington Road), Farmington Road (between Hall Boulevard and Tucker Avenue), and Tucker Avenue on the east (between Farmington Road and 3rd Street and including the small segment of 2nd Street that connects the two segments of Tucker Avenue).

2. Zone 2 is 5th Street (between the railroad tracks and Stott Avenue), Stott Avenue (between 5th Street and Farmington Road), Farmington Road (between Stott Avenue and Cedar Hills Boulevard), Cedar Hills Boulevard (between Farmington Road and Canyon Road), Canyon Road (between Cedar Hills Boulevard and Broadway Street to the east), Broadway Street (between Canyon Road and Lombard Avenue), Lombard Avenue (between Broadway Street and the railroad tracks at Lombard Avenue and old Beaverton Hillsdale Highway, and south beside the railroad tracks to 5th Street). [BC 6.02.085, added by Ordinance No. 4445, 8/13/07; amended by Ordinance No. 4467, 1/7/08]

III. ADMINISTRATION


6.02.100 Powers of the Council.

Subject to state laws, the Council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the City except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another City ordinance or Code section.


6.02.110 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.110, repealed by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]


6.02.120 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.120, repealed by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]


6.02.130 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.130, repealed by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]


6.02.140 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.140, repealed by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]


6.02.150 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.150, repealed by Ordinance No. 4026, 11/5/98]

IV. GENERAL REGULATIONS


6.02.200 Rules of the Road.

In addition to state law, the following shall apply to the operation of vehicles upon the streets of the City:

A. The operator of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic, and shall yield the right-of-way to moving traffic and pedestrians.

B. The operator of a vehicle in the traffic lane shall have the right-of-way over an operator of a vehicle departing from a parking space.

C. No operator of a vehicle shall pull away from a curb or other parking area without giving an appropriate turn signal when other traffic may be affected.

D. Where a stop sign is erected at or near the entrance to an intersection, the operator of a vehicle approaching shall bring the vehicle to a stop before crossing a stop line or crosswalk; or, if none, then before entering the intersection. Stopping at a point which does not yield an unobstructed view of traffic on the intersecting street shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of this subsection.


6.02.205 Earphones.

No person shall operate a motor vehicle or bicycle upon a highway as defined in ORS 481.020 while one or both of the person’s ears are covered or occupied by headphones or earphones. [BC 6.02.205, added by Ordinance No. 3469, 10/8/85]


6.02.210 Crossing Private Property.

No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to another street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services.


6.02.215 Exhaust Brakes.

No person shall use a compression braking system in conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle, except for a person operating an emergency services vehicle (a fire engine or similar apparatus) equipped with a muffled exhaust braking system or except to avoid imminent danger to person or property. Compression braking systems, commonly found on trucks and busses and referred to as “Jake” brakes, convert an internal combustion engine into an air compressor for the purpose of slowing or stopping a vehicle with the use of wheel brakes. [BC 6.02.215, added by Ordinance No. 3470, 10/7/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3538, 10/21/86; Ordinance No. 4346, 4/4/05]


6.02.220 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.220 repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.230 Rollerskates, Sleds, etc.

No person shall:

A. Use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds, or similar devices, except where authorized.

B. Use rollerskates or skateboards on sidewalks in the business district or on any street, except as authorized or except to cross at a crosswalk.


6.02.240 Damaging Sidewalks and Curbs.

A. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk, planter or decorative median strip, or street planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

B. No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.

C. No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair.


6.02.250 Obstructing Streets.

A. No unauthorized person shall obstruct the free movement of vehicles or pedestrians using the streets.

B. No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle in such a manner that it constitutes a hazardous vehicle as defined in BC 6.05.010.

C. No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon or obstructing any street or other premises open to the public marked with a curb or surface marking, or posted with a sign, indicating the premises are set aside as a fire lane, fire apparatus access road, or access curb. [BC 6.02.250 amended by Ordinance No. 4321, 9/21/04]


6.02.270 Parks.

No person shall ride a horse or operate or park a motor vehicle in any place in a City park or any other city-owned property, except on a street, parking area, parking lot or a place designated by signs providing therefor.


6.02.280 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.280 repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.290 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.290 added by Ordinance No. 3620, 6/27/88, repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]

V. PARKING REGULATIONS


6.02.300 Method of Parking.

A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking.

B. Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction of the nearest lane of travel and, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible, within a single marked space.

C. The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street shall have priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to deprive the operator of that priority or block the access.

D. Whenever the operator of a vehicle is knowingly parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers.


6.02.305 Prohibited Parking in Specified Places.

No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal in any of the following places:

A. Within fifty feet of any uncontrolled intersection or any intersection controlled with side-mounted stop signs, side-mounted yield signs, or side-mounted signals, except: l) on one-way streets leaving an intersection, or 2) on streets otherwise signed, if:

1. the vehicle is over six feet in height, or

2. the vehicle is less than six feet in height, but by manufacture or modification, obscures the vision of:

a. any official side-mounted traffic control sign or signal;

b. intersection traffic; or

c. any pedestrian in a crosswalk.

Such vehicles described in subsection A2 are inclusive of, but not limited to:

Vehicles with darkened, shaded or curtained windows.

Vehicles modified to eliminate side window(s) and/or rear window(s).

Vehicles with visibility through windows blocked by parcels, packages, or freight.

Pickup vehicles of less than six feet in height but mounted with a canopy or camper with limited visibility through it.

Panel trucks with no side and/or rear window(s).

An “uncontrolled intersection” is one where there are no traffic regulating signs or signals.


6.02.310 Prohibited Parking or Standing.

No person shall park or stand:

A. A vehicle in violation of state motor vehicle laws or on the public right-of-way in violation of a lawfully erected parking limitation sign.

B. A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of 30 consecutive minutes.

C. A motor truck as defined by the Oregon Vehicle Code on a street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day in front of or adjacent to a residence, motel, apartment house, hotel, or other sleeping accommodation.

D. A vehicle upon a bridge, viaduct, or other elevated structure used as a street or within a street tunnel unless authorized.

E. A vehicle upon a parkway or freeway, except as authorized.

F. Repealed by Ordinance No. 4415.

G. A vehicle for a period in excess of a maximum parking time limit where so designated by sign or other marking. Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking.

H. Unless otherwise indicated, a vehicle within 20 feet of an intersection except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger.

I. Any trailer house, camp trailer, mobile home, auto home, camp car, recreational vehicle, boat, boat trailer, utility trailer, or any other device not primarily intended for the transportation of people, upon any street, such that the device has not moved at least one tenth of a mile within 48 hours.

J. A vehicle on a street or public place or premises open to the public without a license plate or a vehicle with a license plate or temporary licensing permit which is expired for more than one month.

K. A vehicle any place on premises occupied by the city police station that is marked as a place for police parking only.

L. A motor vehicle upon a sidewalk, curb, planting strip or median within the public right-of-way. 

M. A vehicle in front of and 10 feet on either side of a mailbox during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and federal holidays. [BC 6.02.310, amended by Ordinance No. 3278, 8/17/82; Ordinance No. 3365, 4/10/84; Ordinance No. 3427, 1/22/85; Ordinance No. 3447, 5/14/85; Ordinance No. 3537, 10/21/86; Ordinance No. 3560, 4/14/87; Ordinance No. 4053(3), 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4185, 12/17/01; Ordinance No. 4415, 12/11/06; Ordinance No. 4614, 6/11/13]


6.02.320 Prohibited Parking of Vehicles for Vending Purposes.

No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle on city-owned premises or on a right-of-way of a city highway for the purpose of advertising, selling or offering merchandise for sale, including the vehicle itself, except pursuant to written agreement with the city. [BC 6.02.320, amended by Ordinance No. 3890, 3/28/94; Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.322 Definitions for BC 6.02.323 and 6.02.324.

As used in BC 6.02.323 and 6.02.324:

“Camp” means set up, or remain in, a vehicle for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live.

“Commercial parking lot” means a parking lot adjacent to a commercial structure, or a lot if not adjacent then within the control of the commercial interest occupying the structure, which lot is privately owned but open to the public.

“Commercial structure” means a building in which the predominant activity is connected with the sale, rental, or distribution of, or performance of services to, end users of products or services.

“Person in charge” means a person, a representative or employee of the person who has lawful control of premises by ownership, tenancy, official position or other legal relationship.

“Sanitary facilities” include, but are not limited to, toilet, hand washing, and trash disposal facilities.

“Vehicle” means a trailer house, camp trailer, mobile home, auto home, camp car, recreational vehicle, or similar conveyance. [BC 6.02.322, added by Ordinance No. 4743, 10/10/18]


6.02.323 Prohibited Vehicle Camping.

A. Except as authorized by BC 6.02.324, a person shall not camp in a commercial parking lot.

B. A person in charge of a commercial structure or parking lot who believes that it is more likely than not that a person is camping in violation of this section shall do all of the following:

1. Make a reasonable effort under the circumstances to locate the operator of the offending vehicle; and

2. Make a reasonable effort under the circumstances to request that the person cease the offending conduct.

C. A person in charge of a commercial structure or parking lot who fails to follow the sequence of events listed in subsection B of this section commits a Class 2 civil infraction. [BC 6.02.323, added by Ordinance No. 4384, 3/6/06; amended by Ordinance No. 4743, 10/10/18]


6.02.324 Permitted Vehicle Camping.

A. A property owner may allow a person to camp in a commercial parking lot if (1) expressly authorized by the Mayor under a program administered by the Mayor and established by Council resolution, and (2) the property owner complies with the requirements outlined in subsection B of this section.

B. Each property owner described in subsection A of this section shall:

1. Permit the designated program manager to enter the commercial parking lot. The designated program manager is responsible for the intake, placement, and case management of the persons camping in a commercial parking lot.

2. Permit sanitary facilities to be placed at the commercial parking lot for persons camping in a commercial parking lot.

3. Permit a storage container to be placed on the commercial parking lot for persons camping to store personal items such that the items are not visible from any public right-of-way.

4. Not require any payment from persons camping in a commercial parking lot.

C. A property owner described in subsection A of this section may establish additional regulations for use of its commercial parking lot. A property owner may revoke permission for a person to camp in a commercial parking lot at any time if the person violates a property owner’s regulations.

D. A property owner described in subsection A of this section who does not comply with this section commits a Class 2 civil infraction. [BC 6.02.324, added by Ordinance No. 4743, 10/10/18]


6.02.325 Prohibited Repair of Vehicle.

No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle on city-owned property or on a right-of-way of a city highway for the purpose of repairing or servicing the vehicle, except pursuant to written agreement with the city or under circumstances where repair or service of the vehicle is necessitated by an unforeseeable emergency. [BC 6.02.325, amended by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.330 Use of Loading Zone.

No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to loading zone are in effect. In no case when the hours applicable to loading zone are in effect shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed 30 minutes.


6.02.340 Unattended Vehicles.

No operator or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall park it or allow it to be parked unattended on a street, on premises open to the public or on a new or used car lot without first stopping the engine, turning the front wheels to the curb, if any, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key from the vehicle, and effectively setting the brake. If the vehicle is attended, the ignition key need not be removed.


6.02.350 Standing or Parking of Buses and Taxicabs.

The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping the taxicab outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers.


6.02.360 Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.

No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space.


6.02.370 Lights on Parked Vehicle.

No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this ordinance upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or object at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle.


6.02.380 Exemption.

The provisions of this ordinance regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply:

A. To a vehicle of the City, county or state or public utility while necessarily in use for construction, repair or other work on a street, 

B. A vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail, or

C. Vehicles of disabled persons who comply with the provisions of the Oregon Vehicle Code.

VI. PERMIT PARKING AREAS


6.02.390 Downtown and Residential Permit Parking Districts.

The following provisions shall apply to residential permit parking districts authorized by BC 6.02.080 and to the following Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District:

A. Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District Eligibility Area. For purposes of parking permit eligibility under subsection D of this section, the boundaries of the Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District are as follows:

1. On the north, the Tri Met light rail right-of-way from Cedar Hills Boulevard to Lombard Avenue;

2. On the west, Cedar Hills Boulevard from the Tri Met light rail right-of-way to Farmington Road, east along Farmington Road to Stott Avenue, and Stott Avenue from Farmington Road to 3rd Street;

3. On the south, 3rd Street from Stott Avenue to Tucker Avenue, Tucker Avenue from 3rd Street to 2nd Street, and 2nd Street from Tucker Avenue to Lombard Avenue; and

4. On the east, Lombard Avenue from 2nd Street to Broadway, Broadway from Lombard Avenue to Canyon Road, Canyon Road from Broadway to Lombard Avenue, Lombard Avenue from Canyon Road to the Tri Met light rail right-of-way.

5. Also included are those tax lots abutting the south line of 2nd Street from Tucker Avenue to Lombard Avenue.

B. A vehicle parking permit for a specified residential permit parking district allows parking of a permitted vehicle in excess of the posted parking time limit in the specified residential permit parking districts authorized by BC 6.02.080. In the Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District, a vehicle parking permit allows parking of a permitted vehicle in excess of the posted parking time limit along the following City streets:

1. S.W. Broadway between S.W. Watson Avenue and S.W. Cedar Hills Boulevard;

2. S.W. 2nd Street between S.W. Hall Boulevard and S.W. Lombard Avenue;

3. S.W. 2nd Street between S.W. Watson Avenue and S.W. Angel Avenue;

4. The west side of S.W. Main Avenue between S.W. 1st Street and a point 125 feet south of S.W. 1st Street;

5. The south side of S.W. 1st Street between S.W. Stott Avenue and S.W. Main Avenue;

6. The west side of S.W. Rose Biggi Avenue between S.W. Beaverdam Road and S.W. Millikan Way;

7. The south side of S.W. 1st Street between Tucker Avenue and Hall Boulevard.

C. City Council’s Authority Over City-Owned Parking Lots.

1. The City Council by resolution may add other city-owned parking lots or remove those listed in this section.

2. Such action may be temporary or permanent.

3. The vehicle parking permit shall not preclude such action by the City Council, nor entitle the permit holder to recover the permit fee or any part thereof.

D. Parking Permit Eligibility.

1. In the Downtown or in a residential permit parking district, a person is eligible to obtain a vehicle parking permit, if the person who can demonstrate (either with a valid driver’s license, vehicle registration, or rent or utility receipt) that the person currently resides in the district for which the person requests a permit. A person using a vehicle owned by another person must present a notarized statement from the owner stating that the vehicle has been assigned to the applicant for the applicant’s personal use.

2. In the Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District, a person also is eligible to obtain a vehicle parking permit, if the person is an employee of a business that is located within the District. The employee shall provide proof of eligibility by any document showing to the City’s satisfaction that the person is a current employee of a business located within the District and that the business holds a current, valid city business license. A business within the boundary may purchase vehicle parking permits for its employees who work within the Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District eligibility area, if it shows proof of a current valid city business license.

E. Permit Applications.

1. A person desiring a vehicle parking permit must apply for same with the City Finance Department on a form prepared by the City and pay applicable fees.

2. Permit fees and changes to permit fees for permit parking districts authorized by this Code shall be by resolution of the City Council.

3. The fee shall not exceed the City’s costs to administer and enforce the permit program.

F. Parking Permit Design. Parking permit design shall be unique to each residential permit parking district, and to the Beaverton Downtown Permit Parking District’s eligibility area.

G. Theft or Loss of Vehicle Parking Permit.

1. A permit holder shall notify the City Finance Department of loss or theft of a vehicle parking permit within three business days.

2. The permit holder may purchase a replacement for one-half of the current fee, unless the person is disallowed from purchase due to improper use.

H. Use and Misuse of a Parking Permit; Suspension; Revocation.

1. A parking permit is valid until expiration, surrender, or revocation so long as the permit holder and its vehicle remain in compliance with all parking area regulations.

2. A parking permit is valid only in the area for which it is issued. A permit may be displayed only on a vehicle currently registered with the State where the vehicle owner resides.

3. The City may revoke and may require the surrender of a vehicle parking permit held by a person who is not eligible to possess or display the permit, or who commits misuse of a parking permit as defined in this section.

4. A person commits the offense of misusing a parking permit if a person does any of the following:

a. Displays a permit on a vehicle that is not currently registered with the State in which the vehicle owner resides;

b. Displays a permit obtained without meeting the eligibility requirements of BC 6.02.390 D and E;

c. Displays a permit that is expired, suspended, or revoked;

d. Obtains a permit from the City by misrepresentation;

e. Fails to surrender a permit at the City’s lawful request;

f. Duplicates or attempts to duplicate, by any means, a parking permit authorized under BC 6.02.390, or displays such a duplicate permit on any vehicle.

5. In addition to any fines or other penalties that may be imposed, upon conviction for misusing a parking permit, all permits issued to the offender and the right to apply for or display a permit shall be suspended for a period of three months.

6. In addition to any fines or other penalties that may be imposed, upon a second or subsequent conviction for misusing a parking permit within 12 months of a prior conviction for the same offense, the following shall apply:

a. All permits issued to the offender shall be revoked and returned to the City within three days of conviction;

b. The offender shall be disqualified from purchasing or otherwise obtaining or displaying a permit for 12 months following conviction.

7. Fines, suspensions, revocations, and any other punitive action against a person or a person’s ability to obtain parking permit privileges may be incorporated into a judgment of conviction for misusing a parking permit.

8. No person fined under this section may apply to display a parking permit until all fines have been paid.

9. Misuse of a parking permit is a violation punishable under BC 6.02.900.

I. Restrictions.

1. Display of a vehicle parking permit does not convey any privileges other than that of exceeding the posted permit parking time limit.

2. It does not authorize parking in any other restricted zone.

3. Permitted vehicles are subject to the provisions of BC 6.02.320 (displaying vehicle for sale; repairing or servicing vehicle).

4. Nothing in this ordinance shall limit the authority of any city police officer from requiring or causing the removal of any parked vehicle in an emergency or where the vehicle is subject to seizure or removal according to law.

J. Mayor’s Administration of Vehicle Parking Permit Program.

1. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall be responsible for administration of the vehicle permit parking program under this ordinance.

2. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee is authorized to prepare appropriate application forms, a permit decal and other reasonable and necessary forms and documentation for proper administration. [BC 6.02.390, added by Ordinance No. 3971, 1/7/97; amended by Ordinance No. 4109, 6/5/00; Ordinance No. 4205(4), 5/13/02; Ordinance No. 4251, 5/5/03; Ordinance No. 4264, 8/11/03; Ordinance No. 4403, 9/11/06; Ordinance No. 4467, 1/7/08]

VII. BICYCLES


6.02.400 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.400 repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.410 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.410 repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.420 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.420 repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


6.02.430 Impounding of Bicycles.

A. It shall be unlawful to leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner thereof.

B. A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of 72 hours may be impounded by the police department.

C. If a bicycle impounded under this section bears an Oregon driver’s license number or is licensed by this City or another City or other means of determining its ownership exists, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner.

D. An impoundment fee set by Council resolution shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section except where the bicycle was stolen.

E. A bicycle impounded under this chapter which remains unclaimed for 60 days, shall be disposed of in accordance with BC 2.05.010 through 2.05.026.


6.02.440 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.440 repealed by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]

VIII. PEDESTRIANS


6.02.500 Use of Sidewalks.

A pedestrian shall not use a street or the shoulder of a street for travel when a sidewalk is available.


6.02.510 Pedestrian Must Use Available Crosswalk.

No pedestrian shall cross a roadway outside of a marked crosswalk if within 150 feet of a marked crosswalk. [BC 6.02.510, amended by Ordinance No. 3883, 2/14/94]


6.02.520 Right Angles.

A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle, unless crossing within a crosswalk.

IX. PARADES


6.02.600 Prohibited Activity.

No person shall organize or participate in a parade unless a permit has been obtained prior to commencement of the parade.


6.02.610 Exemption.

No parade permit shall be required for parades of 50 persons or less with no vehicles if the participants intend to use the City sidewalks and obey all pedestrian and traffic laws and do not wish to use the City streets for the parade.


6.02.620 Parade Permit.

A. Application for parade permits shall be made to the police chief at least 48 hours prior to the intended date and time of the parade, unless the time is waived or increased by the police chief.

B. In considering whether to waive or increase the minimum time within which an application for a permit must be made, the police chief shall base his decision on the following criteria:

1. whether the size, route or nature of the proposed parade is such that additional law enforcement resources are required and scheduling of or arranging for such resources requires further time;

2. whether additional time is needed to inform the public of the parade in order to minimize public inconvenience;

3. whether additional time is needed to evaluate whether the permit should be granted pursuant to this section.

C. Applications shall include the following information:

1. the name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade;

2. the date of the proposed parade;

3. the desired route, including assembling points;

4. the number of persons, vehicles or animals which will be participating in the parade;

5. the proposed starting and ending time; and

6. the application shall be signed by the person designated as the chairperson of the event.

D. If the police chief, upon receipt of the application, determines that the parade can be conducted without endangering public safety and without seriously inconveniencing the general public, the police chief shall approve the route and date and issue the permit.

E. If the police chief determines that the parade cannot be conducted without endangering public safety or seriously inconveniencing the general public, the police chief may issue the permit with an alternate route or an alternate date. In determining whether to propose a different route or date, the police chief shall consider the following:

1. whether the parade is likely to cause excessive traffic congestion including vehicle flow, parking and pedestrian passage;

2. whether the parade is likely to substantially interfere with the orderly operation of governmental or commercial activity by blocking access to governmental or commercial premises for a long period of time;

3. whether the parade is likely to substantially interfere with previously approved or planned parades or public gatherings.


6.02.625 Denial of Permit.

A. If the police chief determines that the parade cannot be conducted without seriously inconveniencing the general public or seriously endangering public safety, the police chief shall deny the permit. In determining whether public safety is endangered, the police chief shall consider any concrete evidence indicating a specific intent on the part of the parade organizers or participants to engage in violence during the parade.

B. If the police chief denies the license, written findings shall be issued specifying the reasons for the decision and a copy of the findings shall be furnished to the applicant.


6.02.630 Notification of Decision.

The police chief shall notify the applicant of the decision within 48 hours of receipt of the application or at least one hour, prior to the scheduled time of the parade where the 48 hour application period has been waived. The copy of the written findings provided for in BC 6.02.625 B shall be furnished to the applicant at the time of notification of the police chief’s decision.


6.02.635 Police Chief Authorized to Promulgate Rules.

The police chief shall promulgate administrative rules governing the issuance of parade permits. Such rules may include, but need not be limited to, the following provisions:

1. designating certain major streets which cannot be used for parades;

2. impose insurance obligations and costs for extra police services for parade organizers and exemptions from the obligations and costs for indigent organizers.


6.02.640 Appeal to Council.

A. An applicant may appeal the decision of the police chief by filing a written request of the appeal with the City recorder within five days after the police chief has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit.

B. The mayor shall schedule a hearing date which shall not be later than three days following the filing of the written appeal with the City recorder and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that the applicant or the applicant’s representative may appear. The President of the Council may appoint a Councilor or committee of Councilors to hear the appeal.


6.02.650 Offenses Against Parade.

A. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant.

B. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade.


6.02.660 Permit Revocable.

The police chief may revoke or suspend a parade permit if:

A. An imminent threat of violence and personal injury to the parade participants exists, all reasonable efforts to protect the parade participants have failed, and a request to disband the parade made to the parade organizers has been refused;

B. Actual violence that endangers public safety has been caused by parade participants and public safety cannot be protected without revocation of the permit; or

C. There is significant deviation from the route designated in the application or approval, or assembly at points not shown in the application or approval, which occurs without approval of the police officer in charge of the parade escort. Revocation or suspension shall be in accordance with the Uniform Revocation Procedure set forth in BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066.


6.02.670 Funeral Processions.

A. No permit shall be required for a funeral procession.

B. A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable.

C. The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control purposes.

D. All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their headlamps turned on.

E. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.

F. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession.

X. PARKING CITATIONS AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY


6.02.700 Parking Citation on Illegally Parked Vehicle.

A. Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter or state law, the parking enforcement officer finding the vehicle shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation that clearly states:

1. The date, place, and nature of the charge.

2. The time and place for the person’s appearance in court.

3. The name of the parking enforcement officer issuing the citation.

4. The license plate of the vehicle.

B. The parking citation shall instruct the person to answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed within a specific number of days and during specific hours.

C. The parking citation shall contain a statement notifying the person that a judgment may be entered against the person up to the maximum amount of fines, assessments, and other costs allowed by law for the parking violation if the person does not pay the penalty imposed, or fails to appear at the time, date, and court specified in the parking citation, or fails to appear at subsequently-scheduled hearings in the matter.

D. The parking citation shall also contain a statement notifying the person that the person’s vehicle is subject to a tow if there are four or more unpaid parking citations that have been issued to the same vehicle. [BC 6.02.700, repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.710 Owner Responsibility.

Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered shall be responsible for any parking violation of the provisions of this Code. It shall be no defense that the vehicle was parked illegally by another unless proof is presented that said vehicle has been stolen and has not been returned to the registered owner by the date of the violation. The registered owner of a vehicle is not responsible for any parking violation if proof is presented that said vehicle has been sold prior to the date of the violation and not reregistered, in which case the purchaser shall be responsible. [BC 6.02.720, amended by Ordinance No. 3327, 7/19/83; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18. Formerly 6.02.720]


6.02.720 Parking Enforcement Officers.

The Mayor may authorize a person to issue parking citations on behalf of the city if the person agrees to enforce the City’s ordinances and regulations relating to the parking of vehicles as a part of an organized program administered by the City. Such a person shall be considered a parking enforcement officer and shall have full authority to assist in the enforcement of the City’s ordinances and regulations relating to parking, including but not limited to the issuance of parking citations. [BC 6.02.750, added by Ordinance No. 3884, 2/14/94, amended by Ordinance 4258, 7/14/03; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18. Formerly 6.02.750]

XI. HEARINGS FOR PARKING CITATIONS


6.02.800 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.800 repealed by Ordinance No. 4053(5), 8/3/99]


6.02.801 Registered Owner Presumption.

In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was then the owner in fact. [BC 6.02.801, added by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.802 Proof by Preponderance.

Except as otherwise provided by the ORS provisions adopted in BC 6.02.020, proof of any violation of this chapter shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. [BC 6.02.802, added by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.803 Procedures without Hearing for Parking Violations.

A. A Beaverton municipal judge may proceed to make a determination and enter a judgment on a parking citation without a hearing if:

1. None of the registered owners of the vehicle appear within the time allowed in the Beaverton Municipal Court;

2. Notice of the parking citation and the provisions of this section are mailed to the registered owner or owners of the vehicle at the address or addresses reflected in the records of the Department of Transportation; and

3. No request for a hearing is filed with the court within the time provided on the citation.

In no event shall a judgment be taken sooner than 60 days from the date of the citation and without prior notice by mail to the person against whom the judgment is taken.

B. A Beaverton municipal judge may proceed to make a determination and enter a judgment as described in subsection A of this section if at least one of the registered owners appears within the time allowed in Beaverton Municipal Court and requests a hearing, but thereafter fails to appear at the time and date set for any subsequent hearing in the matter. If a determination is made under this subsection, the Beaverton Municipal Court shall mail notice of any sentence and judgment to the registered owner or owners of the vehicle at the address or addresses reflected in the records of the Department of Transportation.

C. A determination under this section shall be on the citation and on any evidence that a Beaverton municipal judge may, in his or her discretion, determine to be appropriate.

D. Upon making a determination under this section, a Beaverton municipal judge may enter judgment, and, if the determination is one of conviction, may impose a sentence of a fine within the limits established for the parking violation along with a money award for costs, assessments, and other amounts authorized by law.

E. On motion and upon such terms as are just, a Beaverton municipal judge may relieve a person from a judgment entered in this section upon a showing that the failure of the person to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. The motion must be made within a reasonable time, and in no event more than one year after entry of judgment in the matter. [BC 6.02.803, added by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.805 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.805, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.810 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.810, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.815 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.815, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.820 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.820, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.825 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.825, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.830 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.830, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.840 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.840 A, amended by Ordinance No. 3322, 5/24/83; BC 6.02.840 B, added by Ordinance No. 3322, 5/24/83; repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.845 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.845, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.850 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.850, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.855 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.855, repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.890 Repealed.

[BC 6.02.890, added by Ordinance No. 4053(6), 8/3/99; repealed by Ordinance No. 4742, 10/2/18]


6.02.900 Penalties.

A. Violation of any provisions of BC 6.02.200 through 6.02.270 is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $300.00.

B. Violation of any provision of BC 6.02.300 through 6.02.670 is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $75.00.

C. A violation of a provision identical to a state statute is punishable by a fine not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute. [BC 6.02.900, amended by Ordinance No. 4258, 7/14/03]


Chapter 6.04 OFF-ROAD VEHICLES

Sections:

6.04.010    Purpose.

6.04.020    Definitions.

6.04.030    Operation of Off-Road Vehicles.

6.04.040    Exemptions.

6.04.050    Penalties.

6.04.060    Conformance with Law.


6.04.010 Purpose.

The Council hereby determines that off-road vehicles can provide appropriate, useful and energy efficient alternatives to automobiles when properly operated. The purpose of BC 6.04.010 through 6.04.060 is to prevent those vehicles from becoming a nuisance to the people of the City and causing damage to and deterioration of the environment and to avoid detrimental effects on the health, safety and welfare of the people.


6.04.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 6.04.010 through 6.04.060 the following mean:

Off-road area – Any area that is not a road or a road that is closed to off-road vehicles and posted as closed, except areas commonly held open to vehicular use, such as parking lots and automobile service stations.

Off-road vehicle – Every self-propelled motor vehicle designed or capable of traversing on or over natural terrain, including, but not limited to motorcycles, minibikes, trail bikes, motor scooters, dune buggies, four-wheel drive trucks, pickups, all-terrain vehicles, jeeps and half-tracks.

Operate – Start, move, run or drive.

Police chief – The chief of the police department or the police chief’s designee.

Road – Every public way, thoroughfare, road, street or easement within the City used or intended for use by the general public for vehicular traffic.

This ordinance – BC 6.04.010 through 6.04.060.


6.04.030 Operation of Off-Road Vehicles.

A. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on any off-road area that the person does not own unless:

1. the operator possesses written permission to do so from the owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the off-road area; or

2. the operator possesses written evidence of membership in a club or association to which the owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the off-road area has given written permission to do so and a copy of it has been filed with the police chief; or

3. the owner, contract purchaser or lessee has designated the off-road area as being open to off-road vehicle use by posting notice of it in a form and manner prescribed by the police chief.

B. No person shall:

1. falsify the written permission required by subsection Al of this section; or

2. falsify the evidence of club or association membership or the written permission required by subsection A2 of this section; or

3. post the notice or remove the posted notice required by subsection A3 of this section without the consent of the owner, contract purchaser or lessee.


6.04.040 Exemptions.

The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to implements of husbandry, publicly-owned vehicles or authorized emergency vehicles used for legal purposes.


6.04.050 Penalties.

A. A violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. [BC 6.04.050, amended by Ordinance No. 3372, 5/22/84]

B. The penalties imposed by this section are not exclusive and are in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, available to the City under the law.


6.04.060 Conformance with Law.

This ordinance shall not be a substitute for or eliminate the necessity of conformity with state laws, rules and regulations, or Code provisions which are now or may be in the future in effect which relate to the activities regulated by this ordinance.


Chapter 6.05 VEHICLES

Sections:

I. VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT

6.05.001    Vehicle Impoundment When Driving Uninsured.

6.05.005    Short Title.

6.05.010    Definitions.

6.05.020    Abandoned Vehicles Prohibited.

6.05.025    Custody, Removal and Sale of Abandoned Vehicles.

6.05.030    Towing without Notice.

6.05.035    Remedies Cumulative.

6.05.037    Rights and Liabilities of Owners.

6.05.040    Towing and Storage Liens.

6.05.050    Towing and Storage Fees.

6.05.060    Notice Prior to Removal.

6.05.070    Hearing to Contest Validity of Removal and Custody.

6.05.080    Pretowing Notice When Four or More Citations Have Been Issued with Respect to a Vehicle.

6.05.090    Notice after Removal.

6.05.100    Exemption from Notice and Hearing for Vehicle Held in Criminal Investigation.

6.05.110    Return of Vehicle to Owner.

6.05.120    Hearing.

6.05.130    Hearings on Towing and Storage Charges When Pretowing Notice Was Given.

6.05.140    Decision.

6.05.150    Failure to Appear.

II. VEHICLE INVENTORY ORDINANCE

6.05.200    Short Title.

6.05.205    Definitions.

6.05.210    Purpose.

6.05.215    Duty to Inspect Impounded Vehicles.

6.05.220    Timing of Inspection.

6.05.225    Manner of Inspection.

6.05.230    Identification and Safekeeping of Property.

6.05.235    Distribution of Property Receipts.

6.05.240    Adoption of Administrative Policies or Procedures.

I. VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT


6.05.001 Vehicle Impoundment When Driving Uninsured.

[BC 6.05.001, added by Ordinance No. 3888, 4/11/94; repealed by Ordinance No. 3888, 7/1/94]


6.05.005 Short Title.

BC 6.05.005 through 6.05.150 shall be known and may be cited as the “Vehicle Impoundment Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this ordinance”.


6.05.010 Definitions.

As used in this ordinance, the following mean:

Abandoned vehicle A vehicle left in circumstances demonstrating its owner never intends to return.

A. A motor vehicle shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle under this definition if it remains upon any street for a period in excess of 48 hours and the motor vehicle:

1. Reasonably appears incapable of self propulsion; or

2. Does not display a current registration plate or a current trip permit; or

3. Is on a street and is not registered to a person at the address of property on the same side of the street that abuts the part of the street upon which the motor vehicle is located; or

4. Is on public property other than a street without the consent of the owner, occupant and any other person in lawful possession of the public property.

B. A trailer shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle under this definition if it remains upon any street for a period in excess of 24 hours and the trailer:

1. Does not display a current registration plate or a current trip permit, unless exempt from registration under provision of Oregon law; or

2. Is on a street and no right of control over the trailer exists in a person or relative of a person who owns property or resides at property that is on the same side of the street that abuts the part of the street upon which the trailer is located; or

3. Is on public property other than a street without the consent of the owner, occupant and any other person in lawful possession of the public property.

Hazardous vehicle – A vehicle left in a location or in a condition that constitutes an immediate and continuous hazard to the health, safety or welfare of person or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, vehicles blocking fire hydrants, vehicles with leaking gas tanks, vehicles with an audible anti-theft alarm system that has sounded in excess of 20 minutes, vehicles located in violation of the Fire Prevention Code in effect within the City of Beaverton, vehicles blocking a public or private right-of-way, and vehicles occupying parking spaces designated for police parking only.

Law enforcement officer – A law enforcement officer of the City or other City employee authorized to enforce this ordinance.

Motor vehicle – A vehicle that is self propelled or designed for self propulsion.

Owner – A person with an individual or joint claim in or ownership of a legal or equitable interest in a vehicle.

Private garage – A private storage yard, garage or other storage place selected by the City.

Public property – Real property that is owned, leased, rented or lawfully used or operated by the state, a county, City or other governmental entity.

Vehicle – Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. [BC 6.05.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3278, 8/17/82; Ordinance No. 3302, 11/3/82; Ordinance No. 3427, 1/22/85; Ordinance No. 3539, 10/21/86; Ordinance No. 4053(7), 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4223(2), 8/19/02; Ordinance No. 4507, 4/20/09]


6.05.020 Abandoned Vehicles Prohibited.

A. No abandoned vehicle shall be left upon:

1. A street, as defined in BC 6.02.030, or

2. Public property, as defined by BC 6.05.010, without the consent of the owner, occupant or any other person in lawful possession of the public property.

B. The owner of a vehicle, as shown by records of the Oregon Department of Transportation or records of a similar agency of another state or governmental jurisdiction, shall be considered responsible for the abandonment of a vehicle in the manner prohibited by this section, and shall be liable for the cost of its removal and disposition.

C. A vehicle abandoned in violation of this section is subject to the provisions for removal of abandoned vehicles under BC 6.05.025 or 6.05.030, and to being sold as provided under BC 2.05.030 or applicable state law, including ORS 819.210 or 819.220.

D. The City may use its personnel, equipment and facilities for removal and storage of the vehicle or may hire other personnel, equipment and facilities for that purpose. [BC 6.05.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3278, 8/17/82; Ordinance No. 3302, 11/3/82; Ordinance No. 3427, 1/22/85; Ordinance No. 4053(8), 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4223(3), 8/19/02]


6.05.025 Custody, Removal and Sale of Abandoned Vehicles.

A. After providing notice required under BC 6.05.060 and, if requested, a hearing under BC 6.05.120 to 6.05.150, the City may take an abandoned vehicle into custody and remove the vehicle from the location where it has been left.

B. The authority to remove and take abandoned vehicles into custody provided by this section is in addition to any authority to remove and take vehicles into custody under BC 6.05.030.

C. Subject to BC 6.05.037, vehicles and the contents of vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section and BC 6.05.030 are subject to a lien, as provided under BC 6.05.040.

D. Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale under BC 2.05.030, ORS 819.210 or 819.220, if the vehicle is not reclaimed, as provided under BC 6.05.037, or returned to the owner or person entitled to possession under BC 6.05.110. [BC 6.05.025, added by Ordinance No. 4223(4), 8/19/02]


6.05.030 Towing without Notice.

A. A law enforcement officer may immediately cause a vehicle to be towed without prior notice if:

1. the vehicle is a hazardous vehicle; or

2. the vehicle was in possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement officer and no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle was available under the circumstances; or

3. the vehicle has been reported stolen; or

4. the vehicle bears license plates which are not issued to the vehicle according to the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles.

5. The vehicle has been involved in a fire and it is necessary to take the vehicle into custody immediately for further fire investigation.

B. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of towing and storing the vehicle.


6.05.035 Remedies Cumulative.

Any impoundment of a vehicle pursuant to this ordinance is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal, or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. [BC 6.05.035, added by Ordinance No. 4053(9), 8/3/99]


6.05.037 Rights and Liabilities of Owners.

The owner, a person entitled to possession or any person with an interest recorded on the title of a vehicle taken into custody under BC 6.05.020 or 6.05.030:

A. Is liable for all costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle and its contents, except that:

1. The owner, a person entitled to the vehicle or any person with an interest recorded on the title is not liable for nor shall be required to pay storage charges for a period in excess of 20 days, unless the person has received a written notice as required under applicable state law, including ORS 819.160. In no case shall a person be required to pay storage charges for a storage period in excess of 60 days.

2. A security interest holder is not liable under this subsection, unless the security interest holder reclaims the vehicle.

B. May reclaim the vehicle at any time after it is taken into custody and before the vehicle is sold or disposed of under BC 2.05.030, ORS 819.210 or 819.220, upon presentation to the authority holding the vehicle of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and upon payment of costs and expenses for which the person is liable under this section.

C. If the vehicle is taken into custody under BC 6.05.020 or 6.05.030, has a right to request and have a hearing under BC 6.05.120 to 6.05.150.

D. If the vehicle is sold or disposed of under BC 2.05.030, ORS 819.210, 819.215 or 819.220, has no further right, title or claim to or interest in the vehicle or the contents of the vehicle;

E. If the vehicle is sold or disposed of under ORS 819.210, has a right to claim the balance of the proceeds from the sale or disposition, as provided under ORS 819.260.

F. Has no right to a hearing, if the vehicle is disposed of under ORS 819.215. [BC 6.05.037, added by Ordinance No. 4223(5), 8/19/02]


6.05.040 Towing and Storage Liens.

A. A person who, at the request of a law enforcement officer, takes a vehicle into custody under provisions of this ordinance shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents as provided under state law including, but not limited to ORS 87.152 and ORS 819.160, for reasonable towing and storage charges and may retain possession of that vehicle consistent with this ordinance until such charges are paid or bond or some form of security is posted. Such lien shall attach and may be foreclosed as provided under state law. A lien described under this section does not attach to the contents of any vehicle taken into custody from public property until 15 days after taking the vehicle into custody. If the appraised value of the vehicle is $750.00 or less, the vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided in the Oregon Vehicle Code.

B. If the vehicle is taken into custody under provisions of this ordinance and held by a law enforcement officer, rather than by a private garage, the vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided in the Oregon Vehicle Code. [BC 6.05.040, amended by Ordinance No. 4053(10), 8/3/99]


6.05.050 Towing and Storage Fees.

The Council may, by resolution, rule, agreement or contract set uniform towing and storage charges for abandoned vehicles that have been towed which shall be deemed reasonable for the purposes of this ordinance.


6.05.060 Notice Prior to Removal.

A. If the City proposes to take custody of a vehicle that an officer reasonably suspects is abandoned in violation of BC 6.05.020, the City shall affix a notice to the vehicle with the information required by subsection B of this section.

1. The notice shall be affixed to the vehicle at least 24 hours before taking the vehicle into custody.

2. The 24 hour period under this section includes holidays, Saturdays and Sundays.

B. Notices affixed to a vehicle shall state all of the following:

1. That the vehicle will be subject to being taken into custody and removed by the City, if the vehicle is not removed before the time set by City.

2. The statute, ordinance or rule violated by the vehicle and under which the vehicle will be removed.

3. The place where the vehicle will be held in custody or the telephone number and address of the City official or department that will provide such information.

4. That the vehicle, if taken into custody and removed by the City, will be subject to towing and storage charges, and that a lien will attach to the vehicle and its contents.

5. That the vehicle will be sold to satisfy the costs of towing and storage, if the charges are not paid.

6. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle is entitled to a hearing, before the vehicle is impounded, to contest the proposed custody and removal, if a hearing is timely requested.

7. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle may also challenge the reasonableness of any towing and storage charges at the hearing.

8. The time within which a hearing must be requested, and the method for requesting a hearing.

C. This section does not apply to vehicles listed in BC 6.05.030. [BC 6.05.060, amended by Ordinance No. 4053(11), 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4223(6), 8/19/02]


6.05.070 Hearing to Contest Validity of Removal and Custody.

A person provided notice under BC 6.05.060, 6.05.080 or 6.05.090, or any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle, may request a hearing under this section to contest the validity of the removal and custody under BC 6.05.030 or the proposed removal and custody of a vehicle under BC 6.05.020, by submitting a request for hearing with the City not more than five days from the mailing date of the notice. The five day period in this section does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays. A hearing under this section shall comply with all of the following:

A. If the City proposes to remove a vehicle and receives a request for hearing before the vehicle is taken into custody and removed, the vehicle shall not be removed unless the vehicle constitutes a hazard.

B. A request for hearing shall be in writing and shall state grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes that the custody and removal of the vehicle is not justified.

C. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing under this section, the City shall set a time for, and conduct a hearing pursuant to BC 6.05.120 to 6.05.150. [BC 6.05.080, amended by Ordinance No. 4053(13), 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4223(7), 8/19/02]


6.05.080 Pretowing Notice When Four or More Citations Have Been Issued with Respect to a Vehicle.

A. A vehicle may be towed or immobilized on order of the municipal court if:

1. it is a vehicle that has been used in the commission of at least four or more violations of City parking ordinances for which citations have been issued and have been outstanding for more than 30 days; and

2. the citation issued stated that the vehicle could be immobilized or towed if bail was not posted or a hearing scheduled; and

3. a delinquent parking citation notice was mailed to the registered or legal owner at least ten days prior to the towing or immobilization stating the following:

a. the license plate number, the citation numbers, the violation dates and the amount of bail due;

b. that the vehicle will be immobilized and towed and taken into custody by the City if the total bail is not paid within ten calendar days;

c. the statutes, ordinances or rules violated by the vehicle for which the citation is issued;

d. that if the vehicle is immobilized or towed, the place where the vehicle will be held in custody or the telephone number and address of the City department where information concerning the vehicle can be obtained;

e. that if the vehicle is immobilized an immobilization fee will be assessed for removal of the immobilization device in addition to any penalties assessed pursuant to the Code;

f. that the person who tows the vehicle pursuant to this ordinance at the request of a law enforcement officer shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents for reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain possession of the vehicle until the charges are paid, and may have the vehicle sold at a public auction to satisfy the lien;

g. that the owner of the vehicle is entitled to a hearing before the vehicle is immobilized or towed to contest the validity of the citations or proposed immobilization or towing if a hearing is timely requested;

h. that if the vehicle is towed, the owner of the vehicle is entitled to challenge the reasonableness of any towing and storage charges at a hearing;

i. that a hearing on the validity of the citations, proposed immobilization or towing must be requested in person at the court or in writing within ten calendar days of date of the notice and that the request must include the grounds upon which the owner believes the towing is invalid.

B. If the owner of the vehicle requests a hearing before the vehicle is taken into custody, the vehicle shall not be immobilized or towed until a hearing is set and held in accordance with BC 6.05.110 through 6.05.130.

C. The owner must request the hearing on the validity of the citations, proposed immobilization or towing within ten days of the date of the delinquent parking citation notice. The request must be made in writing or in person and shall state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the citations and/or proposed immobilization or towing are invalid.

D. Failure to appear in person or to mail or deliver a written request for a hearing within ten calendar days after date of the delinquent parking citation notice shall act as a waiver of the right to contest the validity of the citations or the tow.


6.05.090 Notice after Removal.

A. If the City takes custody of a vehicle under BC 6.05.030, the City shall provide, by certified mail within 48 hours of the removal, written notice with an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing, under BC 6.05.120 to 6.05.150, to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders, as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation.

1. The notice shall:

a. state that the vehicle has been taken into custody;

b. give the location of the vehicle; and

c. describe procedures for:

(i) the release of the vehicle, and

(ii) obtaining a hearing under BC 6.05.120 to 6.05.150.

2. The 48 hour period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

B. After a vehicle is taken into custody and removed, any notice given under this section shall state all of the following:

1. That the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed, the identity of the appropriate authority that took the vehicle into custody and removed the vehicle, and the statute, ordinance or rule under which the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed.

2. The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of the appropriate authority that will provide that information.

3. That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of charges that have accrued to the date of the notice, and the daily storage charges.

4. That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of the towing and storage charges, and that the vehicle and its contents will be sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by a date specified by the appropriate authority.

5. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it, and to contest the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing is timely requested.

6. The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method for requesting a hearing.

7. That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by presentation to the appropriate authority of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and either payment of the towing and storage charges or the deposit of cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the appropriate authority. [BC 6.05.090, amended by Ordinance No. 4053(14), 8/3/99; Ordinance No. 4223(8), 8/19/02]


6.05.100 Exemption from Notice and Hearing for Vehicle Held in Criminal Investigation.

A vehicle that is being held as part of any criminal investigation is not subject to any requirements under BC 6.05.060 to 6.05.090 or BC 6.05.120 to 6.05.150. [BC 6.05.100, amended by Ordinance No. 4223(9), 8/19/02]


6.05.110 Return of Vehicle to Owner.

A. An owner whose vehicle has been towed pursuant to BC 6.05.020 or 6.05.030 and who has requested a hearing in accordance with this ordinance may recover immediate possession of the vehicle before the hearing by:

1. Presenting proof of ownership or right to possession; and

2. Either paying the towing and storage charges or posting a security deposit in the form of a bond or cash with the City for towing and storage charges that have accumulated as of the date of the request for the hearing.

B. The municipal judge is authorized to establish, by court order, a security deposit schedule. The municipal court is also authorized to require those owners requesting a hearing under BC 6.05.080 or BC 6.05.130 to certify that the owner will attend the hearing when a hearing date is scheduled.

C. The judge is authorized to increase security deposit amounts which must be posted before a vehicle is released prior to a hearing where the individual requesting the hearing has failed to appear in the past, is a nonresident of the state, or under other appropriate circumstances.

D. An owner whose vehicle was towed or immobilized pursuant to BC 6.05.080 or BC 6.02.805 through 6.02.855 may recover possession of the vehicle pursuant to BC 6.02.840. [BC 6.05.110, amended by Ordinance No. 4223(10), 8/19/02]


6.05.120 Hearing.

A. When a person requests a hearing pursuant to BC 6.05.037, the hearing shall be held before a judge of the Beaverton Municipal Court.

B. The hearing shall be set within three days of receipt of the request, holidays, Saturdays and Sundays not included. The City shall provide notice of the hearing, either in writing, by phone or in person to the person requesting the hearing and the registered and legal owners of the vehicle, if not the same as the person requesting the hearing.

C. Unless otherwise provided by this Code or City ordinance, at the hearing the owner or person entitled to possession may contest:

1. the validity of the action of the law enforcement officer in taking the vehicle into custody;

2. creation and amount of the lien attached to the vehicle.

D. The City shall have the burden of showing the validity of the taking of the vehicle. [BC 6.05.120, amended by Ordinance No. 4223(11), 8/19/02]


6.05.130 Hearings on Towing and Storage Charges When Pretowing Notice Was Given.

A. Whenever pretowing notice has been given pursuant to BC 6.05.060 through 6.05.070 and the owner fails to request a hearing within the stated time period, the owner may nevertheless request a hearing on the creation or amount of the lien.

B. The hearing on the creation or amount of the lien must be requested in person or in writing not more than 25 days after the vehicle was towed and shall state the grounds upon which the person believes the creation of the lien is invalid or the amount unreasonable.

C. The provisions of BC 6.05.120 B shall apply.


6.05.140 Decision.

If the municipal judge finds that custody and removal is:

A. Valid, the judge shall order the vehicle to be held in custody until the costs of the hearing and all towing and storage costs are paid by the person claiming the vehicle. If the vehicle has not yet been towed, the judge shall order it towed.

B. Invalid, the judge shall:

1. order the immediate release of the vehicle to the person claiming it;

2. order any immobilization, towing or storage costs already paid be refunded;

3. order the City to satisfy any immobilization, towing and storage charges the tower may require from the City;

4. order that the owner is not liable for immobilization, towing and storage charges occasioned by the taking. New storage costs will not start to accrue until more than 24 hours after the time the vehicle is officially released by the judge’s order to the person claiming the vehicle.

C. The order of the judge shall be in writing.

D. The action of the municipal judge is final and no appeal can be taken from it.


6.05.150 Failure to Appear.

A. If the person who requested the hearing does not appear at the hearing, the judge may enter an order supporting the removal and assessment of immobilization, towing and storage costs and apply security posted against the costs.

B. A person who fails to appear at a hearing is not entitled to another hearing on the same matter unless the person provides a satisfactory reason to the judge for failure to appear.

II. VEHICLE INVENTORY ORDINANCE


6.05.200 Short Title.

BC 6.05.200 to 6.05.235 shall be known and may be cited as the Vehicle Inventory Ordinance and may also be referred to as “this ordinance.” [BC 605.200 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.205 Definitions.

For the purpose of this ordinance, the following mean:

Officer – A police officer employed by the City of Beaverton or acting on behalf of the City of Beaverton.

Personal property – Every kind of property except land, tenements and fixtures.

Valuable personal property – Any cash, check, money order or other financial instrument, in any amount; any earring, necklace, non-prescription glasses, ring, watch, bracelet or other similar item of jewelry, regardless of the item’s apparent value; and any other item of personal property that the person examining the item reasonably believes has a fair market value of $500 or more.

Dangerous personal property – Any item of personal property that under the circumstances in which it is possessed is readily capable of causing physical injury.

Impounded vehicle – A vehicle seized from its owner or operator by or at the direction of the City or one of its employees, for a substantial period of time, under circumstances in which the City either must consent to its release or otherwise bears some responsibility for its protection, preservation or disposition.

For purposes of this ordinance, a vehicle shall not be considered an impounded vehicle if:

A. The vehicle is an abandoned vehicle as defined in BC 6.05.010; or

B. The City or one of its employees or agents facilitates the towing of a vehicle under the following circumstances:

1. The vehicle is towed by a person independent of the City to a place not under the authority or control of the City.

2. The vehicle may be returned to its operator or an owner of the vehicle without City authorization; and

3. The vehicle is towed either:

a. with the consent of its operator or an owner of the vehicle; or

b. at the direction of a person who:

(i) is not an owner or an operator of the vehicle; and

(ii) is not an employee or agent of the City; and

(iii) is an owner, tenant, occupant or person otherwise in lawful control of the property upon which the vehicle is located immediately prior to towing.

Closed container – A container the contents of which are not exposed to view.

Vehicle – Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes a vehicle that is propelled or powered by any means.

Owner – When referring to the owner of a vehicle, the person or persons in whose name or names title to a vehicle is issued, and who is or are entitled to possession and use of the vehicle. For purposes of this ordinance, a security interest holder or lessor of a vehicle is an owner of the vehicle. [BC 6.05.205 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96; amended by Ordinance No. 4223(12), 8/19/02]


6.05.210 Purpose.

The inspection and inventory of the contents of impounded vehicles pursuant to this ordinance is intended to:

A. Protect an owner’s property while in custody of the City;

B. Protect the City, its employees and agents against claims or disputes over lost, stolen or damaged property; and

C. Protect City employees from potential danger. [BC 6.05.210 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.215 Duty to Inspect Impounded Vehicles.

An officer shall inspect the exterior and interior of every lawfully impounded vehicle as provided in this ordinance. [BC 6.05.215 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.220 Timing of Inspection.

The inspection of a lawfully impounded vehicle shall occur prior to the vehicle’s removal from the place where it is seized, unless exigent circumstances reasonably require that the inspection be delayed. In such exigent circumstances, the inspection shall occur as soon as practicable after the exigency has passed. [BC 6.05.220 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.225 Manner of Inspection.

The inspection of a lawfully impounded vehicle shall occur in the following manner:

A. An officer shall examine the exterior of the vehicle to determine if there is any readily apparent body damage.

B. An officer shall examine interior areas where personal property or dangerous items may reasonably be located. Interior areas shall include, but are not limited to:

1. The passenger compartment, including the center console, dashboard, glove box, door pockets, seat pockets, ash tray, sun visor and the areas behind and under the seats and floor mats;

2. An unlocked trunk;

3. An uncovered hatchback;

4. The open bed of a pickup truck; and

5. The area within any attached canopy, camper or car-top container openly accessible from either inside or outside of the vehicle.

C. An officer shall open and examine the following locked areas: glove box, trunk, center console, hatchback, canopy, camper, car-top container or similar area within or attached to a vehicle, if:

1. There is an openly accessible unlocking mechanism provided within the vehicle;

2. A key to the locked area will remain with the vehicle; or

3. A key to the locked area will be taken or withheld from the possession of an owner or occupant of the vehicle.

D. If the conditions set forth in subsection C of this section are not present, then the area shall remain locked and unopened.

E. The contents of a closed container found within a vehicle shall not be opened unless:

1. The officer reasonably believes that the closed container contains valuable or dangerous personal property;

2. An occupant of the vehicle wants to retain physical custody and control of the closed container; or

3. Opening the closed container is otherwise lawful.

F. Any objects found within an examined area or closed container that is opened for inspection pursuant to subsections B, C or E of this section, shall be scrutinized only to the extent necessary to complete an accurate inventory. [BC 6.05.225 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.230 Identification and Safekeeping of Property.

As soon after the completion of an inspection of a lawfully impounded vehicle as is reasonably possible, an officer shall:

A. Make a written list of any body damage to the vehicle’s exterior that reasonably appears to the officer to be damaged in excess of $500.

B. Make a written list of all valuable and/or dangerous personal property found within the vehicle.

C. Remove from the vehicle the valuable and/or dangerous property listed in conjunction with the inspection.

D. Give to any occupant of the vehicle such property removed from the vehicle that the officer reasonably determines the occupant may rightfully possess, unless circumstances otherwise lawfully permit withholding the property from the person.

E. Take reasonable steps to safeguard the remaining property removed from the vehicle, and that is not returned to an occupant.

F. Note the disposition of all the valuable or dangerous personal property discovered during the inspection by recording who has physical custody of each item of valuable or dangerous personal property taken out of the vehicle.

G. Secure the vehicle in a reasonably appropriate manner to reduce the opportunity for unauthorized entry. [BC 6.05.230 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.235 Distribution of Property Receipts.

The City shall maintain the original record of property and its disposition. A copy of such record shall be distributed as follows:

A. To the person in control of the vehicle. If that person is unknown or otherwise unavailable, the copy shall be left with the vehicle in a conspicuous place.

B. To any person taken into custody to whom the officer must tender a copy pursuant to ORS 133.455. [BC 6.05.235 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


6.05.240 Adoption of Administrative Policies or Procedures.

The Beaverton Police department may adopt any necessary administrative procedures, rules or regulations to carry out this ordinance. [BC 6.05.240 added by Ordinance No. 3951, 2/26/96]


Chapter 6.06 TOWING OPERATORS

Sections:

6.06.010    Repealed.

6.06.020    Repealed.

6.06.030    Repealed.

6.06.040    Repealed.

6.06.050    Repealed.

6.06.060    On-Call Rotation; City Contracts for Towing Services.

6.06.070    Repealed.


6.06.010 Repealed.

[BC 6.06.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


6.06.020 Repealed.

[BC 6.06.020, repealed by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


6.06.030 Repealed.

[BC 6.06.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3519, 6/19/86; repealed by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


6.06.040 Repealed.

[BC 6.06.040, repealed by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


6.06.050 Repealed.

[BC 6.06.050, repealed by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


6.06.060 On-Call Rotation; City Contracts for Towing Services.

A. The primary purpose of this section is to authorize the creation of a reliable list of towing companies that are available on-call to provide quick and efficient towing services for the City. This section is not intended to authorize the creation of rules and regulations regarding standards of towing service applicable to the general public.

B. To provide a workable and comprehensive policy regarding the towing and/or storage of abandoned, disabled, seized, stored or impounded vehicles from public or private property, the Mayor may adopt service standards to guide in the formation of contracts for towing services provided exclusively to the City, and not to the general public. These standards may include, but are not limited to, standards governing:

1. The establishment of a rotational list of towing companies and/or operators;

2. Requirements and standards for placement on the rotational towing list;

3. Requirements and standards for continued placement on the rotational towing list;

4. Grounds for and procedures governing removal from the rotational towing list; and

5. Any other matters pertaining to the administration of a rotational towing list maintained for the City’s benefit.

C. The authority delegated by this section includes the authority of the mayor to enter into any intergovernmental agreement necessary or convenient to the establishment or maintenance of an on-call rotation towing list for non-consensual tows.

D. As used in this section, “non-consensual tows” are vehicle tows done at the City’s request by a tow truck without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the vehicle. Non-consensual tows may include, but are not limited to, the towing and/or storage of abandoned, disabled, seized, stored or impounded vehicles from public or private property. [BC 6.06.060, amended by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


6.06.070 Repealed.

[BC 6.06.070, repealed by Ordinance No. 4146, 3/5/01]


Chapter 6.10 TRUCK ROUTE

Sections:

6.10.010    Short Title.

6.10.015    Definitions.

6.10.020    Trucks on Certain Roads Prohibited.

6.10.025    Exemptions.

6.10.030    Defenses.

6.10.035    Weigh-in.

6.10.040    Liability.

6.10.045    Penalties.


6.10.010 Short Title.

BC 6.10.010 through 6.10.045 shall be known and may be cited as the “Truck Route Ordinance.”


6.10.015 Definitions.

As used in BC 6.10.010 through 6.10.045, the following terms have the following definitions:

“Truck” – means a motor vehicle that is primarily designed or used for carrying loads other than passengers and that has either (a) three or more axles or (b) a registration weight exceeding 20,000 pounds The term “truck” includes a combination vehicle consisting of a truck tractor and one or more truck trailers.

“Registration Weight” – means the loaded weight required under ORS 803.430 to be declared and established as the maximum loaded weight at which certain vehicles may be operated on public roads.

“Truck Route” – means the following roadways and portions of roadways designated in the Comprehensive Plan within the City limits:

US 26 – Sunset Highway

Oregon Highway 217 – Beaverton-Tigard Highway

Oregon Highway 8 – Tualatin-Valley Highway and Canyon Road

Oregon Highway 10 – Farmington Road and Beaverton-Hillsdale Highway

Scholls Ferry Road

Murray Boulevard between Sunset Highway and Scholls Ferry Road

Cornell Road south of Sunset Highway

158th Avenue and Merlo Road between 170th Avenue and Cornell Road

170th Avenue between Merlo Road and Oregon Highway 10

Jenkins Road between Murray Boulevard and the west City limits

Western Avenue

Allen Boulevard: Oregon Highway 217 to Scholls Ferry Road

Hall Boulevard: Oregon Highway 217 east to City limits

Oleson Road

“Road” – means any public way that is used or intended to be used by the general public for vehicular traffic. [BC 6.10.015, amended by Ordinance No. 4059, 9/15/99; Ordinance No. 4113, 6/26/00]


6.10.020 Trucks on Certain Roads Prohibited.

Except as otherwise provided in BC 6.10.025, no person shall move or drive a truck on any road other than on a truck route.


6.10.025 Exemptions.

BC 6.10.020 shall not apply to:

A. Trucks owned by a federal, state or local government while being used for a public purpose.

B. Trucks operated as emergency vehicles, as defined in ORS 801.260.

C. Trucks operated on a detour approved by the City Engineer, Traffic Engineer or Public Works Director.


6.10.030 Defenses.

It is a defense to a charge of violation of BC 6.10.020 if the person so charged can establish any of the following:

A. That the person was going to a destination to make a pickup or delivery and could not reach the destination by using a truck route, but had used a truck route to reach the intersection closest to the destination.

B. That the person was coming from a destination described in subsection A of this section and was directly headed to the closest truck route from the destination.

C. That the person was coming from a destination described in subsection A of this section and was directly headed to another destination to make another pickup or delivery, and that the second destination was located closer to the first destination than the first destination was located to the closest truck route.


6.10.035 Weigh-in.

Any peace officer may require a truck driver moving or driving a truck on [a] road other than a truck route to proceed to any available public or private scale for the purpose of weighing the truck.


6.10.040 Liability.

In addition to any penalty that may be imposed under this ordinance, the owner and driver of a truck using a road in violation of this ordinance shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for all damages done as a result of the violation.


6.10.045 Penalties.

Violation of BC 6.10.020 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250. [BC 6.10.010 through 6.10.045, amended by Ordinance No. 3707, 2/26/90]


Title 7 LICENSES, PERMITS, AND BUSINESS REGULATION

Chapters:

7.01    Business Tax

7.02    Marijuana Facility Licensing

7.03    Marijuana Tax

7.04    Door-to-Door Solicitation

7.05    Use of City Property and Public Right-of-Way for Special Events

7.10    Secondhand Dealers

7.12    Regulations on Payday Lending

7.14    Relaxation Treatment and Related Businesses

7.15    Alarms

7.17    Shopping Carts

7.18    Lodging Tax


Chapter 7.01 BUSINESS TAX

Sections:

7.01.005    Repealed.

7.01.010    Purpose and Scope.

7.01.015    Definitions.

7.01.020    Imposition of Tax.

7.01.025    Multiple Businesses or Premises.

7.01.030    Basis and Rate.

7.01.035    Repealed.

7.01.040    Repealed.

7.01.045    Issuance and Display of Receipt.

7.01.050    Repealed.

7.01.060    Misrepresentation; Nonpayment.

7.01.065    Penalties.


7.01.005 Repealed.

[BC 7.01.005 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.01.010 Purpose and Scope.

The business license fee imposed by this ordinance is for revenue purposes only. The fee shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other license or permit fee, charge or tax required under any other Code section or ordinance of the City. The business license required by this ordinance shall not be construed to constitute a permit to engage in any activity prohibited by law nor a waiver of any other regulatory or license requirement imposed by any other provision of City ordinance or federal, state, regional or local law. [BC 7.01.010 amended by Ordinance No. 3833(1), 10/19/92]


7.01.015 Definitions.

For the purposes of this ordinance, the following mean:

Business – An enterprise, establishment, store, shop, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted, either directly or indirectly, for private profit or benefit, including the holding out of Premises for Rent. “Business” does not include the noncommercial on premises sale of used household goods by a person who resides on the premises (a yard or garage sale) so long as the sale is conducted on no more than six days in any one year period.

Doing Business – An act or series of acts performed in the course or pursuit of a business activity on more than one occasion or day in a calendar quarter and not as a one-time or isolated activity or event.

Not-for-Profit – An entity that exists to accomplish some religious, charitable, humanitarian or educational purpose and for whom the United States and the State of Oregon have granted an exemption from income tax on that basis.

Premises for Rent – A building, portion of a building, or a group of buildings within the City containing three or more dwelling units that are rented, leased, let or made available for compensation for sleeping or living purposes. The term “Premises for Rent” includes a hotel or motel, automobile or tourist court, rental or boarding house, and mobile home or trailer park. In the case of mobile homes or trailer parks, the term dwelling unit means space or stall. A dwelling unit occupied by the owner of Premises for Rent shall not be included in the dwelling unit count for computing the business license fee for that location. [BC 7.01.015 amended by Ordinance No. 3833(2), 10/19/92]


7.01.020 Imposition of Tax.

A. No person shall do business within the City without a current, valid City business license.

B. No person shall do business within the City as the employee, agent or representative of another person or entity unless either the principal or the employee, agent or representative has a current, valid City license for that business, no matter where the principal offices of that business are situated.

C. This section shall not apply to a not-for-profit entity as defined in this ordinance nor to a person who is expressly exempt from the business license tax imposed by this ordinance under a lawful provision of federal, state, county, regional or other local law; provided, that a person who claims exemption from the business license tax imposed by this ordinance shall show proof of such exemption satisfactory to the City Attorney upon the City’s request for same. [BC 7.01.020 amended by Ordinance No. 3623, 7/18/88; Ordinance No. 3833(3), 10/19/92]


7.01.025 Multiple Businesses or Premises.

A. A person who does business from more than one physical location and under a different business name or as a different business entity at the separate location shall obtain a separate license for each such location, name and entity.

B. A person who does business as a franchisee of another business entity shall obtain and hold a current, valid City business license for each of the physical locations at which the person does business under the franchise, separate and additional to the license, if any, required of the franchisor. [BC 7.01.025 amended by Ordinance No. 3833(4), 10/19/92]


7.01.030 Basis and Rate.

A. A person who seeks a city business license shall submit an annual application for same on a form provided by the City. The application shall show, among other things, the corporate, or trade, or registered name of the business, the complete address and telephone number of the principal office of the business, the name of the owner(s) or principal(s), and the state of incorporation if the business is a corporation. On the basis of that application the City shall compute the annual fee for that license according to the schedule of fees that the City Council shall establish from time to time by resolution.

B. The business license fee shall be computed according to the number of persons or full-time equivalents engaged in the business within the City during the calendar year or the number of dwelling units occupied or available in the City in Premises for Rent, whichever is applicable, or by any other method as the Council may determine by resolution. The applicant shall warrant by his/her signature that all representations made on the application form are the truth to the best of his/her knowledge. An intentional misrepresentation on the application shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.

C. All such applications shall be submitted on or before January 1 of each calendar year or before the first day in any calendar year that the person first commences his or her business in the City, whichever is later. A license shall be valid until December 31st of the current calendar year. The business license fee shall be prorated to the beginning of the calendar year semi-annual period in which the applicant first does business in the City. [BC 7.01.030 amended by Ordinance No. 3307, 12/14/82; Ordinance No. 3347, 12/6/83; Ordinance No. 3383(5), 10/19/92]


7.01.035 Repealed.

[BC 7.01.035 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.01.040 Repealed.

[BC 7.01.040 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.01.045 Issuance and Display of Receipt.

A. Upon receipt of a signed and completed application for a business license the City shall inform the applicant of the license fee that is due and inform the applicant of any information known to the City and not shown or different from the application that the City used in computation of the fee. The business license fee determined by the City shall be due and payable by the applicant no later than February 1st of the calendar year for which the license is issued or no later than 10 days after the date that the applicant first does business in that calendar year, whichever is later.

B. The City shall issue a written receipt for a business license fee that is paid in full. The receipt shall constitute a business license and shall be public notice that the person named thereon is licensed to do business in the City for the calendar year shown. A person who is required by this ordinance to have a business license shall cause the receipt to be prominently posted in a place available to the public at the principal location or office of the business for which the license is issued. [BC 7.01.045 amended by Ordinance No. 3833(6), 10/19/92]


7.01.050 Repealed.

[BC 7.01.050 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.01.060 Misrepresentation; Nonpayment.

A. All persons doing business within the City for which a business license is required by this ordinance shall make all records, accounts and documents of every nature and kind and in whatever media kept or stored that tend to show the number of persons engaged in the business or the number of rental dwelling units available or occupied, available to the City on its demand for the City’s use in verifying the person’s compliance with this ordinance. The City shall deem such records, accounts and documents to be submitted to it in confidence as trade secrets to the extent allowed by Oregon public records law if so requested by the person submitting the information.

B. A business license fee due from any person and not paid in full when due is delinquent, and the City may avail itself of any and all remedies available to it to collect the fee from that person, including but not limited to citation of the person for a violation of the Beaverton Code.

C. A delinquent charge of 10 percent of the business license fee that is due from any person and is delinquent shall be added to the fee that is otherwise due for each successive 30 day period or portion thereof for which any portion of the amount due, including delinquent charges already imposed, remains unpaid, up to a maximum penalty of 100% of the license fee. [BC 7.01.060 amended by Ordinance No. 3833(7), 10/19/92]


7.01.065 Penalties.

A violation of any provision of this ordinance constitutes a Class 2 Civil Infraction. Conviction of a person for a violation of this ordinance shall not relieve the person from the obligation to pay the business license fee, including any delinquent charges, for which the person is liable. The penalty imposed by this section is additional to and not in lieu of any other remedy available to the City to enforce this ordinance. [BC 7.01.065 amended by Ordinance No. 3833(9), 10/19/92]


Chapter 7.02 MARIJUANA FACILITY LICENSING

Sections:

7.02.005    Short Title.

7.02.010    Definitions.

7.02.015    Licensing Requirement – Exception.

7.02.020    License Application – Contents – Fee.

7.02.025    License Application Approval – Issuance – Form – Denial.

7.02.030    License Authorization – Term.

7.02.035    Annual License Renewal – Fee.

7.02.040    License Renewal Application Approval – Issuance – Form – Denial.

7.02.045    License Surrender.

7.02.050    Grounds for Suspending, Revoking or Refusing to Grant License.

7.02.055    Appeal.

7.02.060    Enforcement.

7.02.065    Public Nuisance.

7.02.070    Closure during Pendency of Action – Emergency Closures.

7.02.075    Enforcement of Closure Order – Costs.

7.02.080    Remedies Cumulative.

7.02.085    Severability.


7.02.005 Short Title.

This section to BC 7.02.085 shall be known and may be cited as the “Marijuana Facility Licensing Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 7.02.005, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Consumer” means a person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds, or uses marijuana items other than for the purpose of resale.

“Debilitating medical condition” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.410.

“Marijuana” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.410.

“Marijuana items” means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts.

“Marijuana processor” means a person who processes marijuana items in this State and is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC).

“Marijuana retailer” means a person who sells marijuana to a consumer in Oregon and is licensed by the OLCC.

“Marijuana wholesaler” means a person who purchases marijuana items in Oregon for resale to a person other than a consumer and is licensed by the OLCC.

“Medical marijuana” means marijuana used for the exclusive benefit of a person to mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition.

“Medical marijuana facility” means the business that distributes marijuana to a registry identification cardholder or the designated primary caregiver of a registry identification cardholder and is licensed by the Oregon Health Authority (OHA).

“Medical use of marijuana” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.410.

“Person responsible for a medical marijuana facility” or “person responsible for the medical marijuana facility” means an individual who owns, operates, or otherwise has legal responsibility for a medical marijuana facility, or who intends to own, operate, or otherwise have legal responsibility for a medical marijuana facility.

“Person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility” or “person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility” means an individual who owns, operates, or otherwise has legal responsibility for a recreational marijuana facility, or who intends to own, operate, or otherwise have legal responsibility for a recreational marijuana facility.

“Recreational marijuana facility” means a premises licensed by the OLCC for marijuana processors, marijuana retailers, or marijuana wholesalers under OAR Chapter 845.

“Registry identification cardholder” means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the OHA. [BC 7.02.010, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.015 Licensing Requirement – Exception.

A. A person may not conduct, maintain, manage, or operate a medical marijuana facility in Beaverton unless a person responsible for the medical marijuana facility has a marijuana facility license issued pursuant to this chapter.

B. A person may not conduct, maintain, manage, or operate a recreational marijuana facility in Beaverton unless the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility has a marijuana facility license issued pursuant to this chapter.

C. If the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility has obtained a marijuana facility license and is also licensed by the OLCC to process or sell medical marijuana, then the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility is not required to obtain another marijuana facility license to process or sell medical marijuana in the City. [BC 7.02.015, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.020 License Application – Contents – Fee.

A. The person responsible for a medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility shall apply to the City for a marijuana facility license in writing on a form and in a manner prescribed by the City. The application shall request and the applicant shall provide information including:

1. The name of the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility;

2. The address or location of the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility;

3. The OHA MMD number of the medical marijuana facility or the OLCC license number of the recreational marijuana facility;

4. Proof that the OHA has registered the medical marijuana facility at the location indicated on the application or proof that the OLCC has licensed the recreational marijuana facility at the location indicated on the application; and

5. Any other information the City considers necessary.

B. At the time the person responsible for a medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility submits an application under this section, the person shall pay to the City a license application fee of $100.00. The license application fee is not refundable. The Council may establish a different license application fee by adoption of a resolution. [BC 7.02.020, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.025 License Application Approval – Issuance – Form – Denial.

A. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, within 180 days after receiving an application for a marijuana facility license, the City shall issue a license to conduct, maintain, manage, or operate a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility in Beaverton at the location identified in the application only if the City finds that:

1. The application is complete and accurate;

2. The OHA has registered the medical marijuana facility at the location indicated on the application or the OLCC has licensed the recreational marijuana facility at the location indicated on the application;

3. The applicant has paid the required application fee under BC 7.02.020; and

4. The applicant’s recreational marijuana facility or medical marijuana facility is located in a zone permitted by the City’s Development Code.

B. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall prescribe the form of the license the City issues under this chapter. At minimum, the marijuana facility license must display the expiration date of the license, the address or other location of the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility, and the name of the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility or the name of the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility.

C. The City may disapprove an application and deny the applicant a license if the City finds that any of the criteria in BC 7.02.050(A) applies to the applicant.

D. If the City disapproves an application or denies the applicant a license under subsection A of this section, the City shall notify the applicant promptly and state the reasons for the disapproval and denial.

E. As reasonably required to complete the review of an application for a license issued under this chapter, the City may conduct a criminal history background check. [BC 7.02.025, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.030 License Authorization – Term.

A marijuana facility license:

A. Is not transferable or assignable;

B. Authorizes the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility to conduct, maintain, manage, and operate a medical marijuana facility only at the location displayed on the license; or authorizes the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility to conduct, maintain, manage, and operate a recreational marijuana facility only at the location displayed on the license; and

C. Remains in full force and effect for one year from date of issuance, unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked as provided herein. [BC 7.02.030, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.035 Annual License Renewal – Fee.

A. The person responsible for a medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility shall apply to the City annually for renewal of a marijuana facility license in writing on a form and in a manner prescribed by the City. The application shall request and the applicant shall provide information including:

1. The name of the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility;

2. The address or location of the medical marijuana facility or the recreational marijuana facility;

3. The OHA MMD number of the medical marijuana facility or the OLCC license number of the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility;

4. Proof that the OHA has registered the medical marijuana facility at the location indicated on the application or proof that the OLCC has licensed the recreational marijuana facility at the location indicated on the application; and

5. Any other information the City considers necessary.

B. At the time the person responsible for a medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility submits a license renewal application under this section, the person shall pay to the City a license renewal application fee of $75.00. The license renewal application fee is not refundable. The Council may establish a different license renewal application fee by adoption of a resolution. [BC 7.02.035, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.040 License Renewal Application Approval – Issuance – Form – Denial.

A. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, after receiving a license renewal application for a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility, the City shall renew the marijuana facility license identified in the application if the City finds that:

1. The application is complete and accurate;

2. The OHA has registered the medical marijuana facility at the location identified on the application or the OLCC has registered the recreational marijuana facility at the location identified on the application; and

3. The applicant has paid the required renewal application fee under BC 7.02.035.

B. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall prescribe the form of the license renewal the City issues under this chapter.

C. The City may disapprove an application and deny the applicant renewal of a marijuana facility license if the City finds that any of the criteria in BC 7.02.050(A) applies to the applicant.

D. If the City disapproves an application or denies the applicant renewal of a marijuana facility license, the City shall notify the applicant promptly and state the reasons for the disapproval and denial. [BC 7.02.040, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.045 License Surrender.

A licensee may surrender a marijuana facility license by delivering written notice to the City that the licensee thereby surrenders the license. A licensee’s surrender of a license under this section does not affect the licensee’s civil or criminal liability for acts the licensee may have committed before surrendering the license. [BC 7.02.045, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.050 Grounds for Suspending, Revoking or Refusing to Grant License.

A. The City may initiate proceedings to suspend, revoke or refuse to grant a marijuana facility license if the City has reasonable grounds to believe that one or more grounds as provided below exist:

1. The licensee or applicant knowingly makes a material false statement or omission in connection with the issuance or renewal of the license;

2. The OHA or the OLCC suspends or revokes the registration of the medical marijuana facility or the recreational marijuana facility to which the license pertains;

3. The OHA or the OLCC suspends or revokes the authority of the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility to operate a medical marijuana facility or the authority of the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility to operate a recreational marijuana facility;

4. (a) A violation of the provisions of this chapter, State, or local law has been committed; (b) the citation for the violation is connected with the operation of the recreational marijuana facility or medical marijuana facility; and (c) the person responsible for a recreational marijuana facility or person responsible for a medical marijuana facility knew, or reasonably should have known, that violations or offenses were allowed to occur at the location.

B. Any proceeding under this section shall be substantially in accord with the procedure provided in BC 2.05.056 through 2.05.058.

C. Upon a determination that grounds for suspension, revocation, or refusal to grant a marijuana facility license exist, the factors to be considered in determining whether to suspend, revoke, or refuse to grant a marijuana facility license are limited to one or more of the following:

1. The nature of the conduct constituting the grounds for suspension, revocation, or refusal;

2. The frequency of the conduct;

3. The effect the conduct has upon the enjoyment of life, health and property of members of the community;

4. The efforts of the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the conduct;

5. The actual results of any actions taken by the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility or the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the conduct; and

6. The license history of either or both the medical marijuana facility and the person responsible for the medical marijuana facility, or the license history of either or both the recreational marijuana facility and the person responsible for the recreational marijuana facility. [BC 7.02.050, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.055 Appeal.

A decision pursuant to this chapter to deny an application for a new license or to deny an application for the renewal of an existing license, or to suspend or revoke a license, is final. Appeal of a final decision shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Washington County, Oregon, as provided by law. [BC 7.02.055, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.060 Enforcement.

The City may institute appropriate suit or legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of any decision or order issued pursuant to this chapter. [BC 7.02.060, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.065 Public Nuisance.

A. Any premises, house, building, structure or place of any kind where marijuana is sold, manufactured, bartered, distributed, processed, or given away in violation of State law or this chapter, or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of consuming marijuana in violation of State law or this chapter, or any place where marijuana is kept or possessed for sale, barter, distribution, processing, or gifting in violation of State law or this chapter, is a public nuisance.

B. The City may institute an action in the Circuit Court for Washington County in the name of the City to abate, and to temporarily and permanently enjoin, such nuisance. The court has the right to make temporary and final orders as in other injunction proceedings. The plaintiff shall not be required to give bond in such action. [BC 7.02.065, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.070 Closure during Pendency of Action – Emergency Closures.

The City may institute an action for a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction pursuant to ORCP 78 if a threatened or existing nuisance under this chapter creates an emergency that requires immediate action to protect public health, safety or welfare. In such instances, the notice requirements of this chapter need not be fulfilled. [BC 7.02.070, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.075 Enforcement of Closure Order – Costs.

The Court may authorize the City to physically secure the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility against use or occupancy in the event that the person in charge of the facility fails to do so within the time specified by the Court. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the premises, all costs incurred by the City to effect a closure shall be allowed and recovered as provided under ORCP 68. As used in this section, “costs” include those reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the City for the physical securing of the premises. [BC 7.02.075, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.080 Remedies Cumulative.

Any penalty or remedy imposed pursuant to this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty, sanction or remedy otherwise authorized by law. The abatement of a nuisance under this chapter does not prejudice the right of any person to recover damages for its past existence. [BC 7.02.080, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


7.02.085 Severability.

The sections and subsections of this chapter are severable. If any part of this chapter is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

A. The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional or invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid part; or

B. The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed according to the legislative intent. [BC 7.02.085, added by Ordinance No. 4636, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4689, 7/19/16]


Chapter 7.03 MARIJUANA TAX

Sections: 

7.03.005    Definitions.

7.03.010    Tax Imposed.

7.03.015    Collection.

7.03.020    Interest and Penalty.

7.03.025    Repealed.

7.03.030    Repealed.

7.03.035    Repealed.

7.03.040    Repealed.

7.03.045    Repealed.

7.03.050    Repealed.

7.03.055    Repealed.

7.03.060    Repealed.

7.03.065    Repealed.

7.03.070    Repealed.


7.03.005 Definitions.

“Marijuana items” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.015(16).

“Marijuana retailer” means a person licensed under ORS 475B.110.

“Retail sale price” means the total consideration paid to a marijuana retailer for a marijuana item, excluding tax, by or on behalf of a consumer. [BC 7.03.005, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.010 Tax Imposed.

The City of Beaverton hereby imposes a three percent tax on the retail sale price of marijuana items sold by a marijuana retailer within the City of Beaverton. [BC 7.03.010, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.015 Collection.

The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items. [BC 7.03.015, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.020 Interest and Penalty.

A. Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

B. If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall by imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.

C. Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.

D. Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the City of Beaverton by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the City’s general fund.

E. If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the City of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and the City under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. [BC 7.03.020, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.025 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.025, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.030 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.030, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.035 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.035, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.040 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.040, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.045 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.045, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.050 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.050, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.055 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.055, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.060 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.060, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.065 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.065, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


7.03.070 Repealed.

[BC 7.03.070, added by Ordinance No. 4647, 10/28/14; repealed by Ordinance No. 4705, 4/18/17]


Chapter 7.04 DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION

Sections:

7.04.005    Repealed.

7.04.010    Repealed.

7.04.015    Repealed.

7.04.020    Repealed.

7.04.025    Repealed.

7.04.030    Repealed.

7.04.035    Repealed.

7.04.040    Repealed.

7.04.045    Repealed.

7.04.050    Repealed.

7.04.055    Door-to-Door Solicitation.

7.04.060    Repealed.

7.04.065    Repealed.

7.04.070    Repealed.

7.04.075    Repealed.


7.04.005 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.005 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.010 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.010 repealed by Ordinance No. 3862, 10/11/93]


7.04.015 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.015 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.020 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.020 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.025 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.025 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.030 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.030 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.035 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.035 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.040 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.040 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.045 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.045 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.050 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.050 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.055 Door-to-Door Solicitation.

A. No person shall offer goods or services for sale or solicit money or anything having money value from another person on premises occupied as a residence except between the hours of 8 a.m. and 9 p.m. or except by the prior, express permission of the person occupying or in control of those premises.

B. A person who offers goods or services for sale or who solicits money or anything having money value from another person on premises occupied as a residence shall carry a legible copy of a current, valid City business license and produce same for inspection on demand by any person to whom the offer or solicitation is made. A person who is exempt from the business license required by this ordinance shall show other identification giving the person’s true name and the registered or business name of the entity that the solicitor represents upon demand by the person to whom the offer or solicitation is made.

C. No person shall solicit door-to-door at premises where a sign has been posted saying “No Solicitors,” “No Peddlers” or similar words to that effect. [BC 7.04.055 amended by ordinance No. 3833(8), 10/19/92; Ordinance No. 3862, 10/11/93]


7.04.060 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.060 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.065 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.065 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


7.04.070 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.070 repealed by Ordinance No. 3862, 10/11/93]


7.04.075 Repealed.

[BC 7.04.075 repealed by Ordinance No. 3833(10), 10/19/92]


Chapter 7.05 USE OF CITY PROPERTY AND PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

7.05.005    Scope.

7.05.010    Definitions.

7.05.015    Time, Place and Manner Limitations on Special Events.

7.05.020    Permit Application.

7.05.025    Approval Criteria.

7.05.030    Issuance of Permit – Fees.

7.05.035    Appeal of the Permit Decision.


7.05.005 Scope.

No person shall occupy public right-of-way or City-owned property for a “special event” as defined in this chapter without a current, valid City permit for the event. [BC 7.05.005, added by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12; amended by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


7.05.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, a “special event” is an assembly or gathering of persons for entertainment, recreation, the display or sale of goods or services, or other common purpose to be undertaken by a person other than the City that may involve use or closure of public right-of-way or City-owned property, control over vehicle and pedestrian access to the special event location, use of sound amplifying devices, use of public personnel or resources for emergency response or any combination of those elements. [BC 7.05.010, added by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12; amended by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


7.05.015 Time, Place and Manner Limitations on Special Events.

A. A person may apply for the use of City property, public right-of-way or both. Any such use shall be limited to the hours of operation allowed in the City Development Code for principally permitted uses within the zoning district at the location of the event, or limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., whichever is the greater limitation.

B. The City may restrict the date and duration of event proposals that are shown to conflict with other permitted events. The City may also limit the duration of certain events to ensure space availability for other events. Limits to event duration apply to the following City properties:

1. North and South Plaza at the Round. During the period of May 15th through September 15th, one private event shall be limited to no more than four consecutive days, and no more than 12 days total during that period. During the period of September 16th through May 14th, one private event shall be limited to no more than seven consecutive days in any 30-day period.

2. Public Right-of-Way. One private event shall be limited to no more than three consecutive days in any 30-day period.

3. All Other City Property. One private event shall be limited to no more than three consecutive days in any 30-day period.

C. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other local law, the more restrictive provision(s) shall control. [BC 7.05.015, added by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12; amended by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


7.05.020 Permit Application.

A person who seeks to use public right-of-way or City property for a special event shall formally apply for a permit for such use by submitting the following information:

A. The proposed time, place and hours for the special event;

B. The area of public right-of-way or City property to be occupied for the applicant’s use;

C. The location of any streets or intersections where the applicant proposes to restrict access by pedestrians, vehicles or both during the event while complying with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act;

D. Provisions for emergency response services for the event;

E. The proposed type and location of sound amplification and lighting, if any;

F. The proposed type and location of facilities for on-site food preparation and consumption and for mobile food sales, if any;

G. Provisions for waste disposal and for toilet facilities;

H. Proof of liability insurance for the event in types and amounts that the City may require;

I. The form of security that the applicant shall furnish to guarantee payment of the cost to the City to clean and restore the site upon the applicant’s failure to do so;

J. The dimensions, location and duration of any signage that the applicant proposes for the event;

K. The form of agreement as administered by the Beaverton Police Department to pay for police services as determined necessary;

L. For street closures, the City may require the event organizer to notify residents and businesses in the surrounding area as to where and when the event is to occur. When notice is required by the City, the event organizer shall inform residents and businesses in writing at least 20 days prior to the date of event and shall provide the City with proof that notice has been issued. [BC 7.05.020, added by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12; amended by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


7.05.025 Approval Criteria.

Special event permits may be issued on evidence provided by the applicant that demonstrates the following criteria are satisfied:

A. The permit application provides information about the event, consistent with direction provided in BC 7.05.020.

B. The proposed special event will continue to provide access to affected right-of-way, City property, adjacent property, public transit systems, or all.

C. The proposed special event will ensure access of emergency response services to the event.

D. The proposed special event use will not create a significant adverse impact to the public health, safety and welfare of the community.

E. The location is available for use and the event will not conflict with another permitted event. [BC 7.05.025, added by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


7.05.030 Issuance of Permit – Fees.

The City on receipt of an application for a special event permit shall review the application for conformance to the requirements of this chapter and any other relevant Federal, State and local laws and may deny an application for which the information and other material required are incomplete or not acceptable.

The City in its sole discretion may impose conditions on the permit to ensure compliance with relevant law and ensure public access to the right-of-way or City property or adjacent areas, to ensure the availability of emergency response services to the event, to alleviate the nuisance effects of sound and light generated by the event, and to generally protect the public health, safety and welfare.

The City may charge a fee for its review of the application and for issuance of a permit for the event intended to recover the City’s costs related to the application and the event itself. Those costs may include but are not limited to the amount of staff time to review the application and the costs of any City-provided traffic control, emergency response, restrooms, waste disposal, set-up and similar support services. The City also may charge the applicant the reasonable rental value of the City property. [BC 7.05.030, added by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12; amended by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


7.05.035 Appeal of the Permit Decision.

An applicant may appeal a staff decision denying a special event permit to the City Council. The applicant may initiate the appeal process by filing a notice of appeal within five business days of the date of the challenged decision.

The notice of appeal must include at least the following:

A. The name, contact information and signature of the applicant.

B. A statement explaining why staff erred in concluding the standards in BC 7.05.025 have not been met and identifying any evidence relied upon to support the claim of error.

C. An appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council.

Within seven business days after a notice of appeal is received, the staff will determine whether it contains the information necessary to process. If not, the appeal may be dismissed without review by the City Council.

A hearing on an appeal of a special events permit will be scheduled within 30 days after the notice is filed or, if after 30 days, at the next scheduled City Council meeting. The appellant shall be provided notice of the appeal hearing date at least 14 days before the scheduled hearing. The appellate decision making authority on appeal of special event decisions shall be the City Council. No additional written or oral evidence may be presented at the hearing. The City Council will make its decision based on the record, including the notice of appeal filed by the applicant. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council will affirm or reverse the decision under appeal, with or without conditions or changes. [BC 7.05.035, added by Ordinance No. 4713, 6/13/17]


Chapter 7.10 SECONDHAND DEALERS

Sections:

7.10.005    Short Title.

7.10.010    Purpose.

7.10.015    Definitions.

7.10.017    Unauthorized Sale of Property.

7.10.018    Notice.

7.10.020    Permit Required.

7.10.025    Fee.

7.10.030    Application for Permit.

7.10.035    Issuance and Renewal of Permit.

7.10.040    Change of Place of Business.

7.10.045    Dealer Recordkeeping of Regulated Property.

7.10.050    Holding Periods.

7.10.053    Procedures for Release of Held or Seized Property.

7.10.055    Inspection of Property and Records.

7.10.059    Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

7.10.060    Penalty.

7.10.063    Adoption of Administrative Policies or Procedures.

7.10.065    Repealed.


7.10.005 Short Title.

BC 7.10.005 through 7.10.065 shall be known and may be cited as the “Secondhand Dealer Ordinance” and also may be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [BC 7.10.005, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.010 Purpose.

This chapter regulates the acquisition of used property by certain businesses. This activity presents an extraordinary risk of misuse to conceal criminal conduct involving the theft of personal property. The risk of misuse is present despite the best efforts of legitimate businesses to otherwise control the risk. This chapter is intended to reduce this risk by providing timely police awareness about potentially criminal conduct and by regulating businesses that may encounter these activities. [BC 7.10.010, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.015 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following mean:

Acceptable Identification – Either:

A. A current driver’s license that includes the date of birth, photograph, and physical description of the person offering the identification; or

B. Two forms of current identification, at least one of which is issued by a governmental agency or subdivision and includes the date of birth, photograph and physical description of the person offering the identification.

Acquire – To take or transfer any interest in personal property in a voluntary transaction, including but not limited to sales, trade-ins, and loans.

Application Date – The date the City receives the required application fee from an applicant for a secondhand dealer permit.

Business – A shop, store, enterprise, profession, activity, establishment or undertaking of any nature conducted directly or indirectly for private profit or benefit and as a substantial means of a person’s livelihood. The term is not meant to include the activity of any federal, state or local government or governmental subdivision or agency, or of any organization exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

Occasional Secondhand Dealer – A person who owns, helps manage or operates a secondhand business that acquires fewer than 100 items of regulated property in a calendar year.

Owner – A person who has a right of possession to an item of property superior to that of the seller.

Pawnbroker – Any business required by ORS 726.040 to hold an Oregon pawnbroker’s license.

Person. See BC 1.01.020 (“Person”).

Personal Property – Any article, substance or thing of value, including, but not limited to, money, tangible and intangible personal property, chose in action, and evidence of debt or of contract.

Police Chief – The Police Chief of the City of Beaverton or the Police Chief’s designee.

Police Department – The Beaverton Police Department.

Regular Secondhand Dealer – A person who acquires regulated property while carrying on a business and who does not qualify as an occasional secondhand dealer under this chapter.

Regulated Property – Property of a type that is determined by the Police Chief to frequently be the subject of theft and is included in a list published by the Police Chief as part of the Police Department’s administrative rules for this chapter.

Secondhand Business – A business that acquires regulated property.

Secondhand Dealer – Both regular secondhand dealers and occasional secondhand dealers.

Secondhand Dealer Permit – The permit issued to a secondhand dealer pursuant to this chapter.

Seller – Any person who:

A. Offers items of regulated property in exchange for money or other property, or as collateral for a loan; or

B. Donates or abandons items of regulated property.

Transaction – The acquisition of regulated property.

Transaction Report Form – The form required by BC 7.10.045(A).

Used – Previously owned, consumed or put into service by a person other than the manufacturer or the manufacturer’s dealer or agency. [BC 7.10.015, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 3925, 6/5/95; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.017 Unauthorized Sale of Property.

No person shall sell or attempt to sell personal property to a secondhand dealer without the consent of the property’s owner. [BC 7.10.017, added by Ordinance No. 3925, 6/5/95; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.018 Notice.

A. A regular secondhand dealer shall post a notice substantially similar to that set forth in subsection B of this section in the manner and at the locations described in subsection C of this section. The size of the notice shall be no smaller than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches with lettering no smaller than one-fourth of an inch in height.

B. The notice shall be worded substantially as follows:

NOTICE

The sale or attempted sale of property to a secondhand dealer without consent of the property’s owner is punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $500 per item.

Do not sell property without the consent of the property’s owner. You will be held strictly liable for any violations of this law.

C. Every copy of the notice required to be posted under this section shall be posted in a manner reasonably calculated to provide patrons actual knowledge of the contents of the notice. A copy of the notice shall be posted:

1. Outside each point of entry intended for patron use; and

2. At or near each place where a regular secondhand dealer acquires used personal property in the regular course of business.

D. If a significant number of the patrons of the regular secondhand dealer use a language other than English as a primary language, the notice shall be in English and the primary language or languages of the patrons. [BC 7.10.018, added by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.020 Permit Required.

A. No secondhand dealer shall engage in, conduct, or carry on a secondhand business without a secondhand dealer permit. The secondhand dealer permit shall contain the address where it is valid.

B. If a secondhand dealer has an additional business location in the City, then the secondhand dealer must file an application for another secondhand dealer permit and pay an additional fee for that additional business location. Secondhand dealer permits issued for additional business locations are subject to all the requirements of this chapter. The term of the permit issued for a subsequent or additional business location will expire on the same date as the initial permit. [BC 7.10.020, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.025 Fee.

Every applicant for a secondhand dealer permit shall pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution. [BC 7.10.025, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.030 Application for Permit.

A secondhand dealer shall apply for a secondhand dealer permit in the following manner:

A. The City shall supply an application form for secondhand dealer permits.

B. The City may require that all secondhand dealers provide the following information on the application form:

1. The name, mailing address, email address, telephone number, social security number and date of birth of the person applying for the permit.

2. The name of the secondhand business in whose name the secondhand dealer permit should be issued if the application is approved.

3. The mailing address of the secondhand business and, if different from its mailing address, the physical location where the business is to be conducted in the City.

4. The web address of any and all web pages used to acquire or offer for sale regulated property on behalf of the secondhand business, and any and all internet auction account names used to acquire or offer for sale regulated property on behalf of the secondhand business.

5. An estimate of the total number of transactions the applicant expects the secondhand business to complete in the next calendar year.

6. Whether the applicant or any other person who owns, helps manage or operates the secondhand business ever has been engaged in a similar business; whether any permit similar to the one applicant seeks ever has been issued to the applicant or any person who owns, helps manage or operates the secondhand business; whether any such permit so issued ever has been suspended or revoked.

7. Such other information that the Police Chief may reasonably and lawfully require, including the fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant or any other person who will own, help manage or operate the secondhand business.

C. The City may require that all regular secondhand dealers supply the following information on the application form. This information is in addition to the information listed in subsection B of this section.

1. The name, mailing address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth and principal occupation of the applicant and any other person who owns, helps manage or operates the secondhand business.

2. The past five years of employment history of the applicant and any other person who owns, helps manage or operates the secondhand business.

3. A description of the property interest held by any person with an interest in the applicant’s secondhand business.

4. The name, address and phone number of each person who has loaned money or other property to the applicant for the applicant’s secondhand business.

5. Any criminal arrest or conviction the applicant or any other person who owns, helps manage or operates the secondhand business has had in the past 15 years. The applicant may be required to disclose where, when and the nature of any arrest or conviction.

6. A list of the businesses in which the applicant or any person who helps own, manage, or operate the secondhand business has an interest. A person need not disclose stock ownership in publicly traded corporations if the person owns less than five percent of the publicly traded corporation’s outstanding shares.

D. The applicant shall complete and submit a completed application form to the City that includes all information required by the City. At the time the applicant submits the completed application, the applicant shall pay a fee as required in BC 7.10.025. [BC 7.10.030, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4633, 2/25/14; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.035 Issuance and Renewal of Permit.

A. The Police Chief shall review the application after the applicant has submitted a completed application and paid the fee as required under BC 7.10.025. The scope of the Police Chief’s review may include any matter reasonably related to the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter or state law relating to the issuance of the type of secondhand dealer permit for which a person has applied. The Police Chief may conduct criminal history background checks in conjunction with the review. If no grounds for denial exist, the Police Chief shall issue a secondhand dealer permit within 90 days of receiving the application.

B. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the Police Chief shall deny an application for a permit if the Police Chief has probable cause to believe any of the following conditions exist:

1. The applicant, or any person who owns or will help manage or operate the secondhand business, has owned or operated a secondhand business regulated under this chapter or any substantially similar ordinance and, within the five years prior to the application date:

a. Has had a secondhand business permit revoked for a reason that would be grounds for a denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter; or

b. The secondhand business has been found to constitute a public nuisance.

2. The applicant, or any person who owns or will help manage or operate the secondhand business, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving a false statement or dishonesty within 15 years prior to the application date.

3. The applicant has:

a. Knowingly made a false statement in the application;

b. Knowingly omitted information requested to be disclosed in the application; or

c. Completed the application with reckless disregard for the truth or accuracy of the statements made therein.

4. A person who owns, manages or operates the business unjustifiably refused the Police Chief from lawfully inspecting the secondhand business premises.

5. The secondhand business, the applicant, or any person who owns, manages or operates the secondhand business has committed more than 10 violations of this chapter, the Beaverton Code, any state or federal law, or any combination thereof within the prior 24 months.

6. There is clear and convincing evidence of substantially more criminal activity within 500 feet of the secondhand business as compared to other similar businesses located in the City.

C. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection B of this section, the Police Chief may grant a secondhand dealer permit despite grounds for denial if the Police Chief concludes that the applicant has established more likely than not that the basis for denial:

1. Is unlikely to recur;

2. Is remote in time; or

3. Is not reasonably related to the purpose of this chapter.

D. If the Police Chief approves an application for a secondhand dealer permit, a permit shall be issued in the name of the secondhand business for the physical location specified by the applicant in the application form. The secondhand dealer permit is to be nontransferable and valid for one year from the date of issue. The permit shall be clearly displayed at the secondhand business in a manner readily visible to the secondhand business’s patrons.

E. If the Police Chief denies an application for a secondhand dealer permit, the Police Chief shall give the applicant written notice of the denial and refund half the fee paid for the permit to the applicant. [BC 7.10.035, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.040 Change of Place of Business.

A secondhand dealer permit is valid only at the location printed on the permit. Whenever a secondhand business changes its location within the City, the business shall give written notice to the Police Chief and shall surrender its current secondhand dealer permit for cancellation. A new permit shall be issued to the business upon payment to the City of a fee determined under Council resolution. The newly issued permit shall be valid only for the balance of the term remaining under the old permit. [BC 7.10.040, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.045 Dealer Recordkeeping of Regulated Property.

A. Secondhand dealers shall provide the Police Department with all information required by this section. The Police Chief shall require all secondhand dealers to complete a transaction report form to record their transaction. The transaction report form may request any information reasonably calculated to help the Police Chief identify the purchaser, the seller or the property associated with the transaction.

B. The Police Chief may designate the format for the transfer of information required in subsection A of this section and may direct that the information be provided to the Police Department by means of mail, the internet, or other computer media.

1. If the Police Chief directs that information be transmitted via the internet or computer media for all secondhand dealers, then the Police Chief shall require that a specific database system be used in order to ensure conformity among all secondhand dealers.

2. If, after establishing the format and requirements for the transmission of computerized reports of transactions, the Police Chief alters the required format, secondhand dealers will be provided at least 60 days to comply with the new format requirements. If a secondhand dealer is unable to implement the reporting system before the deadline, then the secondhand dealer shall submit a written request for additional time to the Police Chief before the deadline. The Police Chief may deny or approve the request depending on the reason for the request for additional time.

3. Secondhand dealers that are pawnbrokers only need to report new transactions.

C. Whenever a regular or occassional secondhand dealer acquires regulated property, the dealer shall obtain acceptable identification from the seller along with the seller’s current residence address.

D. A secondhand dealer shall complete a transaction report form at the time of the transaction. The seller shall sign his or her name on the completed form and declare that he or she is the owner on a declaration of proof of ownership form prescribed by the City. The secondhand dealer shall also take a photograph of the seller of the regulated property or take a photograph of the seller’s acceptable identification. The photograph shall show the face and shoulders of the seller. The seller shall not be photographed wearing any head-covering, dark glasses or similar object that obscures the seller’s facial features. The seller may wear untinted eyeglasses when photographed. The seller shall also provide a legible thumbprint on the transaction report form. The thumbprint shall be of the thumb of the right hand, unless the thumbprint is impractical to obtain. If the right-hand thumbprint is impractical to obtain, the seller shall provide a legible thumbprint of the left hand. If the seller cannot provide a thumbprint, then the secondhand dealer shall note the reason on the transaction report form.

E. If a secondhand dealer is required to record an acquisition of regulated property from a seller on a transaction report form, then the secondhand dealer shall assign a unique number, letter, symbol or identification mark on each article of regulated property. This unique number, letter, symbol or identification mark shall appear both on the transaction report form and, while the article is possessed by the secondhand dealer, on the article itself. The secondhand dealer shall also take a photograph of the regulated property at the time of the transaction and attach that photograph to the transaction report form.

F. Secondhand dealers shall mail or deliver to the Police Chief the original of every transaction report form completed on a given day at the end of the business day to which the transaction occurred. 

G. The Police Chief may provide copies of the report to other law enforcement agencies. The entire transaction report form is subject to public disclosure pursuant to Oregon public records law. [BC 7.10.045, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4190, 1/28/02; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.050 Holding Periods.

A. A copy of every transaction report form filled out and every photograph taken as required by this chapter shall be kept on the premises of the secondhand business during normal business hours for at least one year from the date of purchase. The transaction report form and the photograph shall be subject to inspection by the Police Chief pursuant to BC 7.10.055.

B. Except as provided by state law, all regulated property purchased by a secondhand dealer and required to be recorded on a transaction report form shall be held by the secondhand dealer for at least 25 days from the date of acquisition. The secondhand dealer shall maintain the property in substantially the same form as when acquired and shall not alter, exchange or commingle the property. During the holding period the regulated property shall be kept on the business premises during normal business hours or at an alternate business location during normal business hours. The Police Chief must first approve the alternate business location before a secondhand dealer may store regulated property at the business location. A secondhand dealer that stores regulated property at an alternate business location shall transport regulated property to the Police Chief to be inspected at its sole expense if requested by the Police Chief. Regulated property held by secondhand dealers shall be subject to inspection by the Police Chief.

C. All regulated property that has an altered, obstructed or removed serial number, inscription or other identifying mark and that is purchased by a secondhand dealer and is required to be recorded on a transaction report form shall be held by the secondhand dealer for at least 90 days from the date of purchase. The property shall be maintained in the same manner and place as required under subsection B of this section.

D. The Police Chief may give written notice to a secondhand dealer holding regulated property that the Police Chief has probable cause to believe a specific item of regulated property is associated with criminal conduct. The secondhand business holding the regulated property shall then continue to hold the property specified in the notice in the same manner and place as required under subsection B of this section until released by the Police Chief. The Police Chief may also take physical custody of that regulated property, but in no event shall the Police Chief’s physical custody exceed the statute of limitations for the crime being investigated. Any seizure of property shall be in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes.

E. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the holding period for any item of regulated property shall not exceed 180 days from the date of acquisition.

F. If unreasonable hardship will result from holding regulated property as required under this section, the secondhand dealer may request in writing that the Police Chief shorten the length of the holding period. The request should identify the property to which the request relates and state the reason extreme hardship will result if the holding period is not shortened. The Police Chief may grant a request to shorten the length of the holding period if the secondhand dealer establishes clear and convincing grounds to believe that undue hardship will occur if the request is not granted. If the Police Chief decides relief from the holding period is appropriate, the Police Chief shall provide the secondhand dealer who requested relief with written authorization to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of the regulated property. The authorization shall be effective only upon delivery of the written authorization to the secondhand dealer. [BC 7.10.050, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.053 Procedures for Release of Held or Seized Property.

A. Procedures for release of held or seized property shall be in accordance with ORS Chapter 133.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the Police Chief may release regulated property to the owner if:

1. Another law enforcement agency has provided documentation to the satisfaction of the Police Chief of the stolen status of the property; or

2. The owner reported the property as stolen; the owner filed a stolen property report with a law enforcement agency where making an untruthful report is a violation of the law; and the Police Chief provided notice to the secondhand dealer holding the property or from whom the property was seized. [BC 7.10.053, added by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.055 Inspection of Property and Records.

A. A secondhand business shall allow a representative of the Beaverton Police Department to enter the business premises to inspect the property or records of a secondhand business to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter if the representative of the Beaverton Police Department presents official identification. The inspection will be for the limited purpose of inspecting the business location, regulated property, and business and related records as provided in this chapter and any administrative rules promulgated under this chapter. Representatives of the Beaverton Police Department shall only inspect the property and records of a secondhand business during the normal business hours of the secondhand business.

B. Authority to inspect secondhand business premises under this chapter is in addition to and not a limitation of the authority that the City, the Police Chief, or representative of the Beaverton Police Department otherwise has to enter the business premises. [BC 7.10.055, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.059 Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

A. The Police Chief may suspend or revoke an issued permit if the Police Chief has probable cause to believe any of the following conditions exist:

1. The licensee, or any person who owns, manages or operates the secondhand business, within the prior five years:

a. Has had a secondhand business permit revoked for a reason that would be grounds for a denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter; or

b. The secondhand business has been found to constitute a public nuisance.

2. The licensee, or any person who owns, manages or operates the secondhand business, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving a false statement or dishonesty within the prior 15 years.

3. The licensee, or any person who owns, manages or operates the business, unjustifiably refused the Police Chief to lawfully inspect the secondhand business premises.

4. The licensee, the secondhand business, or any person who owns, manages or operates the secondhand business has committed more than 10 violations of this chapter, the Beaverton Code, any state or federal law, or any combination thereof within the prior 24 months.

5. There is clear and convincing evidence of substantially more criminal activity within 500 feet of the secondhand business as compared to other similar businesses located in the City.

6. The licensee or any person who owns, manages, or operates the secondhand business was convicted of a crime that was connected with the operation of the secondhand business.

7. A lawful inspection under BC 7.10.055 has been refused.

B. The Police Chief may choose to not suspend or revoke a secondhand dealer permit despite grounds for suspension or revocation if the Police Chief concludes that the applicant has established more likely than not that the basis for suspension or revocation:

1. Is unlikely to recur;

2. Is remote in time; or

3. Is not reasonably related to the purpose of this chapter.

C. If the Police Chief orders the revocation of an issued secondhand dealer permit, the revocation procedures shall be conducted according to BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066. The term “revocation” as found in BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066 shall be interpreted for the purpose of this chapter to mean revocation of a secondhand dealer permit. The term “licensee” as found in BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066 shall be interpreted for the purpose of this chapter to mean the secondhand dealer.

D. If the Police Chief revokes an issued permit of a secondhand dealer, no part of the secondhand dealer permit fee shall be refunded to the secondhand dealer. [BC 7.10.059, added by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.060 Penalty.

A. Violation of a provision of this chapter by a person constitutes a Class I civil infraction to be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Violation of a provision of this chapter by a person shall constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement in accordance with the provisions of BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.230.

C. A finding that a person has committed a violation of this chapter shall not act to relieve the person from the provisions of this chapter.

D. The penalties imposed by this section for violation of this chapter are in addition to and not in limitation of any other action or claim available to the City or any other governmental jurisdiction.

E. Violation of BC 7.10.017 is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 per item sold or attempted to be sold without the consent of the item’s owner. [BC 7.10.060, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; BC 7.10.060 F added by Ordinance No. 3925, 6/5/95; amended by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.063 Adoption of Administrative Policies or Procedures.

The Police Chief may adopt administrative procedures, rules, or regulations to carry out this chapter. This authority includes updating the list of regulated property at any time to enhance the Police Department’s ability to reduce property crimes and recover stolen goods; provided, however, that the Police Chief provides notice and an opportunity to comment for secondhand dealers when the list of regulated property is updated. [BC 7.10.063, added by Ordinance No. 4749, 1/8/19]


7.10.065 Repealed.

[BC 7.10.065, added by Ordinance No. 3774, 6/24/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3829, 8/24/92]


Chapter 7.12 REGULATIONS ON PAYDAY LENDING

Sections:

7.12.005    Purpose.

7.12.010    Definitions.

7.12.015    Permits.

7.12.020    Administrative Authority.

7.12.025    Cancellation of Payday Loan.

7.12.030    Renewals of Payday Loans.

7.12.035    Payment of Principal Prior to Payday Loan Renewal.

7.12.040    Payment Plan for a Payday Loan.

7.12.045    Remedies.

7.12.050    Appeals.

7.12.055    Complaints.

7.12.060    Severability.


7.12.005 Purpose.

The City finds that, in order to minimize the detrimental effects that certain payday lending practices have on individuals and families, payday lenders should require payment of a portion of the original loan amount prior to the renewal of a payday loan, borrowers should be able to rescind a payday loan, and borrowers should be able to convert a payday loan into a payment plan. This chapter shall be construed in conformity with the laws and regulations of the State of Oregon. [BC 7.12.005, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.010 Definitions. 

For the purpose of this Ordinance, unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean:

Borrower – A natural person who receives a payday loan.

Cancel – To annul the payday loan agreement and, with respect to the payday loan agreement, returning the borrower and the payday lender to their financial condition prior to the origination date of the payday loan.

Mayor – The City Mayor or designee.

Payday lender – A lender in the business of making payday loans as defined by state law.

Payday loan – A payday loan as defined by state law.

Principal – The original loan proceeds advanced for the benefit of the borrower in a payday loan excluding any fee or interest charge. [BC 7.12.010, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.015 Permits.

Within 60 days of the effective date of this Ordinance, any payday lender operating in the City of Beaverton shall apply for and obtain a permit to operate as a payday lender. Permits shall be required for each location a lender operates in the City of Beaverton and shall be renewed annually. The application shall be in a form to be determined by the Mayor. The Mayor shall require the payday lender to report its fee schedule in the payday lender’s permit application. No person shall operate a payday lending business or loan any funds as a payday loan without a current permit to do business issued by the City of Beaverton. The amount of the fee shall be set by Council resolution. [BC 7.12.015, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.020 Administrative Authority.

A. The Mayor is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this Ordinance. The Mayor shall have the power to investigate any and all complaints regarding alleged violations of this Ordinance. The Mayor may delegate any or all authority granted under this section to a designee.

B. The Mayor is authorized to adopt and enforce rules interpreting and applying this Ordinance. The Mayor shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law to support all decisions.

C. The City of Beaverton reserves the right to review and/or copy the records of any payday lender for purposes of auditing or complaint resolution. Such records shall be made available for inspection during normal business hours within 24 hours of written notice by the Mayor. [BC 7.12.020, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.025 Cancellation of Payday Loan.

A. A payday lender shall cancel a payday loan without any charge to the borrower if prior to the close of the business day following the day on which the payday loan originated, the borrower:

1. Informs the payday lender in writing that the borrower wishes to cancel the payday loan and any future payment obligations; and

2. Returns to the payday lender the uncashed check or proceeds given to the borrower by the payday lender or cash in an amount equal to the principal amount of the payday loan.

B. A payday lender shall conspicuously disclose to each borrower that the right to cancel a payday loan as described in this section is available to the borrower. The payday lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12 point type. [BC 7.12.025, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.030 Renewals of Payday Loans.

A payday lender shall not renew an existing payday loan more than two times. [BC 7.12.030, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.035 Payment of Principal Prior to Payday Loan Renewal.

A payday lender may not renew a payday loan unless the borrower has paid an amount equal to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal of the original payday loan, plus interest on the remaining balance of the payday loan. The payday lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12 point type. [BC 7.12.035, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.040 Payment Plan for a Payday Loan.

A. A payday lender and a borrower may agree to a payment plan for a payday loan at any time.

B. A payday lender shall disclose to each borrower that a payment plan described in this section is available to the borrower after two renewals of the loan. The payday lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12 point type.

C. After a payday loan has been renewed twice, and prior to payday lender declaring a default on the payday loan, a payday lender shall allow a borrower to convert the borrower’s payday loan into a payment plan. Each payment plan shall be in writing and acknowledged by both the payday lender and the borrower.

D. The payday lender shall not assess any fee, interest charge or other charge to the borrower as a result of converting the payday loan into a payment plan.

E. The payment plan shall provide for the payment of the total of payments due on the payday loan over a period of no fewer than 60 days in three or more payments. The borrower may pay the total of payments due on the payment plan at any time. The payday lender may not assess any penalty, fee or other charge to the borrower for prepayment of the payment plan.

F. A payday lender’s violation of the terms of a payment plan entered into with a borrower under this section constitutes a violation of this Ordinance. If a payday lender enters into a payment plan with a borrower through a third party that is representing the borrower, the payday lender’s failure to comply with the terms of that payment plan constitutes a violation of this Ordinance. [BC 7.12.040, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.045 Remedies.

A. Failure to comply with any part of this chapter or the administrative rules may be punishable by civil penalties. The Mayor may impose a civil penalty of up to $1,500.00 for a substantial violation of this Ordinance or the administrative rules. A substantial violation is a violation having an impact on the public, as determined by the Mayor, that informal compliance methods fail to resolve. Each substantial violation may be assessed a separate civil penalty.

B. Civil penalties shall be payable to the City of Beaverton.

C. Civil Remedies. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any person from pursuing any available legal remedies.

D. No civil penalties shall be assessed within 60 days of the effective date of this Ordinance. [BC 7.12.045, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.050 Appeals.

Any person upon whom a civil penalty has been imposed, or who has been directed by the Mayor to resolve a complaint, may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the Mayor. The City Council shall consider the appeal. [BC 7.12.050, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.055 Complaints.

A. The Mayor shall have the authority to investigate any and all complaints alleging violation of this Ordinance or administrative rules.

B. The Mayor may receive complaints from borrowers by telephone or in writing. Within a reasonable time, the Mayor shall forward the complaint by telephone or in writing to the payday lender it concerns for investigation.

C. The payday lender shall investigate the allegations of the complaint and report the results of the investigation and the proposed resolution of the complaint to the Mayor by telephone or in writing within two (2) business days from initial contact by the Mayor.

D. If the proposed resolution is satisfactory to the Mayor, the payday lender shall proceed to resolve the complaint directly with the borrower according to the resolution proposed to the Mayor.

E. If the proposed resolution is not satisfactory to the Mayor, the Mayor shall conduct an independent investigation of the alleged complaint and propose an alternative resolution of the complaint. If the payday lender accepts the proposed alternative resolution and offers it to the borrower, the complaint shall be final. If the payday lender refuses to accept and implement the proposed alternative resolution it shall be subject to remedies as provided in BC 7.12.045. In the event of imposition of remedies, the payday lender may appeal as provided in BC 7.12.050. [BC 7.12.055, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


7.12.060 Severability.

If any provision of this Ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, is declared invalid or unenforceable the remainder of the Ordinance and its application to other persons and circumstances, other than that which has been held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected, and the affected provision of the Ordinance shall be severed. [BC 7.12.060, added by Ordinance No. 4394, 7/10/06]


Chapter 7.14 RELAXATION TREATMENT AND RELATED BUSINESSES

Sections:

7.14.005    Repealed.

7.14.010    Repealed.

7.14.015    Repealed.

7.14.020    Repealed.

7.14.025    Repealed.

7.14.030    Repealed.

7.14.035    Repealed.

7.14.040    Repealed.

7.14.045    Repealed.

7.14.050    Repealed.

7.14.055    Repealed.

7.14.060    Repealed.

7.14.065    Repealed.

7.14.070    Repealed.

7.14.075    Repealed.

7.14.080    Repealed.

7.14.085    Repealed.

7.14.090    Repealed.

7.14.095    Repealed.


7.14.005 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.005, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.010 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.015 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.015, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.020 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.020, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.025 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.025, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.030 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.030, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.035 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.035, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.040 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.040, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.045 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.045, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.050 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.050, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.055 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.055, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.060 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.060, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.065 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.065, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.070 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.070, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.075 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.075, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.080 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.080, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.085 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.085, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.090 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.090, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


7.14.095 Repealed.

[BC 7.14.095, repealed by Ordinance No. 4196, 2/11/02]


Chapter 7.15 ALARMS

Sections:

7.15.005    Short Title.

7.15.010    Purpose and Scope.

7.15.015    Definitions.

7.15.020    Alarm Permits Required – Exceptions.

7.15.025    Application for Alarm Permit – Confidentiality.

7.15.030    Alarm Permit Fees – Exemptions.

7.15.035    Delinquency Fees.

7.15.040    Permit Display.

7.15.045    Consent to Protective Sweep of Building, Structure, or Facility.

7.15.050    False Alarms.

7.15.055    Appeal Procedure for False Alarm Fees.

7.15.060    Alarm Termination.

7.15.065    Automatic Dialing Device.

7.15.070    Alarm Business Requirements.

7.15.075    Penalties.


7.15.005 Short Title.

This section through BC 7.15.075 shall be known and may be cited as the “Alarm Ordinance” and may also be referred to as “this chapter.” [BC 7.15.005, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.010 Purpose and Scope.

The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to properly use and maintain alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and protect the emergency services of the City from misuse by governing alarm systems, requiring permits, establishing fees, and providing penalties for violations. [BC 7.15.010, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.015 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following mean:

“Alarm business” means any business by any individual, partnership, corporation, company or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, monitoring, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, monitored, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility.

“Alarm coordinator” means an individual designated by the City to manage and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

“Alarm system” means any device or series of devices including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as a cellular or private radio signal, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual, or electronic signal arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond.

“Alarm user” means any person who owns, leases, operates, or maintains an alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility.

“Automatic dialing device” means a device connected to a communication line and programmed to select a predetermined phone number and transmits by voice message or code signal to a dispatch service or agency indicating an urgent need for police.

“Deactivate or deactivation” means removal from any power source.

“False alarm” means an alarm signal that elicits an urgent response for police, when circumstances reasonably justifying such a response do not exist at the time the alarm signal was transmitted. This includes the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the alarm user or alarm user’s employee or agent. The term does not include an alarm signal transmitted because of violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.

“Notice” means written notice served through the last-known electronic mailing address, or served through first-class mail of the last known mailing address of the recipient.

Person. See BC 1.01.020 (“Person”).

“Unsecured” means a door that is unlocked or an open door or window.

“Vehicle alarm system” means a silent or audible alarm system that is a part of a vehicle. [BC 7.15.015, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.020 Alarm Permits Required – Exceptions.

A. An alarm user shall obtain an alarm permit from the City if the alarm user owns, leases, operates, or maintains an alarm system that is capable of signaling the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. The alarm permit is valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. No person shall own, lease, operate, or maintain an alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility without a valid alarm permit.

B. An alarm user shall provide notice to the alarm coordinator within 15 days of deactivation of an alarm system.

C. Exceptions. An alarm user need not obtain an alarm permit for:

1. The use of any alarm system installed in a vehicle, including a mobile alarm system; 

2. The use of any alarm system dedicated to signaling the occurrence of a fire; or

3. Alarm systems located on real property that becomes a part of the City, if a county has issued an alarm permit regarding the alarm system and the alarm permit is valid on the date the property becomes subject to the City’s jurisdiction. This exception ends on the date when the alarm permit issued by the county would have expired or otherwise would have terminated had the property not become a part of the City. [BC 7.15.020, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 3730, 6/25/90; and Ordinance No. 3834(1), 11/9/92; Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.025 Application for Alarm Permit – Confidentiality.

A. A person required to obtain an alarm permit under BC 7.15.020 shall apply to the City for an alarm permit upon forms supplied by the City. The person shall provide notice to the alarm coordinator if there is a change in any of the information provided on the permit application form within 15 days following the change.

B. A person required to obtain an alarm permit shall complete the permit application forms completely and accurately. The City may require that a person provide the following information on the application form:

1. The street address and telephone number of the location where the alarm system is used.

2. The name, address, electronic mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant.

3. The address where notices regarding the alarm system are to be mailed.

4. Whether the alarm is audible, silent or both.

5. If the alarm activates, whether the police will be contacted by an alarm monitoring company or similar entity and, if so, the name and 24-hour telephone number of the monitoring company.

6. In order of priority, the name and telephone number of at least three persons, including the applicant, who can be contacted to assist the police in turning off the alarm, investigating suspected criminal activity or resolving other issues that may arise in connection with the alarm system.

7. The nature of the business conducted where the alarm system is located.

8. The type of residence (such as house, condominium, townhome, apartment or other) where the alarm system is located.

9. The names of the people normally residing at the residence where the alarm system is located.

10. The breed and name of any dog normally present where the alarm system is located, if any, and information regarding whether the dog is commonly kept inside, outside or in a kennel.

11. Whether the applicant is 65 years of age or older and is requesting an exemption from the required payment of an alarm permit fee.

C. Information submitted to the City on an alarm permit application form is considered confidential and exempt from public disclosure. [BC 7.15.025, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; BC 7.15.025 (B)(4) and (B)(5), amended by Ordinance No. 3730, 6/25/90; and Ordinance No. 3834(2), 11/9/92; Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.030 Alarm Permit Fees – Exemptions.

A. At the time the alarm user submits a completed application, the alarm user shall pay an alarm permit fee to the City in an amount determined by Council resolution.

B. Exemptions. An individual over the age of 65 may request that the alarm permit be waived for an alarm system located in or on the individual’s primary residence if (1) the individual resides in Beaverton for the majority of the calendar year, and (2) conducts no business at the individual’s primary residence. [BC 7.15.030, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; BC 7.15.030(D)(3) amended by Ordinance No. 3730, 6/25/90; Ordinance No. 3834(3), 11/9/92; Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.035 Delinquency Fees.

A. An alarm user is subject to a delinquency fee if the alarm user:

1. Fails to obtain a permit within 15 days following the installation of a new alarm system; or

2. Fails to obtain a permit within 15 days following written notice of the need to obtain an alarm system permit; or

3. Fails to renew a permit within 15 days following the date of expiration of the permit; or

4. Fails to report a change in any of the information provided on the permit application form within 15 days following the change. An alarm user shall not be subject to a delinquency fee if the alarm user reports a change in information provided on the permit application form within 15 days of the date of the change and it is the same alarm user.

B. Delinquency fees shall be set by Council resolution. [BC 7.15.035, added by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.040 Permit Display.

An alarm user shall post the alarm permit issued by the City upon each building, structure, or facility with an associated alarm system. The alarm permit shall be posted near the main entrance of the building, structure, or facility and in a manner reasonably calculated to be visible to a responding police officer. [BC 7.15.040, added by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.045 Consent to Protective Sweep of Building, Structure, or Facility.

A. An alarm user may grant the City permission to enter and perform a protective sweep of a building, structure, or facility associated with an alarm permit issued by the City.

B. If the alarm user grants permission, a responding police officer may conduct the protective sweep only if the alarm system has been activated; the building, structure, or facility is unsecured or shows signs of forcible entry; and no responsible person is immediately available to give or refuse consent to enter.

C. The City shall solicit permission for the protective sweep of the building, structure, or facility through a consent form supplied by the City. If the alarm user fills out and returns the consent form to the City, the alarm user grants permission to a responding police officer to perform a protective sweep and certifies that the alarm user has actual authority to provide consent.

D. If the alarm user does not grant permission, the alarm coordinator shall notify the Washington County Consolidated Communications Agency (WCCCA) of all buildings, structures, or facilities where the alarm user does not grant consent. The alarm coordinator shall also request that WCCCA put a flag in its database that notifies responding police officers of the alarm user’s lack of consent for that alarm user’s building, structure, or facility. [BC 7.15.045, added by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.050 False Alarms.

A. Whenever an alarm system is activated and a police officer is dispatched, police personnel shall determine whether the alarm is a false alarm.

B. An alarm user whose alarm system sets off three or more false alarms within a calendar year is subject to a fee. The alarm user shall pay the fee within 15 days following issuance of notice to the alarm user.

C. An alarm user whose alarm system has four or more false alarms within 30 days shall not continue to operate or maintain the alarm system unless the alarm user has taken corrective measures.

1. After the alarm user has taken corrective measures, the alarm user shall inform the alarm coordinator about the corrective measures that the alarm user took within 30 days of taking the corrective measures.

2. An alarm user who continues to operate or maintain an alarm system without taking corrective measures is subject to a fee. The alarm user shall pay the fee within 15 days following issuance of notice to the alarm user.

D. False alarm fees shall be set by Council resolution. [BC 7.15.035, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; BC 7.15.035(A), amended by Ordinance No. 3730, 6/25/90; BC 7.15.035(B) and (C) amended by Ordinance No. 3834(4), 11/9/92; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16. Formerly 7.15.035]


7.15.055 Appeal Procedure for False Alarm Fees.

A. An alarm user whose system has set off a false alarm may appeal the finding to the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee in writing within 15 days following issuance of notice from the City.

B. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee shall serve as the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall not be the alarm coordinator. The burden of proof shall be upon the alarm user to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the alarm signal was not a false alarm.

C. The hearing officer shall review all relevant evidence provided by the alarm user and shall render a decision within seven calendar days after receiving that information from the alarm user. The hearing officer shall thereafter send a copy of the decision to the alarm user and alarm coordinator. If the hearing officer determines that the alarm user:

1. Has met the burden of proof, then the hearing officer shall rescind the false alarm determination; or

2. Has not met the burden of proof, then the hearing officer may enter the alarm as a false alarm and the alarm user shall pay any applicable fee assessed by the City. [BC 7.15.040, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16. Formerly 7.15.040]


7.15.060 Alarm Termination.

A. If a police officer responds to an audible alarm and the alarm system continues to transmit an audible signal for 15 minutes after (1) a responsible party or designated person has been requested to stop the alarm from sounding, or (2) no responsible party or designated person is available to respond, then the officer may disable the alarm and secure the premises.

B. Neither the City nor its employees shall be held responsible for damages resulting from (1) disabling an alarm, (2) securing the premises, (3) failing to disable an alarm, or (4) failing to secure the premises.

C. Any costs incurred by the City in disabling the alarm or securing the premises shall be the responsibility of the alarm user. [BC 7.15.050, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16. Formerly 7.15.050]


7.15.065 Automatic Dialing Device.

A. No person shall program an automatic dialing device to dial a number, including 9-1-1, that directly solicits a police response.

B. A person shall deactivate an automatic dialing device that is in violation of this section within 12 hours after receiving notice from the City to deactivate the device. [BC 7.15.055, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4085, 2/7/00; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16. Formerly 7.15.055]


7.15.070 Alarm Business Requirements.

A. An alarm business that installs a new alarm system or new control panel on any property subject to this chapter shall use only control panels that are approved by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and meet the SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 or its equivalent. An alarm business shall provide a record demonstrating compliance with this subsection upon request by the City.

B. An alarm business that monitors alarm systems located within the City and subject to this chapter shall, prior to making a police alarm dispatch request, do the following:

1. Attempt a verification call to the building, structure, or facility where the alarm system has been activated;

2. If no responsible party is located on the initial verification call, attempt a second verification call to a cell phone, mobile device, or other alternative contact method designated by the alarm user.

An alarm business shall provide a record demonstrating compliance with this subsection upon request by the City.

C. An alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to an alarm user an alarm system subject to this chapter shall furnish the alarm user with the following:

1. Written instructional information on proper operational procedures for the alarm system;

2. Information on how to obtain service for the alarm system at any time;

3. The requirements and application to obtain an alarm permit from the City; and

4. The consequences of generating false alarms, including possible fees.

D. An alarm business shall include the corresponding Beaverton alarm permit number when requesting an emergency response to an alarm event.

E. An alarm business that fails to comply with the requirements of this section is subject to a fine for each violation. The alarm business shall pay the fine within 15 days following issuance of notice from the City. The amount of the fine shall be set by Council resolution. [BC 7.15.070, added by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16]


7.15.075 Penalties.

A. Violation of this chapter constitutes a Class 1 civil infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense, and each day that violation of this chapter is committed, or is permitted to continue, constitutes a separate offense.

C. A finding that a person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this chapter shall not act to relieve the person from the provisions of this chapter.

D. Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter may also be subject to fines and fees in addition to the penalties described in this section. Any fines or fees assessed pursuant to this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil or administrative penalty, sanction or remedy otherwise authorized by law. [BC 7.15.060, added by Ordinance No. 3647, 11/28/88; amended by Ordinance No. 4690, 7/19/16. Formerly 7.15.060]


Chapter 7.17 SHOPPING CARTS

Sections:

7.17.005    Short Title.

7.17.010    Requirements for Shopping Cart Providers.

7.17.020    Retrieval and Disposal of Carts, Fees.


7.17.005 Short Title. 

BC 7.17.005 through 7.17.020 shall be known and may be cited as the “Shopping Cart Ordinance.” [BC 7.17.005, added by Ordinance No. 4468, 1/7/08]


7.17.010 Requirements for Shopping Cart Providers.

A. A person that supplies shopping carts for public use at the person’s business shall:

1. Post signs in sufficient number to give notice to members of the public entering onto or leaving the business premises that unauthorized appropriation of a shopping cart is a crime under ORS 164.015, and provide a toll-free or local telephone number that members of the public may use to report abandoned shopping carts; and

2. Identify the person’s business on each shopping cart and post a sign on the shopping cart that:

a. Notifies any member of the public using the shopping cart that unauthorized appropriation of a shopping cart is a crime under ORS 164.015; and

b. Provides a toll-free or local telephone number for use in reporting an abandoned shopping cart; and 

3. Establish, maintain and make available to the public, at the person’s own expense, a toll-free or local telephone line for the purpose of reporting abandoned shopping carts. If the person who provides the carts has a contractor who receives the calls concerning abandoned shopping carts, that contractor shall forward each report the contractor receives concerning an abandoned shopping cart to the owner of the shopping cart and to the City’s Code Enforcement Office within one business day after the contractor receives the report;

4. Retrieve or contract for the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts. [BC 7.17.010, added by Ordinance No. 4468, 1/7/08]


7.17.020 Retrieval and Disposal of Carts, Fees.

A. A person may agree with other persons to share and to pay expenses related to the toll-free telephone line described in BC 7.17.010(A)(3). The agreement shall provide that any person designated to operate the toll-free telephone line and receive reports concerning abandoned shopping carts must forward the reports in accordance with BC 7.17.010(A)(3).

B. A person shall retrieve a shopping cart that the person owns within 72 hours after receiving notification that the shopping cart has been abandoned.

C. If the City identifies, salvages or reclaims an abandoned shopping cart, it shall use the toll-free telephone line described in BC 7.17.010(A)(3) to report the existence and location of an abandoned shopping cart to the owner of the shopping cart, if the owner is identifiable.

D. The City may take custody of an abandoned shopping cart and impose a fine of $50.00 on the owner of the shopping cart if the owner does not retrieve the shopping cart within 72 hours after the City makes a report under subsection (C) of this section or after the owner receives a report under BC 7.17.010(A)(3).

E. The City may release a shopping cart held in the City of Beaverton’s custody to the owner upon payment of the $50.00 fine.

F. The City may take title to a shopping cart in the City of Beaverton’s custody and dispose of the shopping cart as the City of Beaverton deems appropriate, if the owner does not claim the shopping cart within 30 days. 

G. A City Code Enforcement Officer may issue citations for the commission of a violation of this shopping cart chapter. A violation proceeding under this chapter shall be processed in accordance with ORS Chapter 153. [BC 7.17.020, added by Ordinance No. 4468, 1/7/08]


Chapter 7.18 LODGING TAX

Sections:

7.18.005    Short Title.

7.18.010    Purpose and Intent.

7.18.015    Definitions.

7.18.020    Rate and Computation of Tax – Total Retail Price – Collector Reimbursement.

7.18.025    Travel Packages – Services Included in the Fee for Lodging.

7.18.030    Tax Exemptions.

7.18.035    Collection of Tax.

7.18.040    Rules and Regulations.

7.18.045    Records and Statements.

7.18.050    Audit.

7.18.055    Special Fund Deposit.

7.18.060    Registration of Transient Lodging Tax Collector.

7.18.065    Due Date, Returns, Payments and Collection Charges.

7.18.070    Payment Schedule Changes.

7.18.075    Penalties and Interest – Lien.

7.18.080    Deficiency Determination.

7.18.085    Evasion – Determination – Assessment.

7.18.090    Fraud – Refusal to Collect – Evasion.

7.18.095    Redetermination – Petition.

7.18.100    Security for Collection of Tax.

7.18.105    Collection.

7.18.110    Refunds to Transient Lodging Tax Collector.

7.18.115    Refunds to Transient.

7.18.120    Compromise of Tax.

7.18.125    Review.

7.18.130    Alternative Remittance of Receipts from Tax on Camping and Recreational Vehicle Spaces.

7.18.135    Use of Tax Revenue.

7.18.140    Conformity with Law.

7.18.145    Severability.

7.18.150    Violations – Penalties.

7.18.155    Remedies Cumulative.


7.18.005 Short Title.

This section to BC 7.18.160 shall be known and may be cited as the “Beaverton Lodging Tax Ordinance” and may be referred herein as “this chapter.” [BC 7.18.005, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.010 Purpose and Intent.

A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to impose a tax on transient occupants of transient lodging in Beaverton, the proceeds of which will be used as provided in BC 7.18.135 (Use of Tax Revenue).

B. The local transient lodging tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to and not in lieu of the Washington County transient lodging tax collected within the corporate limits of the City.

C. The local transient lodging tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to and not in lieu of any State transient lodging tax. [BC 7.18.010, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.015 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “Accrual accounting” means that the transient lodging tax collector enters the rent due from a transient on his or her records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

B. “Cash accounting” means the transient lodging tax collector does not enter the rent due from a transient on his or her records until the rent is paid.

C. “Collection reimbursement charge” means the amount a transient lodging tax collector may retain as reimbursement for the costs incurred by the transient lodging tax collector in collecting and reporting a transient lodging tax and in maintaining transient lodging tax records.

D. “Conference center” means a facility that:

1. Is owned or partially owned by a unit of local government, a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization; and

2. Meets the current membership criteria of the International Association of Conference Centers.

E. “Convention center” means a new or improved facility that:

1. Is capable of attracting and accommodating conventions and trade shows from international, national and regional markets requiring exhibition space, ballroom space, meeting rooms and any other associated space, including without limitation banquet facilities, loading areas and lobby and registration areas;

2. Has a total meeting room and ballroom space between one-third and one-half of the total size of the center’s exhibition space;

3. Generates a majority of its business income from tourists;

4. Has a room-block relationship with the local lodging industry; and

5. Is owned by a unit of local government, a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization.

F. “Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a transient lodging.

G. “Rent” means any consideration rendered for the sale, service or furnishing of transient lodging.

H. “Tax Administrator” means the Finance Director of the City of Beaverton, Oregon, or the Finance Director’s designee.

I. “Tourism” means economic activity resulting from tourists.

J. “Tourism promotion” means any of the following activities:

1. Advertising, publicizing or distributing information for the purpose of attracting and welcoming tourists;

2. Conducting strategic planning and research necessary to stimulate future tourism development;

3. Operating tourism promotion agencies; and

4. Marketing special events and festivals designed to attract tourists.

K. “Tourism promotion agency” includes:

1. An incorporated nonprofit organization or governmental unit that is responsible for the tourism promotion of a destination on a year-round basis.

2. A nonprofit entity that manages tourism-related economic development plans, programs and projects.

3. A regional or statewide association that represents entities that rely on tourism-related business for more than 50 percent of their total income.

L. “Tourism-related facility” means:

1. A conference center, convention center or visitor information center; and

2. Other improved real property that has a useful life of 10 or more years and has a substantial purpose of supporting tourism or accommodating tourist activities.

M. “Tourist” means a person who, for business, pleasure, recreation or participation in events related to the arts, heritage or culture, travels from the community in which that person is a resident to a different community that is separate, distinct from and unrelated to the person’s community of residence, and that trip:

1. Requires the person to travel more than 50 miles from the community of residence; or

2. Includes an overnight stay.

N. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in transient lodging for a period of less than 30 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day an individual checks out of the transient lodging is not included in determining the 30-day period if the individual is not charged rent for that day. Any such individual so occupying or entitled to occupy space in transient lodging shall be deemed a transient for purposes of this chapter until the period of 29 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the transient lodging tax collector and the transient providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. A human being who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a “transient.”

O. “Transient lodging” means:

1. Hotel, motel and inn dwelling units that are used for temporary overnight human occupancy;

2. Spaces used for parking recreational vehicles or erecting tents during periods of human occupancy; or

3. Houses, cabins, condominiums, apartment units or other dwelling units, or portions of any of these dwelling units, used for temporary human occupancy.

P. “Transient lodging intermediary” means a person other than a transient lodging provider that facilitates the retail sale of transient lodging and:

1. Charges for occupancy of the transient lodging;

2. Collects the consideration charged for occupancy of the transient lodging; or

3. Receives a fee or commission and requires the transient lodging provider to use a specified third-party entity to collect the consideration charged for occupancy of the transient lodging.

Q. “Transient lodging provider” means a person who furnishes transient lodging, and includes a person who operates a transient lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owner, managing agent, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, concessionaire, or any other capacity.

R. “Transient lodging tax collector” means a transient lodging provider or a transient lodging intermediary.

S. “Visitor information center” means a building, or a portion of a building, the main purpose of which is to distribute or disseminate information to tourists. [BC 7.18.015, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16; amended by Ordinance No. 4737, 7/24/18]


7.18.020 Rate and Computation of Tax – Total Retail Price – Collector Reimbursement.

A. For the privilege of occupancy in any transient lodging within the corporate limits of the City on or after October 1, 2016, each transient shall pay a tax of four percent of the rent.

1. The tax must be computed on the total retail price, including all charges other than taxes, paid by a person for occupancy of the transient lodging.

2. The total retail price paid by a person for occupancy of transient lodging that is part of a travel package may be determined by reasonable and verifiable standards from books and records kept in the ordinary course of the transient lodging tax collector’s business.

3. The tax shall be collected by the transient lodging tax collector that collects the consideration charged for occupancy of the transient lodging or that receives a fee or commission and requires the transient lodging provider to use a specified third-party entity to collect the consideration charged for occupancy of the transient lodging.

4. The tax imposed by this subsection is in addition to and not in lieu of any other local transient lodging tax collected within the corporate limits of the City.

B. The transient lodging tax collector may withhold a collection reimbursement charge of five percent of the amount collected under subsection A of this section.

C. The City Council may adjust by resolution the collection reimbursement charge provided in subsection B of this section, provided the amount is not less than five percent of the amount collected under subsection A of this section. [BC 7.18.020, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16; amended by Ordinance No. 4737, 7/24/18]


7.18.025 Travel Packages – Services Included in the Fee for Lodging.

A. If a separate fee is charged for a service and the service is optional, that fee is not subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

B. If a separate fee is charged for a service and the service is not optional, or if the value of a service is included in the normal lodging rate, the amount allocated to the service is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

C. If the provider offers a lodging package that includes something that is not associated with the actual lodging or is provided by a third party, only the regular lodging rate that would have been charged absent the package item is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

D. Any allocation made for the City’s local transient lodging tax should be consistent with the allocation for the State transient lodging tax. [BC 7.18.025, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.030 Tax Exemptions.

A. The following are exempt from the tax imposed under this chapter:

1. A dwelling unit in a hospital, health care facility, long term care facility or any other residential facility that is licensed, registered or certified by the Department of Human Services or the Oregon Health Authority;

2. A dwelling unit in a facility providing treatment for drug or alcohol abuse or providing mental health treatment;

3. A dwelling unit that is used by members of the general public for temporary human occupancy for fewer than 30 days per year;

4. A dwelling unit, the consideration for which is funded through a contract with a government agency and the purpose of which is to provide emergency or temporary shelter;

5. A dwelling unit at a charitable nonprofit youth or church camp, charitable nonprofit conference center or other charitable nonprofit facility;

6. A dwelling unit that is leased or otherwise occupied by the same person for a consecutive period of 30 days or more during the year. For purposes of this subsection, a dwelling unit leased for a consecutive period of 30 days or more during the year by one person but occupied by one or more other persons for a consecutive period of less than 30 days is not exempt from the tax imposed under this chapter during each person’s occupancy that is for a consecutive period of less than 30 days. The requirements of this subsection are satisfied even if the physical dwelling unit changes during the consecutive period, if:

a. All dwelling units occupied are within the same facility; and

b. The person paying consideration for the transient lodging is the same person throughout the consecutive period. [BC 7.18.030, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.035 Collection of Tax.

A. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City that is extinguished only by payment to the transient lodging tax collector or to the City.

B. The transient shall pay the tax to the transient lodging tax collector at the time the rent is paid.

C. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the transient lodging tax collector’s business records, including lodging receipts provided to transients.

D. The transient lodging tax collector shall enter the tax on the transient lodging tax collector’s records when rent is collected if the transient lodging tax collector keeps records on the cash accounting basis or, if the transient lodging tax collector keeps records on the accrual accounting basis, when rent is earned. If rent is paid in installments, the transient shall pay a proportionate share of the tax to the transient lodging tax collector with each installment.

E. The tax collected or accrued by the transient lodging tax collector, or which should have been charged by the transient lodging tax collector, constitutes a debt owing by the transient lodging tax collector to the City.

F. In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent for transient lodging, the payment of tax to the transient lodging tax collector may be deferred until the rent is paid. A transient lodging tax collector is not liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. The deferral allowed by this subsection does not excuse a transient lodging tax collector from liability for any failure to collect the tax due.

G. A transient lodging tax collector shall not collect, report or remit amounts of the transient lodging tax imposed by this chapter in amounts smaller than one cent. Fractions of cents calculated as an amount of tax that is collectable, reportable or remittable may be ignored.

H. If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid by the transient to the transient lodging tax collector, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax be paid by the transient directly to the City. [BC 7.18.035, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.040 Rules and Regulations.

A. The Tax Administrator shall administer and enforce provisions of this chapter and has the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

B. Prior to the adoption of rules and regulations, the Tax Administrator shall give public notice of its intent to adopt rules and regulations, provide copies of the proposed rules and regulations to interested parties, and conduct a public hearing on the proposed rules and regulations. Public notice shall be given when rules and regulations have been finally adopted. Copies of current rules and regulations shall be made available to the public upon request.

C. Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “this chapter” herein includes any rules and regulations duly adopted by the Tax Administrator. [BC 7.18.040, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.045 Records and Statements.

A. The transient lodging tax collector shall keep records, render statements and comply with rules adopted by the Tax Administrator with respect to the tax imposed by this chapter. The records and statements required by this section must be sufficient to show whether there is a tax liability under this chapter. The transient lodging tax collector shall retain all records for a period of at least three years and six months from the end of the month in which the record was originally created.

B. The Tax Administrator may examine, during normal business hours, the books, papers and accounting records relating to room rentals of any transient lodging tax collector after notification to the transient lodging tax collector liable for the tax and may investigate the business of the transient lodging tax collector to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the transient lodging tax collector, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.

C. Records, reports or returns submitted to the Tax Administrator are exempt from disclosure to the full extent provided for by State statute. Nothing in this subsection is to be construed to prohibit:

1. The disclosure to, or the examination of, financial records by City officials, employees or agents for the purpose of administering or enforcing the terms of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed under the terms of this chapter, or collecting City business license fees;

2. The disclosure to the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s authorized representative of financial information, including amounts of transient lodgings taxes, penalties, or interest, after filing of a written request by the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s authorized representative and approval of the request by the Tax Administrator;

3. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom a transient occupancy registration certificate has been issued;

4. The disclosure of general statistics in a form that prevents the identification of financial information regarding any particular taxpayer’s return or application; or

5. The disclosure of financial information to the City Attorney or other legal representatives of the City, to the extent the Tax Administrator deems disclosure or access necessary for the performance of the duties of advising or representing the City. [BC 7.18.045, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.050 Audit.

A. The Tax Administrator may audit the transient lodging records of a transient lodging tax collector subject to this chapter. The transient lodging tax collector shall comply with all requests by the Tax Administrator in a timely manner.

B. A person who fails to comply in a timely manner with a request of the Tax Administrator relating to or arising out of an audit under this section commits a violation of this chapter. [BC 7.18.050, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.055 Special Fund Deposit.

The Tax Administrator shall deposit all money collected pursuant to this chapter into a special revenue fund designated by the City Council to be allocated for expenditures pursuant to State Local Budget Law. [BC 7.18.055, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.060 Registration of Transient Lodging Tax Collector.

A. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a transient lodging tax collector of a transient lodging in the City shall register with the City on a form provided by the Tax Administrator. A transient lodging tax collector engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register not later than 30 calendar days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. A transient lodging tax collector starting business after the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax does not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration.

B. The registration form may request, and person registering with the City shall provide, the name under which the transient lodging tax collector transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the Tax Administrator may require. The transient lodging tax collector shall sign the registration.

C. Within 10 days after the submittal of a completed registration form, the Tax Administrator shall issue at no charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates are nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Tax Administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

D. The certificate of authority described in this section shall, among other things, state the following:

1. The name of the transient lodging tax collector;

2. The address of the transient lodging;

3. The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

4. The following:

This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Lodging Tax Ordinance of Beaverton, Oregon, by registration with the tax administrator for the purposes of collection from transients the lodging tax imposed by the city of Beaverton and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a transient lodging without strictly complying with all of the local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit form any board, commission, department or office of the city of Beaverton. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

[BC 7.18.060, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.065 Due Date, Returns, Payments and Collection Charges.

A. The taxes imposed by this chapter and collected by a transient lodging tax collector, less the collection reimbursement charge allowed under BC 7.18.020, are due and payable to the Tax Administrator on a monthly basis on the tenth day of the month for the preceding month. All taxes not remitted on the last day of the month in which they are due are delinquent.

B. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each month of collection, a return for the preceding month’s tax collections shall be filed with the Tax Administrator. The returns shall be filed in such form as the Tax Administrator may prescribe.

C. The returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period covered by the return. The Tax Administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of the transient lodging tax collector for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, the amount of rents exempt, if any, and such other information as may otherwise be necessary for the administration of this chapter.

D. The transient lodging tax collector shall deliver the return, together with the tax due, to the Tax Administrator at the Tax Administrator’s office either by personal delivery or mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery. The Tax Administrator may provide in writing for other methods of delivery besides personal delivery or mail.

E. For good cause shown, the Tax Administrator may extend, for a period not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. Any transient lodging tax collector granted an extension shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties under this chapter. [BC 7.18.065, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.070 Payment Schedule Changes.

The Tax Administrator may require an transient lodging tax collector to file returns and to remit taxes on other than a monthly basis if, in the exercise of the reasonable discretion of the Tax Administrator, the change in payment schedule is needed to ensure payment or to facilitate collection taxes in an individual case. Any change in schedule under this section shall be stated in writing delivered to the transient lodging tax collector at least 20 days in advance of the schedule change. [BC 7.18.070, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.075 Penalties and Interest – Lien.

A. A transient lodging tax collector who fails to remit the full amount of the tax imposed and due by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay a late payment penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the portion of the tax that is unpaid as of the delinquency date, which penalty is owed in addition to the amount of the tax due.

B. If the transient lodging tax collector does not pay the delinquent amount of tax due and the 10 percent late payment penalty within 30 days following the delinquency date, the transient lodging tax collector shall pay a second late payment penalty of 15 percent of the portion of the tax that remains unpaid as of the date that is 30 days following the delinquency date, which penalty is owed in addition to the remaining unpaid amount of the tax and first late payment penalty.

C. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment is on account of fraud or intent to evade the provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax due shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D. In addition to the penalties imposed, a transient lodging tax collector who fails to remit a tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or a fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

F. Within 10 days of notice of the imposition of a late payment penalty, a transient lodging tax collector may petition the Tax Administrator for waiver or refund of any penalty or portion thereof. The Tax Administrator may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown that such failure is not due to willful neglect, waive or refund the penalty in full or in part.

G. The City may record a lien in the City’s lien docket against any real property owned by the transient lodging tax collector in the City as to any delinquent remittances by the transient lodging tax collector. [BC 7.18.075, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.080 Deficiency Determination.

A. If the Tax Administrator determines that a transient lodging tax collector’s return or remittance of tax is missing, incomplete or otherwise incorrect, the Tax Administrator may compute and determine the amount of tax due based upon the facts contained in the transient lodging tax collector’s return, if any, or any other source of information. Any deficiency in the payment of tax due is due and payable immediately upon delivery of a notice of the deficiency from the Tax Administrator to the transient lodging tax collector, at which time the deficiency amount owed is also delinquent. The Tax Administrator will apply any penalty and interest relating to the deficiency amount owed as set forth in this chapter.

B. In making a deficiency determination, the Tax Administrator may offset any overpayment the transient lodging tax collector has against any deficiency, penalty or interest the transient lodging tax collector owes.

C. The Tax Administrator shall deliver the transient lodging tax collector a written notice of any deficiency determination.

D. Except in the case of fraud or willful intent to evade this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice of the deficiency determination delivered to the transient lodging tax collector within three years after the last day of the month following the end of the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period is later. In the case of fraud or willful intent to evade this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice of the deficiency determination delivered to the transient lodging tax collector within 10 years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within 10 years after the return is filed, whichever period is later.

E. A transient lodging tax collector who receives a notice of deficiency determination from the Tax Administrator may petition for redetermination and refund of any overpayment. The petition must be made in writing and delivered to the Tax Administrator within 10 days of the transient lodging tax collector’s receipt of the notice of a deficiency determination. If a timely petition for redetermination is not received by the Tax Administrator, the deficiency determination is final. If a timely petition for redetermination is received by the Tax Administrator, a redetermination will occur as provided in BC 7.18.095 (Redetermination – Petition). [BC 7.18.080, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.085 Evasion – Determination – Assessment.

If a transient lodging tax collector fails or refuses to collect the tax or to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the Tax Administrator may proceed in such manner as the Tax Administrator deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator has determined the tax due, the Tax Administrator may proceed to determine and assess against such transient lodging tax collector the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. The Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed within 10 years after discovery by the Tax Administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. The amount assessed shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the Tax Administrator has given notice thereof; provided, however, the transient lodging tax collector may petition for redetermination and refund as herein provided. [BC 7.18.085, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.090 Fraud – Refusal to Collect – Evasion.

If a transient lodging tax collector fails to collect, report or remit the tax required to be collected and paid to the City pursuant to this chapter, or submits a fraudulent return, or otherwise violates or attempts to violate this chapter, the Tax Administrator may estimate the tax due, and calculate the amount owing from the transient lodging tax collector for tax remittance, interest and penalties and provide notice to the transient lodging tax collector of the assessment. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years of the discovery by the Tax Administrator of the violation. The determination is due and payable upon receipt of notice and shall become final 10 business days after the date notice was delivered if no petition for redetermination is filed. A transient lodging tax collector may petition, after payment has been made, for redetermination and refund as provided under BC 7.18.095 (Redetermination – Petition). [BC 7.18.090, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.095 Redetermination – Petition.

A. Any person affected by a determination under BC 7.18.080 to 7.18.090 may file a petition for redetermination with the Tax Administrator within 10 days of delivery of notice of the tax deficiency determination. Payment in full of all taxes, penalties and interest determined by the Tax Administrator to be due is a prerequisite to filing a petition for redetermination and refund. Filing a petition for redetermination and refund is a prerequisite to seeking judicial review and the determination shall be final if no petition is timely filed.

B. If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the Tax Administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the petition requests, shall grant the petitioner an oral hearing and shall provide at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing, unless the Tax Administrator and petitioner agree otherwise. The Tax Administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

C. The Tax Administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the original determination as a result of the hearing. If the Tax Administrator increases the amount of the original determination, such increase is due upon delivery of a written notice of the increase to the petitioner.

D. After considering the petition and all available information, the Tax Administrator shall issue a redetermination decision and mail the decision to the petitioner. [BC 7.18.095, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.100 Security for Collection of Tax.

To ensure compliance with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require any transient lodging tax collector to deposit security in the form of cash, bond or other security acceptable to the Tax Administrator. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater than five times the transient lodging tax collector’s estimated average monthly tax liability for the period for which the transient lodging tax collector files returns, determined in such manner as the Director deems proper, or $5,000, whichever is less. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Tax Administrator subject to the limitations of this section. [BC 7.18.100, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.105 Collection.

Except in the case of fraud or willful intent to evade this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, the City may bring legal action to collect any amounts owed to the City under this chapter within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, whichever is later. In the case of fraud or willful intent to evade this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, the City may bring legal action to collect any amounts owed to the City under this chapter within 10 years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within 10 years after any determination becomes final, whichever is later. [BC 7.18.105, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.110 Refunds to Transient Lodging Tax Collector.

If a transient lodging tax collector concludes that the transient lodging tax collector has paid more tax, penalty or interest than is due, the transient lodging tax collector may file a claim in writing stating the facts upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within one year from the date of payment. If the claim is approved by the Tax Administrator, the excess amount paid shall be credited against any amounts then due and payable from the transient lodging tax collector and the balance refunded to the transient lodging tax collector within 14 business days of the date the Tax Administrator concludes that the refund is due. The transient lodging tax collector has the burden of proving the facts that establish the basis for a refund. This section is not applicable to any amount determined by the Tax Administrator to be due pursuant to the determination provisions of BC 7.18.080 (Deficiency Determination), 7.18.085 (Evasion – Determination – Assessment) or 7.18.090 (Fraud – Refusal to Collect – Evasion). [BC 7.18.110, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.115 Refunds to Transient.

If a transient concludes that he or she paid more tax than is due, the transient may file a claim in writing stating the facts upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within one year from the date of payment. If the claim is approved by the Tax Administrator, the excess amount collected shall be refunded to the transient within 14 business days of the date the Tax Administrator concludes that the refund is due. The transient has the burden of proving the facts that establish the basis for a refund. [BC 7.18.115, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.120 Compromise of Tax.

The Tax Administrator may, after consultation with the City Attorney, adjust or enter into a settlement as regards any amount believed to be due if, as a result of a bankruptcy filing, foreclosure, bona fide legal or factual dispute or similar circumstance, it is in the best interest of the City. [BC 7.18.120, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.125 Review.

A determination made by the Tax Administrator pursuant to this chapter, or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, is a quasi-judicial decision and is not appealable to Council. Appeals from any determination made by the Tax Administrator are solely and exclusively by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Washington County, as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. [BC 7.18.125, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.130 Alternative Remittance of Receipts from Tax on Camping and Recreational Vehicle Spaces.

A. A transient lodging tax collector who collects tax on rental of privately owned camping or recreational vehicle spaces may hold the tax collected until the amount of money held equals or exceeds $100.00, regardless of the schedule established by the City for payment of the tax.

B. Once the amount held by a transient lodging tax collector equals or exceeds $100.00, or by December 31st of each year if the $100.00 threshold is not met, the transient lodging tax collector shall remit the tax collected at the next following reporting period established by the City for payment of the tax.

C. No penalty or interest shall be assessed against a transient lodging tax collector who withholds payments pursuant to this section. [BC 7.18.130, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.135 Use of Tax Revenue.

A. All of the net revenue from the tax, following reductions attributed to collection reimbursement charges, must be used consistently with subsection B of this section to:

1. Fund tourism promotion or tourism-related facilities;

2. Fund City services; or

3. Finance or refinance the debt of tourism-related facilities and pay reasonable administrative costs incurred in financing or refinancing that debt; provided, that:

a. The net revenue may be used for administrative costs only if the City provides a collection reimbursement charge; and

b. Upon retirement of the debt, the City reduces the tax by the amount by which the tax was increased to finance or refinance the debt.

B. At least 70 percent of net revenue from the transient lodging tax shall be used for the purposes described in subsection (A)(1) or (3) of this section. No more than 30 percent of net revenue from a new or increased local transient lodging tax may be used for the purpose described in subsection (A)(2) of this section. [BC 7.18.135, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.140 Conformity with Law.

This chapter shall be construed and implemented so as to conform with, and shall not be in any way a substitute for, or eliminate in any way the necessity for conformity with any and all laws of the State of Oregon, or ordinances of the City, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to such statutes or regulations. [BC 7.18.140, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.145 Severability.

The sections and subsections of this chapter are severable. If any part of this chapter is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

A. The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional or invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid part; or

B. The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed according to the legislative intent. [BC 7.18.145, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.150 Violations – Penalties.

A. A person who violates a provision of this chapter commits a Class 1 civil infraction. The Class 1 civil infraction shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each transient lodging transaction for which tax, penalty or interest otherwise due is not paid shall be deemed a separate civil infraction.

C. Each day a person fails to register as a transient lodging tax collector shall be deemed a separate civil infraction.

D. A finding that a person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this chapter shall not act to relieve the person from the provisions of this chapter.

E. If a court finds that a transient lodging tax collector collected the tax imposed by this chapter and intentionally failed to remit the tax proceeds to the City when required by this chapter, the amount of penalty may be increased up to 10 times the normal penalty imposed for a Class 1 civil infraction. All amounts listed as room tax in bills or invoices issued by the transient lodging tax collector shall be considered tax collected by the transient lodging tax collector, unless the transient lodging tax collector received no payment on the bill or invoice. [BC 7.18.150, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


7.18.155 Remedies Cumulative.

Any fines pursuant to this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. [BC 7.18.155, added by Ordinance No. 4687, 6/21/16]


Title 8 BUILDING

Chapters:

8.01    Fire Code

8.02    Building Code

8.03    Abatement of Building Nuisances

8.04    Moving of Buildings

8.05    Pool Enclosures

8.06    General Provisions Relating to Construction Codes

8.07    Residential Property Maintenance Code


Chapter 8.01 FIRE CODE

Sections:

8.01.010    Repealed.

8.01.015    Repealed.

8.01.018    Repealed.

8.01.020    Repealed.

8.01.022    Repealed.

8.01.025    Repealed.

8.01.030    Repealed.

8.01.033    Repealed.

8.01.035    Repealed.

8.01.038    Repealed.

8.01.040    Repealed.

8.01.043    Repealed.

8.01.045    Repealed.

8.01.048    Repealed.

8.01.050    Repealed.

8.01.053    Repealed.

8.01.055    Repealed.

8.01.058    Repealed.

8.01.060    Repealed.

8.01.063    Repealed.

8.01.065    Repealed.

8.01.068    Repealed.

8.01.070    Repealed.

8.01.073    Repealed.

8.01.075    Repealed.

8.01.076    Repealed.

8.01.077    Repealed.

8.01.078    Repealed.

8.01.080    Repealed.

8.01.081    Repealed.

8.01.083    Repealed.

8.01.085    Repealed.

8.01.088    Repealed.

8.01.093    Repealed.

8.01.098    Repealed.

8.01.103    Repealed.

8.01.108    Repealed.

8.01.113    Repealed.

8.01.118    Repealed.

8.01.123    Repealed.

8.01.128    Repealed.

8.01.900    Repealed.


8.01.010 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 4345, 4/4/05]


8.01.015 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(1), 6/3/91; Ordinance No. 3839(1), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.018 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.018, added by Ordinance No. 3839(2), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.020 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3668, 5/15/89; Ordinance No. 3772(2), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.022 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.022, added by Ordinance No. 3668, 5/15/89; repealed by Ordinance No. 3772(16), 6/3/91]


8.01.025 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.025, repealed by Ordinance No. 3772(16), 6/3/91; Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.030 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(3), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.033 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.033 added by Ordinance No. 3839(3), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 4345, 4/4/05]


8.01.035 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.035, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(4), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.038 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.038, added by Ordinance No. 3839(4), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 4345, 4/4/05]


8.01.040 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.040, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(5), 6/3/91; repealed by 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.043 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.043, added by Ordinance No. 3839(5), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 4345, 4/4/05]


8.01.045 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.045, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(6), 6/3/91; repealed by 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.048 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.048, added by Ordinance No. 3839(6), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.050 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.050, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(7), 6/3/91; repealed by 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.053 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.053, added by Ordinance No. 3839(7), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.055 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.055, repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.058 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.058, added by Ordinance No. 3839(8), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.060 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.060, amended by Ordinance No. 3458, 8/13/85; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.063 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.063, added by Ordinance No. 3839(9), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.065 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.065, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(8), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.068 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.068 added by Ordinance No. 3839(10), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.070 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.070(9), amended by Ordinance No. 3772(9), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.073 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.073, added by Ordinance No. 3839(11), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.075 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.075, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(10), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.076 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.076, added by Ordinance No. 3772(11), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.077 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.077, added by Ordinance No. 3772(12), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.078 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.078, added by Ordinance No. 3668, 5/15/89; amended by Ordinance No. 3772(13), 6/3/91; Ordinance No. 3839(12), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.080 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.080, amended by Ordinance No. 3772(14), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.081 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.081, added by Ordinance No. 3772(15), 6/3/91; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.083 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.083, added by Ordinance No. 3839(13), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.085 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.085, repealed by Ordinance No. 3839(24), 2/8/93]


8.01.088 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.088, added by Ordinance No. 3839(14), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.093 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.093, added by Ordinance No. 3839(15), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.098 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.098, added by Ordinance No. 3839(16), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.103 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.103, added by Ordinance No. 3839(17), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.108 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.108, added by Ordinance No. 3839(18), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.113 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.113, added by Ordinance No. 3839(19), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.118 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.118, added by Ordinance No. 3839(20), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.123 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.123, added by Ordinance No. 3839(21), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.128 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.128, added by Ordinance No. 3839(22), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 3970, 1/7/97]


8.01.900 Repealed.

[BC 8.01.010 through 8.01.140, amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 3343, 11/8/83; and BC 8.01.090 renumbered to 8.01.900 by Ordinance No. 3839(23), 2/8/93; repealed by Ordinance No. 4345, 4/4/05]


Chapter 8.02 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

8.02.005    Short Title.

8.02.010    Definitions.

8.02.015    State Codes.

8.02.020    City Building Code Administration.

8.02.025    Repealed.

8.02.030    Board of Construction Appeals.

8.02.035    Permits Required.

8.02.040    Fees.

8.02.050    Repealed.

8.02.060    Repealed.

8.02.070    Street Addresses.

8.02.080    Failure to Obtain or Request Final Inspection or Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.

8.02.090    Revocation of Business License.

8.02.100    Prohibited Deposits and Spillage.

8.02.110    Repealed.

8.02.120    Violations; Penalties; Remedies.

8.02.125    Building Official; Authority to Impose Administrative Civil Penalty.

8.02.126    Appeal Procedures.

8.02.130    Interpretation.

8.02.140    Structural Specialty Code Appendix G Amended.


8.02.005 Short Title.

BC 8.02.005 through 8.02.130 shall be known and may be cited as the “Building Code” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance.”


8.02.010 Definitions.

Building official – The City employee designated by the mayor to enforce the Building Code.

Fire Marshal – Shall have the same meaning given to “Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention” in BC 8.01.010.


8.02.015 State Codes.

The following State Specialty Codes are adopted as part of the Beaverton Code except as otherwise provided in this chapter:

A. State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted by ORS 455.010 through 455.895, OAR 918-460-010 through 918-460-015 including Appendix G Flood-Resistant Construction Sections: G101, G102, G103.1 through G103.3, G103.8, G104.1, G105, G201, G401.3 through G401.5, G501, G601, G701, G1001 and G1101, as amended*, and including Appendix AN Section 109.4.2 – Alternative Fire Sprinkler Requirements (“Structural Specialty Code”);

B. State of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by ORS 455.020, OAR 918-440-010 through OAR 918-440-040 (“Mechanical Specialty Code”);

C. State of Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by ORS 447.020(2), OAR 918-750-010 including Appendix M, Rainwater Harvesting Systems (“Plumbing Specialty Code”);

D. State of Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, as adopted by ORS 479.525, OAR 918-305-0100 and delegated to the City by ORS 455.153 (“Electrical Specialty Code”);

E. State of Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as adopted by ORS 455.610, OAR 918-480-000 through 918-480-010 (“Residential Specialty Code”);

F. Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 Edition, by the International Conference of Building Officials (“Dangerous Buildings Code”);

G. State of Oregon Regulations for mobile or manufactured dwelling parks, temporary parks, manufactured dwelling installation support and tie down requirements, and park or camp requirements as adopted by OAR 918-500-000 through OAR 918-500-050, OAR 918-520-001 through OAR 918-520-002, OAR 918-650-000 through OAR 918-650-085;

H. State of Oregon Solar Installation Specialty Code, as adopted by ORS 455.010 through 455.895 and ORS 447.210 through 447.310. [BC 8.02.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3657, 3/20/89; Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89; Ordinance No. 3756, 10/15/90; Ordinance No. 3768, 2/11/91; Ordinance No. 3848, 8/16/93; Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; Ordinance No. 4115, 8/7/00; Ordinance No. 4344, 3/28/05; Ordinance No. 4393, 6/12/06; Ordinance No. 4434, 4/16/07; Ordinance No. 4477, 4/14/08; Ordinance No. 4556, 10/19/10; Ordinance No. 4650, 2/3/15]

*    Amendments to Appendix G, Flood Resistant-Construction, are set forth in BC 8.02.140.


8.02.020 City Building Code Administration.

The City shall provide a program of Building Code administration including plan checking, permit issuing and inspection for structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical work, and administration of the Dangerous Buildings Code. The Building Official is authorized to adopt rules of procedure for such administration that include, among other things, the authority to stop work and disallow occupancy or use of any building or service equipment in violation of this ordinance; the authority to refund all or part of building permit application fees as to applications that are withdrawn and permits that have lapsed; and the authority to dispose of permit applications and supporting documents, and to declare permits to have expired, at a point in time after applications are received and after permits have issued. [BC 8.02.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89; Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97]


8.02.025 Repealed.

[BC 8.02.025, amended by Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4344(1), 3/28/05]


8.02.030 Board of Construction Appeals.

For application in this City, the sections pertaining to appeals in the State Mechanical Specialty Code, Plumbing Specialty Code, Structural Specialty Code and Residential Specialty Code are replaced with the following:

“The Board of Construction Appeals provided for in BC 2.03.030 through 2.03.042 shall determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions and standards applicable to the Building Code and related activities.”

The Board of Construction Appeals shall have no authority to interpret the administrative rules authorized by this ordinance nor to waive requirements of the State Specialty Codes or City Building Code. [BC 8.02.030, amended by Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; Ordinance No. 4167, 6-11-01; Ordinance No. 4344, 3/28/05]


8.02.035 Permits Required.

Any owner, person, or authorized agent who intends to construct, alter, enlarge, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of any building, structure, appurtenance, or service equipment or cause any such work to be done shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. [BC 8.02.035, added by Ordinance No. 4362, 8/1/05]


8.02.040 Fees.

The fees for inspections, plan reviews and appeals referenced in the State Structural Specialty Code, Residential Specialty Code, Mechanical Specialty Code, Plumbing Specialty Code and Electrical Specialty Code shall be set by council resolution. [BC 8.02.040, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89; Ordinance No. 3756, 10/15/90; Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; Ordinance No. 4167, 6/11/01; Ordinance No. 4344, 3/28/05]


8.02.050 Repealed.

[BC 8.02.050, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89; Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4167, 6/11/01]


8.02.060 Repealed.

[BC 8.02.060, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89; Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4167, 6/11/01]


8.02.070 Street Addresses.

No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor final inspection approved, nor shall a person occupy or allow occupancy of a building unless a street number assigned pursuant to BC 9.02.010 through 9.02.070 is displayed in accordance with the requirements of BC 9.02.040.


8.02.080 Failure to Obtain or Request Final Inspection or Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.

No person shall fail to obtain or request a final inspection or certificate of occupancy as required by this ordinance nor shall a person occupy or allow occupancy of a building unless a final inspection has been completed and approved or a certificate of occupancy has been issued.


8.02.090 Revocation of Business License.

[BC 8.02.090, repealed by Ordinance No. 3309, 1/4/83]


8.02.100 Prohibited Deposits and Spillage.

A. No person shall dump, move or place earth, rock, sand, gravel, stone or construction or building materials so as to cause them to be deposited upon or roll, flow or wash upon or over the premises of another without the express consent of the owner of the premises so affected or upon or over any public place, way, street or sidewalk.

B. No person shall, when hauling or transporting earth, rock, sand, gravel, stone or construction or building materials on or over any public place, way, street or sidewalk, permit, allow or cause such material to blow, drop, leak, fall or spill upon the public place, way, street or sidewalk.

C. When the building official determines that a violation of this section has occurred as a result of building or construction activities at a particular site or as a result of hauling or transporting to or from a particular building or construction site, the building official may issue a citation for the violation or may order the work stopped at that particular site by notice served on a person engaged in building or construction activities at the site. If a stop work order is issued, all work shall stop at the site until the prohibited deposit or spillage has been corrected or removed to the satisfaction of the building official.


8.02.110 Repealed.

[BC 8.02.115, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89; Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; repealed by Ordinance No. 4167, 6/11/01; repealed by Ordinance No. 4344(1), 3/28/05]


8.02.120 Violations; Penalties; Remedies.

A. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this chapter.

B. Violation of a provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $250.00 and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 8.02.125 through 8.02.126. 

C. Each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter exists constitutes a separate violation.

D. In addition to the above penalties, a condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.260. The City Attorney is authorized to institute any legal proceedings necessary to abate the public nuisance.

E. The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available to the City under the Beaverton Code, or other City ordinance, or law. [BC 8.02.120, amended by Ordinance No. 4521, 11/30/09]


8.02.125 Building Official; Authority to Impose Administrative Civil Penalty.

A. In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other enforcement mechanism authorized by this code, upon a determination by the building official that a person has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by subsections A to L of this section. For purposes of this subsection, a responsible person includes the violator, and if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, may include the owner as well.

B. Prior to imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary correction, failing which the building official may issue a notice of civil violation to one or more of the responsible persons to correct the violation. Except where the building official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare, the time for correction shall be not less than five calendar days. 

C. Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct a violation, the building official shall determine whether such correction has been completed. If the required correction has not been completed by the date or time specified in the order, the building official may impose a civil penalty on each person to whom an order to correct was issued. 

D. Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the building official may impose a civil penalty without having issued an order to correct violation or made attempts to secure voluntary correction where the building official determines that the violation was knowing or intentional or a repeat of a similar violation.

E. In imposing a penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall consider: 

1. The person’s past history in taking all feasible steps or procedures necessary or appropriate to correct the violation; 

2. Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders, and permits;

3. The gravity and magnitude of the violation;

4. Whether the violation was repeated or continuous; 

5. Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, negligence, or an intentional act;

6. The violator’s cooperativeness and efforts to correct the violation; and

7. Any relevant rule of the building code or the City code.

F. The notice of civil penalty shall either be served by personal service or shall be sent by registered or certified mail and by first class mail. Any such notice served by mail shall be deemed received for purposes of any time computations hereunder three days after the date mailed if to an address within this state, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside this state. A notice of civil penalty shall include: 

1. Reference to the particular code provision or rule involved; 

2. A short and plain statement of the matters asserted or charged; 

3. A statement of the amount of the penalty or penalties imposed; 

4. The date on which the order to correct was issued and time by which correction was to be made, or if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection D of this section, a short and plain statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; and

5. A statement of the party’s right to appeal the civil penalty to the Mayor or Mayor’s designee. 

G. Any person who is issued a notice of civil penalty may appeal the penalty to the Mayor or Mayor’s designee. The Mayor’s designee shall not be the building official or building inspector. The provisions of BC 8.02.126 shall govern any requested hearing, except that the burden of proof shall be on the building official. 

H. A civil penalty imposed hereunder shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, unless the responsible person appeals the penalty to the Mayor or Mayor’s designee pursuant to, and within the time limits established by, BC 8.02.126. If the responsible person appeals the civil penalty to the Mayor or Mayor’s designee, the penalty shall become final, if at all, upon issuance of the Mayor’s or Mayor’s designee’s decision affirming the imposition of the administrative civil penalty. 

I. Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

J. Failure to pay a penalty imposed hereunder within 10 days after the penalty becomes final as provided in subsection H of this section shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The building official also is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection K of this section, other provisions of this code, or state statutes. 

The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to:

1. Assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the City in remediation, cleanup, or abatement; and

2. Any other actions authorized by law.

K. If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 30 days after such penalty become final, the building official shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien in the docket of City liens. At the time such an assessment is made, the building official shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the docket of City liens. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens established by Council resolution pursuant to BC 1.01.020. The interest shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

L. In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy. [BC 8.02.125, added by Ordinance No. 4521, 11/30/09]


8.02.126 Appeal Procedures. 

A. A person aggrieved by an administrative action of the building official taken pursuant to a section of this code authorizing an appeal under this section may, within 15 days after the date of notice of the action, appeal in writing to the building official. The appeal shall be accompanied by a $250.00 appeal fee as established by the City and shall state: 

1. The name and address of the appellant; 

2. The nature of the determination being appealed; 

3. The reason the determination is incorrect; and 

4. What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives the objections, and the appeal shall be dismissed. Except as provided in subsection E of this section, the appeal fee is not refundable. 

B. If a notice of revocation of a license or permit is the subject of the appeal, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. Notwithstanding this paragraph, an emergency suspension shall take effect upon issuance of, or such other time stated in, the notice of suspension. 

C. Unless the appellant and the City agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the Mayor or Mayor’s designee within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the City shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant.

D. The Mayor or Mayor’s designee shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the Mayor or Mayor’s designee deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply. 

E. The Mayor or Mayor’s designee shall issue a written decision within 10 days of the hearing date. The decision of the Mayor or Mayor’s designee after the hearing is final and may include a determination that the appeal fee be refunded to the applicant upon a finding by the Mayor or Mayor’s designee that the appeal was not frivolous. [BC 8.02.126, added by Ordinance No. 4521, 11/30/09]


8.02.130 Interpretation.

A. If a provision of this ordinance appears to conflict with any other provision of this ordinance or with any other law, Code section, ordinance or regulation having application within the City, the provision that is more restrictive shall govern.

B. Except where specifically provided otherwise, this ordinance shall not apply to a structure or portion of the structure that conforms with applicable building standards in effect at the time a building permit was issued for the structure and shall not invalidate or preclude prior, existing or future prosecutions for violations of the Building Code committed under previous applicable ordinances.


8.02.140 Structural Specialty Code Appendix G Amended.

The Structural Specialty Code Appendix G Flood-Resistant Construction is amended to read as follows:

APPENDIX G

FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION

SECTION G101

ADMINISTRATION

G101.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific flood hazard areas through the establishment of comprehensive regulations for management of flood hazard areas designed to:

1. Prevent unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding;

2. Manage the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and shorelines;

3. Manage filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential;

4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will divert floodwaters or which can increase flood hazards; and

5. Contribute to improved construction techniques in the floodplain.

G101.2 Objectives. The objectives of this appendix are to protect human life, minimize the expenditure of public money for flood control projects, minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding, minimize prolonged business interruption, minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas, contribute to improved construction techniques in the floodplain and ensure that potential owners and occupants are notified that property is within flood hazard areas.

G101.3 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall apply to all proposed development in a flood hazard area established in Section G102.2.

G101.4 Violations. Any violation of a provision of this appendix, or failure to comply with a permit or variance issued pursuant to this appendix or any requirement of this appendix, shall be handled in accordance with BC 8.01.900 and 8.02.020.

SECTION G102

APPLICABILITY

G102.1 General. This appendix, in conjunction with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code (OSSC), provides minimum requirements for development located in flood hazard areas, including the installation of utilities, placement and replacement of manufactured homes, new construction and repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or additions to new construction and substantial improvement of existing buildings and structures, including restoration after damage, and utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and structures.

G102.2 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are established by BC 9.05.015 and the City of Beaverton Development Code, Ordinance 2050, Section 60.10.10.

SECTION G103

POWERS AND DUTIES

G103.1 Permit applications. The building official shall review all building permit applications to determine whether the development sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed development site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes) shall be designed and constructed with methods, practices and materials that minimize flood damage and that are in accordance with this code and ASCE 24.

G103.2 Other permits. It shall be the responsibility of the building official to assure that approval of a proposed development shall not be given until proof that necessary permits have been granted by federal or state agencies having jurisdiction over such development.

G103.3 Determination of design flood elevations. If design flood elevations are not specified, the building official is authorized to require the applicant to:

1. Obtain, review and reasonably utilize data available from a federal, state or other source, or

2. Determine the design flood elevation in accordance with accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Such analyses shall be performed and sealed by a registered design professional. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow review and approval by the building official. The accuracy of data submitted for such determination shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

G103.4 through G103.7: Not Adopted.

G103.8 Records. The building official shall maintain a permanent record of all building permits issued in flood hazard areas including copies of inspection reports and certifications required by OSSC Section 1612.

SECTION G104

PERMITS

G104.1 Required. Any person, owner or authorized agent who intends to conduct any development in a flood hazard area shall first make application to the building official and shall obtain the required permits as required in the OSSC.

G104.2 Application for permit

The applicant shall file an application in writing on a form furnished by the building official. Such application shall:

1. Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit. 

2. Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the site. 

3. Include a site plan showing the delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, flood zones, design flood elevations, ground elevations, proposed fill and excavation and drainage patterns and facilities. 

4. Include in subdivision proposals and other proposed development with more than 50 lots or larger than 5 acres (20 234 m²), base flood elevation data in accordance with Section 1612.3.1 if such data are not identified for the flood hazard areas established in Section G102.2.

5. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 

6. Be accompanies by construction documents, grading and filling plans and other information deemed appropriate by the building official.

7. State the valuation of the proposed work.

8. Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent. 

9. Applicants shall supply a comprehensive Maintenance Plan for the entire structure to include but not limited to: exterior envelope of structure; all penetrations to the exterior of the structure; all shields, gates, barriers, or components designed to provide floodproofing protection to the structure; all seals or gaskets for shields, gates, barriers, or components; and, the location of all shields, gates, barriers, and components as well as all associated hardware, and any materials or specialized tools necessary to seal the structure.

10. Applicants shall supply an Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for the installation and sealing of the structure prior to a flooding event that clearly identifies what triggers the EAP and who is responsible for enacting the EAP.

G104.3 Validity of permit.

The issuance of a permit under this appendix shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this appendix or any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. The issuance of a permit based on submitted documents and information shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors. The building official is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure or site that is in violation of this appendix or other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 

G104.5 Suspension or revocation.

The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this appendix wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or code of this jurisdiction. 

SECTION G105

VARIANCES

G105.1 General. The board of appeals established pursuant to BC 8.02.030 shall hear and decide requests for variances on buildings and structures and their appurtenances regulated by this appendix. The board of appeals shall base its determinations on technical justifications, and has the right to attach such conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objective of this appendix and Section 1612 of the OSSC.

G105.2 Records. The building official shall maintain a permanent record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.

G105.3 Historic structures. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of a historic structure upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

Exception: Within flood hazard areas, historic structures that are not:

a. Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places; or

b. Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district;

c. Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation program that is approved by the Department of Interior.

G105.4 Functionally dependent facilities. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement of a functionally dependent facility provided the criteria in Section 1612.1 are met and the variance is the minimum necessary to allow the construction or substantial improvement, and that all due consideration has been given to methods and materials that minimize flood damages during the design flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

G105.5 Restrictions. The board of appeals shall not issue a variance for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in flood levels would result during the base flood discharge.

G105.6 Considerations. In reviewing applications for variances, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other portions of this appendix and the following:

1. The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community;

5. The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are not subject to flooding or erosion;

6. The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development;

7. The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

8. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

9. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

10. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.

G105.7 Conditions for issuance. Variances shall only be issued by the board of appeals upon:

1. A technical showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the site renders the elevation standards inappropriate;

2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable;

3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;

4. A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and

5. Notification to the applicant in writing over the signature of the building official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and that such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.

SECTION G201

DEFINITIONS

G201.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of the OSSC for general definitions.

G201.2 Definitions.

DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.

MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and as further defined by ORS 446.003. For floodplain regulation purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days if permitted to be placed on a permanent foundation, permanently connected to utilities, or anchored to the land. For insurance purposes the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is: (a) Built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this section from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

VIOLATION. A development that is not fully compliant with this appendix or Section 1612, as applicable.

SECTION G301: Not Adopted

SUBDIVISIONS

SECTION G401

SITE IMPROVEMENT

G401.1 through G401.2: Not Adopted.

G401.3 Sewer facilities. All new or replaced sanitary sewer facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 8, ASCE 24, to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, or impairment of the facilities and systems.

G401.4 Water facilities. All new replacement water facilities shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8, ASCE 24, to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.

G401.5 Storm drainage. Storm drainage shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters to minimize or eliminate damage to persons or property.

Section G401.6: Not Adopted.

SECTION G501

MANUFACTURED HOMES

G501.1 Elevation. All manufactured homes otherwise allowed to be placed or substantially improved within the floodplain shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is not less than one foot above the base flood elevation and the chassis of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or be flood proofed to or above that level together with attendant utility services composed of flood resistant materials, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of the Beaverton Code Section 9.05. Site Development Code. All electrical crossover connections shall be elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation or be designed to they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the component and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the base flood elevation.

G501.2 Foundations. All new and replacement manufactured homes, including substantial improvement of existing manufactured homes, shall be placed on a permanent, reinforced foundation that is designed in accordance with Section 1612 of the OSSC. Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 

(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. (ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. (iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

G501.3 Anchoring. All new and replacement manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved in a flood hazard area shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring are authorized to include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

SECTION G601

RECREATIONAL VEHICLES

G601.1 Placement prohibited. The placement of recreational vehicles shall not be authorized in flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action and in floodways.

G601.2 Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles in flood hazard areas shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use, and shall be placed on a site for less than 180 consecutive days.

G601.3 Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that are not fully licensed and ready for highway use, or that are to be placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days, shall meet the requirements of Section G501 for manufactured homes.

SECTION G701

TANKS

G701.1 Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydraulic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.

G701.2 Above-ground tanks. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation or shall be anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic or hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.

G701.3 Tank inlets and vents. In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:

1. At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood.

2. Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic or hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.

SECTION G801: Not Adopted

OTHER BUILDING WORK

SECTION G901: Not Adopted

TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND TEMPORARY STORAGE

SECTION G1001

UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U

Utility and miscellaneous Group U. Utility and miscellaneous Group U includes buildings that are accessory in character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy in the OSSC, including, but not limited to agricultural buildings, aircraft hangers (accessory to a one- or two-family residence), barns, carports, fences not more than 7 feet high, grain silos (accessory to a residential occupancy), greenhouses, livestock shelters, private garages, retaining walls, sheds, stables and towers.

G1001.2 Flood loads. Utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and structures, including substantial improvement of such buildings and structures, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from flood loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 

G1001.3 Elevation. Utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and structures, including substantial improvements of such buildings and structures, shall be elevated such that the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to or above the design flood elevation in accordance with Section 1612 of the OSSC. 

G1001.4 Enclosure below design flood elevation. Fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be at or above grade on all sides and conform to the following: 

1. In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave action, enclosed areas shall have flood openings to allow for the automatic inflow and outflow of floodwaters.

G1001.5 Flood-damage-resistant materials. Flood-damage-resistant materials shall be used below the design flood elevation.

G1001.6 Protection of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems. Mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, including plumbing fixtures, shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation. 

Exception. Electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems and other service equipment shall be permitted to be located below the design flood elevation provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the component and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation in compliance with the flood-resistant construction requirements of this code. Electrical wiring systems shall be permitted to be located below the design flood elevation provided they conform to the provisions of the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code (OESC).

SECTION G1101

REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASCE 24-05 Flood Resistance Design G103.1, and Construction G401.3, G401.4

HUD 24 CFR Part 3280 (1994) Manufactured Homes Construction and Safety Standards G201

IBC-2012 International Building Code G102.2

NFPA-70 2011 National Electrical Code G1001.6

[BC 8.02.140, added by Ordinance No. 4393, 6/12/06; amended by Ordinance No. 4650, 2/3/15; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


Chapter 8.03 ABATEMENT OF BUILDING NUISANCES

Sections:

8.03.005    Repealed.

8.03.010    Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisance.

8.03.020    Buildings Used for Illegal Manufacture.

8.03.030    Violation, Penalty.

8.03.040    Appeal.


8.03.005 Repealed.

[BC 8.03.005, repealed by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89]


8.03.010 Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisance.

Every building or part of a building determined by the Building Official to be a dangerous building as defined in section 302 of the Dangerous Buildings Code is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in that code. [BC 8.03.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89]


8.03.020 Buildings Used for Illegal Manufacture.

Section 302 of the Dangerous Buildings Code is amended by adding condition 19 to read as follows:

19. Whenever a building or any portion thereof has been used for the illegal manufacture or distribution of hazardous chemicals or materials.

[BC 8.03.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89]


8.03.030 Violation, Penalty.

A. No person who is the owner of any dangerous building within the City shall knowingly allow a building to be or remain dangerous after ten days from the date that a notice to abate has been mailed and no written protest has been filed.

B. No person shall fail to abate a nuisance within the time provided in the Notice and Order of the Building Official.

C. Violation of this ordinance constitutes a Class 1 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

D. Each day that a violation of this ordinance exists constitutes a separate violation.

E. The requirement to abate a public nuisance is not a penalty for violating this ordinance but is an additional remedy. [BC 8.03.030 repealed, renumbered and amended by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89]


8.03.040 Appeal.

Chapter 5 of the Dangerous Buildings Code is amended by adding Section 505 to read as follows: “Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Construction Appeals concerning a Notice and Order of the Building Official may file an Appeal to the city council within 15 days setting forth the issues of disagreement. Said appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city recorder.” [BC 8.03.040, repealed and added by Ordinance No. 3680, 6/12/89]


Chapter 8.04 MOVING OF BUILDINGS

Sections:

8.04.010    Definitions.

8.04.020    Permit Required.

8.04.030    Application; Fee.

8.04.040    Inspection.

8.04.050    Utility Installations.

8.04.060    Performance Bond.

8.04.070    Issuance of Permit.

8.04.080    Conditions of Permit.

8.04.090    Liability.

8.04.100    Equipment.

8.04.110    Continuity.

8.04.120    Litter.

8.04.130    Movement on State Highways.

8.04.140    Revocation.

8.04.150    Violation.


8.04.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this ordinance, the following mean:

Building – A building that exceeds eight feet in width, or as loaded for moving, extends upward more than 13.5 feet from the ground.

City engineer – The city engineer or the city engineer’s designee responsible for enforcing this ordinance.

Street – Highway, road, street or alley as defined in ORS 487.005(l) and (8).

This ordinance – BC 8.04.010 through 8.04.150


8.04.020 Permit Required.

A. No person shall move a building across or along a street without first applying for and obtaining a permit under this ordinance.

B. No person shall move a building across or along a street in violation of a provision of this ordinance or of the provisions of the permit issued under this ordinance.


8.04.030 Application; Fee.

A. Application for a permit to move a building shall be made to the city engineer on forms provided by the city engineer and shall include the following information:

1. the name and address of the person who owns the building.

2. the name and address of the person engaged to move the building.

3. the location from which the building is proposed to be moved and its zoning classification;

4. the proposed new site of the building and its zoning classification;

5. the proposed route for moving the building.

6. the dimensions, type of construction and approximate age of the building;

7. the use or purpose for which the building was designed;

8. the use or purpose to be made of the building at its new location;

9. the proposed moving date and hours;

10. any additional information the city engineer considers necessary for a fair determination of whether the permit should issue.

B. An application shall be signed by the owner of the building to be moved or by the person engaged to move the building.

C. The permit shall not be issued until the applicant pays a permit fee to defray the costs of issuing the permit. The amount of the fee shall be set by Council resolution.


8.04.040 Inspection.

After receiving the application, the city engineer shall inspect the building, the new site proposed for it if located in the City, and the route proposed for moving it.


8.04.050 Utility Installations.

The permit shall not be issued unless the applicant submits signed statements from the owners of the electric wires and poles and other utility installations along the route on which the building is to be moved:

1. that the moving will not interfere with or endanger the installations; or

2. that the applicant has made arrangements to the satisfaction of the owners for protecting the installations, paying for whatever damage the moving causes them, and reimbursing the owners for any costs of removal and reinstallation of the installations that the moving necessitates.


8.04.060 Performance Bond.

The permit shall not be issued until the applicant furnishes the City a performance bond executed by the applicant and a surety company authorized to do business in this State and approved as to form and amount by the city attorney. The bond shall guarantee that the applicant will:

A. Conform to all requirements imposed by the City relating to the moving of the building; and

B. Promptly repair and make good to the satisfaction of the City any damage to pavement, sidewalks, hydrants, sewers, water lines, streets, alleys, or other public or private property done or caused by the applicant, the applicant’s servants or employees in moving a building; and

C. Within three months after the permit is granted, if the relocated building will be relocated within the City limits, have the relocated building ready for occupancy and use in accordance with the building and zoning regulation of the City in effect at the time the permit is issued.


8.04.070 Issuance of Permit.

The city engineer shall issue the permit applied for if:

A. The application complies with the requirements of this ordinance;

B. The moving can be accomplished without damage to property or, in case of damage to the property, it is consented to by the owner of the property or is to be paid for to the owner’s satisfaction;

C. The building at its new site, if within the City, will conform to the requirements of the Development Code;

D. The Board of Site and Design Review determines that the building at its new site, if within the City, is not detrimental to the general character, attractiveness and welfare of the neighborhood of the new site; and

E. All requirements of BC 8.01.010 through 8.01.090 and 8.02.005 through 8.02.130 have been complied with.


8.04.080 Conditions of Permit.

The permit shall specify:

A. The route for moving the building;

B. The time within which the moving is to be completed; and

C. Whatever additional conditions the city engineer considers necessary to minimize the obstruction of traffic, protect property, and protect the public safety and welfare.


8.04.090 Liability.

The permit shall not constitute an authorization for damaging property. The permit shall not constitute a defense against any liability the permittee incurs for personal injury or property damage caused by the moving.


8.04.100 Equipment.

Equipment used to move buildings along or across the public streets of the City shall be equipped with pneumatic tires, which shall be the only part of the equipment to come in contact with the surfaces of the streets, except planking as required by the city engineer. The city engineer may require the permittee to proceed on planking of specified dimensions when the city engineer considers the planking necessary to prevent damage to a public street or other property.


8.04.110 Continuity.

Once a building has been moved onto a public street under a permit authorized by this ordinance, the person moving the building shall continue with the moving project without interruption until it is completed, except as the permit for the moving or the city engineer specifically allows to the contrary.


8.04.120 Litter.

A person moving a building under a permit authorized by this ordinance shall promptly remove from public streets and private property all litter produced by the moving.


8.04.130 Movement on State Highways.

The city engineer may waive any of the requirements of this ordinance regarding buildings to be moved through the City upon a State highway from and to points outside the City limits, if:

A. Movement will be made pursuant to a permit issued by the appropriate State agency.

B. Notice of the proposed movement and a copy of the permit is submitted to the city engineer before the movement, and

C. The city engineer is satisfied that adequate precautions have been taken to protect the public safety and welfare.


8.04.140 Revocation.

A. The city engineer may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke a permit issued under this ordinance if:

1. the permittee violates or cannot meet a term of the permit or section of this ordinance; or

2. grounds exist for revocation or suspension, or refusal to issue under BC 2.05.054. Any refusal to issue a permit or revocation or suspension of a permit shall be in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066.


8.04.150 Violation.

Violation of this ordinance constitutes a Class 2 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.


Chapter 8.05 POOL ENCLOSURES

Sections:

8.05.005    Short Title.

8.05.010    Definitions.

8.05.020    Application.

8.05.030    Permit Required.

8.05.040    Protective Enclosure.

8.05.050    Special Pools.

8.05.060    Setback.

8.05.070    Angle of Repose.

8.05.080    Administration.

8.05.090    Conformance with Law.

8.05.100    Penalties.


8.05.005 Short Title.

BC 8.05.005 through 8.05.100 shall be known and may be cited as the “Pool Enclosures Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance”.


8.05.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this ordinance, the following mean:

Building official – The City employee designated by the mayor to enforce this ordinance.

Person in charge of property – An owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or other person having possession or control of property.

Special pool – A fish pond or other decorative pool that holds or is capable of holding a body of water exceeding 24 inches in depth at any point.

Swimming pool – An outdoor swimming pool or other body of water designed or used for the purpose of swimming, dipping, wading or immersion of human beings which has a depth at any point in excess of 24 inches, whether above or below grade, and whether intended to be temporary or permanent in nature.


8.05.020 Application.

The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all special pools and swimming pools, except swimming facilities regulated under ORS 448.005 through 448.100 and the State Structural Specialty Code and the Residential Specialty Code. [BC 8.05.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3978, 3/31/97; Ordinance No. 4167, 6/11/01; Ordinance No. 4344, 3/28/05]


8.05.030 Permit Required.

A. No person shall construct, install, enlarge, or substantially remodel any swimming pool or fencing required in connection with it without first obtaining a permit from the building official.

B. Application for a permit shall be accompanied by an application fee. The amount of the application fee shall be set by Council resolution. The application fee shall be in addition to any other required building permit fee. The application shall contain any information the building official considers necessary for an adequate review of the application. All construction and installation shall conform the plans approved by the building official.

C. Permits for temporary pools shall be obtained for the original installation only; however, subsequent installations shall be located on the same property and conform to the original approved plan or a new permit will be required.


8.05.040 Protective Enclosure.

A. A person in charge of property on which a swimming pool is situated shall maintain on the lot and completely surrounding the pool an enclosure consisting of a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. The fence shall be constructed so that it does not have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is used, the openings between the pickets shall not exceed four inches in width. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of the enclosure. The enclosure shall be of a pattern and type to discourage children climbing, that is incapable of being crawled under and that is sufficient to make the pool inaccessible to small children. No enclosure shall be nearer than three feet to the outer walls of a swimming pool.

B. All gates or doors opening through the enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device installed at least 40 inches above the ground or base, designed and capable of keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use; except, that the door of a dwelling occupied by human beings and forming a part of the enclosure required need not be so equipped.


8.05.050 Special Pools.

A. A person in charge of property within a residential area on which is situated a special pool shall construct and maintain an acceptable enclosure and securely close off or block all entrance to it.

B. An acceptable enclosure shall be one of the following:

1. an enclosure completely surrounding the special pool, as provided in BC 8.05.040.

2. a wire screen or cover of sufficient strength to hold a weight of at least 75 pounds and installed not more than six inches below the surface of the water at all times.


8.05.060 Setback.

No part of a swimming pool shall be constructed or installed within three feet of a side or rear lot line or within a public utility easement.


8.05.070 Angle of Repose.

No part of a swimming pool shall be constructed or installed within the angle of repose of the soil supporting a structure on the same or an adjacent lot. The angle of repose shall be determined by the city engineer.


8.05.080 Administration.

The building official shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance and may:

A. Adopt reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the administration of this ordinance;

B. Make modifications in individual cases on a showing of good cause with respect to the height, nature or location of the protective enclosure, or the necessity therefor, provided the protection sought by this ordinance is not reduced by the modification;

C. Permit other protective devices or structures to be used as long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the protective enclosure required by BC 8.05.040 and 8.05.050.


8.05.090 Conformance with Law.

This ordinance shall not be a substitute for or eliminate the necessity of conformity with all State laws, rules and regulations, and any Code section or other City ordinance which are now, or may be in the future, in effect and that relate to the matters regulated by this ordinance.


8.05.100 Penalties.

A. Violation of this ordinance constitutes a Class 2 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. The penalties imposed by this section are not exclusive and are in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, available to the City under the law.

C. Construction, operation or maintenance of a swimming pool or special pool in violation of this ordinance constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.260.


Chapter 8.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CONSTRUCTION CODES

Sections:

8.06.005    Short Title.

8.06.010    Purpose and Scope of BC 8.06.005 through 8.06.070.

8.06.015    Definitions.

8.06.020    Service of Notices and Orders.

8.06.025    Notice and Opportunity to Be Heard.

8.06.035    Secretary to the Construction Board of Appeals.

8.06.040    Duties of Board.

8.06.045    Appeals to the Construction Board of Appeals.

8.06.050    Appeal Procedures.

8.06.055    Determination by the Board.

8.06.060    Failure to Obey Final Order.

8.06.065    Appeal of the Board Action.

8.06.070    Violation.


8.06.005 Short Title.

BC 8.06.005 through 8.06.070 shall be known and may be cited as “Construction Codes: General Provisions” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance” or “general provisions”.


8.06.010 Purpose and Scope of BC 8.06.005 through 8.06.070.

The purpose of BC 8.06.005 through 8.06.070 is to provide uniformity in the procedures used in conjunction with the administration and enforcement of the construction codes. The provisions of this ordinance shall govern except when different provisions are specifically set out in the particular code under which the Board or secretary is proceeding.


8.06.015 Definitions.

As used in this ordinance the following mean:

Board, Board of Appeals or Construction Board of Appeals – The Construction Board of Appeals provided for in BC 2.03.030 through 2.03.042.

Building Code – BC 8.02.005 through 8.02.130 as now enacted or hereafter amended.

Building official – The person designated by the mayor to perform the duties assigned to the building official by the Building Code.

Construction codes – The Building Code and the Fire Code.

Fire chief – Shall have the same meaning it is given in BC 8.01.010.

Fire Code – BC 8.01.010 through 8.01.090 as now enacted or hereafter amended.

Secretary – The person designated by BC 8.06.035 to be the secretary for the Board in matters relating to the particular code under which the appeal or action is taken.


8.06.020 Service of Notices and Orders.

Except where specifically provided otherwise in the construction codes, a notice or order provided for in the construction codes, shall state the reasons for its issuance and may be served either:

A. By delivering a copy personally to the person entitled to the notice; or,

B. By leaving a copy of such notice or order in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of the notice or order, postage prepaid, to the person entitled to notice addressed to the person’s place of business or house address or to the address given on the application for a permit.


8.06.025 Notice and Opportunity to Be Heard.

Except where specifically provided otherwise in the construction codes, when notice and opportunity to be heard are required by the construction codes or by application of the general law relating to the construction code, the secretary of the Board may use the applicable procedural provisions of BC 8.06.045 through 8.06.055 even though the occasion for notice and the opportunity to be heard is not an appeal.


8.06.035 Secretary to the Construction Board of Appeals.

A. Building Official as Secretary. When the board acts in its capacity as the appeals board under the Building Code, the building official as defined in BC 8.06.015 shall act as an ex-officio member of and secretary to the Board.

B. Fire Chief as Secretary. When the Board acts in its capacity as a board of appeals under the Fire Code, the fire chief as defined in BC 8.06.015 shall act as an ex-officio member of and secretary to the Board.


8.06.040 Duties of Board.

A. Materials and Methods.

1. The Board may approve any materials or methods equivalent to those called for in the various codes, provided the alternate materials or methods:

a. meet the minimum standards prescribed under State law;

b. do not constitute a sanitary hazard or cause pollution of any water supply; and

c. provide a substantially equivalent degree of safety and generally conform to national standards concerning fire prevention, fire safety measures and building construction requirements for safety.

B. Appeals. Where a provision of a construction code grants the right to appeal, the Board shall hear the appeal pursuant to BC 8.06.045 through 8.06.055


8.06.045 Appeals to the Construction Board of Appeals.

A. Appeals to the Board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions set out in BC 8.06.050 and 8.06.055 and any rules and regulations pertaining to appeals adopted by the Board.

B. Copies of all rules and regulations adopted by the Board pursuant to BC 2.03.002E shall be delivered to the secretary and shall be a public record.


8.06.050 Appeal Procedures.

A. Only an aggrieved person may appeal a notice, order or decision. When an appeal authorized in the construction codes is taken, it shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this section. An aggrieved person who wishes to appeal a notice, order or decision relating to any of the construction codes must file at the office of the secretary a written appeal containing:

1. a heading in the words: “Before the Construction Board of Appeals of the City of Beaverton”;

2. a caption reading: “Appeal of________”, giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;

3. a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or land involved in the notice and order;

4. a brief statement in ordinary and precise language of the specific order or action protested, the applicable Code section and any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

5. a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;

6. signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses;

7. the verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. An appeal shall be filed within ten days from the date of the notice of the action or order taken which the appellant wishes to appeal.

B. Processing of Appeal. On receipt of any appeal filed under this section, the secretary shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of the Board.

C. Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing.

1. As soon as practical after receiving the written appeal, the board of appeals or the secretary shall set a date, time and place for the Board hearing. The date of the hearing shall be not more than 60 calendar days from the date the appeal was filed with the secretary, unless the appellant requests or agrees to a later time.

2. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant at least ten calendar days before the date of the hearing by the secretary either by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the appellant personally, or by mailing a copy postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the appellant’s address shown on the appeal. An appellant may waive the ten day written notice.

D. Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of a person to file an appeal in accordance with these provisions constitutes a waiver of that person’s right to an administrative hearing on adjudication of the notice and order. The decision or action of the building official or the fire chief shall be final.

E. Scope of Hearing on Appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered by the board in hearing the appeal.

F. Staying of Order Under Appeal. Enforcement of any notice and order of the secretary issued under the provisions of the construction codes shall be stayed during an appeal that is properly and timely filed, except when a stay of the notice or order presents an exigent danger to the health and safety of persons or property.


8.06.055 Determination by the Board.

A. After the appeal is heard, the Board shall:

1. affirm the decision or action of the building official or fire chief; or,

2. reverse the decision or action of the secretary; or,

3. modify the decision or action of the building official or fire chief.

B. Before the formal decision is issued in writing, the Board shall make findings of fact and conclusions representing the official determination of the Board and specifying the basis for the decision.

C. The Board shall also specify a date by which the order must be complied with.

D. Effective Date. The decision of the Board shall be effective at the time the decision is made unless the Board directs otherwise.

E. The appellant shall be given written notification of the Board’s decision.


8.06.060 Failure to Obey Final Order.

A. No person to whom a final order is directed shall fail to obey a final order of the building official, fire chief or the board of appeals.

B. If a person to whom a final order is directed fails to obey the final order, the building official or fire chief may:

1. cause a citation for civil infraction to be issued under this section; or

2. institute or cause to be instituted an appropriate action to condemn the premises in accordance with law.

C. An order is final when no appeal has been taken within the time specified for taking an appeal.


8.06.065 Appeal of the Board Action.

The decision of the Board on matters appealed to it shall be final and conclusive unless, within 30 calendar days after the date of the decision of the Board, an aggrieved party appeals the Board’s decision to the State of Oregon Structural Code Advisory Board, except that appeals of decisions relating to the Fire Code shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction, not the State Structural Code Advisory Board.


8.06.070 Violation.

A. A violation of BC 8.06.060 is a Class 1 Civil Infraction to be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate violation.


Chapter 8.07 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections:

PART 1 – GENERAL

8.07.010    Short Title.

8.07.020    Purpose.

8.07.030    Scope, Conflict with State Law.

8.07.040    Application of Other Laws.

8.07.050    Definitions; Generally.

8.07.060    Definitions.

8.07.070    Severability.

PART 2 – STANDARDS

8.07.100    Housing Maintenance Requirements; Generally.

8.07.110    Minimum Standards for Human Habitation.

8.07.115    Vacant Dwellings.

8.07.120    Roofs.

8.07.130    Chimneys.

8.07.140    Foundations and Structural Members.

8.07.150    Exterior Walls and Exposed Surfaces.

8.07.160    Stairs and Porches.

8.07.170    Handrails and Guardrails.

8.07.180    Windows.

8.07.190    Doors.

8.07.200    Interior Walls, Floors, and Ceilings.

8.07.205    Street Addresses.

8.07.210    Cleanliness and Sanitation.

8.07.220    Interior Dampness.

8.07.225    Standing Water.

8.07.230    Insect and Rodent Harborage.

8.07.240    Bathroom Facilities.

8.07.250    Kitchen Facilities.

8.07.260    Plumbing Facilities.

8.07.270    Heating Equipment and Facilities.

8.07.280    Electrical System, Receptacles, and Lighting.

8.07.290    Bedroom Requirements.

8.07.300    Overcrowding.

8.07.310    Emergency Exits.

8.07.320    [Intentionally Omitted].

8.07.330    Hazardous Materials.

8.07.340    Maintenance of Facilities and Equipment.

8.07.350    [Intentionally Omitted].

8.07.360    Illegal Residential Occupancy.

8.07.370    Fences.

8.07.380    Swimming Pools.

8.07.390    Special Standards for Single-Room Occupancy Housing Units.

PART 3 – ENFORCEMENT

8.07.500    Penalties.

8.07.510    Prohibited Habitation.

8.07.520    Additional Remedies.

PART 1 – GENERAL


8.07.010 Short Title.

BC 8.07.010 through 8.07.520 shall be known and may be cited as the “Residential Property Maintenance Code” and may be referred to herein as “this code.” [BC 8.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.020 Purpose.

This code is enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of Beaverton residents, to prevent deterioration of existing housing, to preserve and enhance the quality of life in residential neighborhoods, and to prevent or reduce urban blight by establishing minimum residential property maintenance standards. [BC 8.07.020, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.030 Scope, Conflict with State Law.

A. The provisions of this code shall apply to all residential property within the City of Beaverton.

B. If a provision of this code conflicts with a provision of the building code as adopted by the City of Beaverton, the provision of the building code shall apply to the exclusion of the conflicting provision of this code. 

C. Except as provided otherwise by state or federal law, if a provision of this code conflicts with a residential property maintenance law, rule or regulation promulgated by a state or federal authority having jurisdiction over residential property in the City of Beaverton, the provision of the state or federal law, rule or regulation shall apply to the exclusion of the conflicting provision of this code. [BC 8.07.030, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.040 Application of Other Laws.

Any repair, alteration, or addition to and change of occupancy in an existing building, or any change of use of residential property, shall be made in accordance with all applicable provisions of law, including, but not limited to, the building code, the Beaverton Code and the Beaverton Development Code. [BC 8.07.040, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.050 Definitions; Generally.

Terms, words, phrases and their derivatives used, but not defined, in this code shall have the meanings defined in the Beaverton Development Code or in BC Titles 8 or 9, or, if not defined therein, shall have their commonly accepted meanings. If a conflict exists between definitions in the Beaverton Code or the Beaverton Development Code and this code, the definition provided in this code shall apply to actions taken pursuant to this code. [BC 8.07.050, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.060 Definitions.

As used in this code, unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean:

Approved – Meets the standards set forth by the municipal code, the community development code, the building code, or other standards referenced in those codes, or is approved by the code official. 

Bathroom – A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 

Bedroom – Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 

Building code – The combined specialty codes described at ORS 455.010, as adopted and as may be amended by the City.

Code official – The Code Enforcement Officer, Chief Building Official or other person authorized by the Mayor to enforce the provisions of this code. 

Courtyard – An open space bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.

Dwelling – Any structure containing a dwelling unit, including the following dwelling classifications:

A. Accessory dwelling unit. An additional dwelling unit within an attached or detached single-family dwelling. 

B. Apartment. Any building or portion of a building containing three or more dwelling units that is intended to be occupied for residential living purposes by renting, leasing, letting, or hiring out, including condos. 

C. Manufactured dwelling. Including manufactured homes, mobile homes, and residential trailers. 

D. Rowhouse. An attached single-family dwellings unit as defined by the State Building Code.

E. Single-family dwelling. A structure containing one dwelling unit, including adult foster care homes. 

F. Single-room occupancy. A one-room dwelling unit provided for human habitation in which some or all sanitary or cooking facilities are shared with other occupants. 

G. Social care facilities. Any building or portion of a building that is designed, built, rented, leased, let, hired out or otherwise occupied for group residential living purposes. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, retirement homes, assisted living facilities, residential care facilities, half-way houses, youth shelters, and homeless shelters.

H. Townhouse. An attached single-family dwellings unit as defined by the State Building Code. 

I. Two-family dwelling. A structure containing two dwelling units, also known as a duplex. 

Dwelling unit – A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Hotels used exclusively for transient occupancy are excluded from this definition of dwelling unit. 

Exit – A continuous, unobstructed means of egress from a dwelling to the exterior of the building and to a public way.

Floor area – The area of clear floor space in a room exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or appliances.

Habitable – Suitable for human habitation.

Habitable space – The area inside a structure available for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, not including attics, bathrooms, closets, garages, halls, laundry rooms, storage spaces, toilet rooms, or utility rooms.

Hazardous materials – Materials defined by the current fire code adopted by the Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue District as hazardous. 

Human habitation – The use of a structure, portion of the structure, or space, in which any person remains for a continuous period of two or more hours per day, or for periods which will accumulate to four or more hours in a day. 

Occupant – Any individual living or sleeping in a dwelling, or having possession of a space within a dwelling.

Residential property – Real property and all improvements thereon including edifices, structures, buildings, dwelling units or parts thereof used or intended to be used for residential purposes including single-family, duplex, multifamily structures and mixed-use structures which have one or more dwelling units. Hotels used exclusively for transient occupancy are excluded from this definition of residential property. [ORS 105.425/Tigard]

Structure – A building constructed for any use. [BC 8.07.060, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.070 Severability.

The sections and subsections of this code are severable. If any part of this code is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

A. The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional or invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid part; or

B. The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed according to the legislative intent. [BC 8.07.070, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]

PART 2 – STANDARDS


8.07.100 Housing Maintenance Requirements; Generally.

A. A dwelling shall be constructed, altered or repaired in accordance with the standards of the applicable building code in effect at the time of construction, alteration or repair. 

B. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any dwelling or residential property that does not comply with the requirements of this code.

C. An existing dwelling that does not comply with the provisions of this code and that does not comply with the standards of the applicable building code then in effect at the time of construction or subsequent alteration or repair shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of public health, safety and maintenance as required herein.

D. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for an existing dwelling designated as a historic building when such dwelling is judged by the code official to be safe and its continued maintenance in historic condition to be in the public interest. [BC 8.07.100, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.110 Minimum Standards for Human Habitation.

No dwelling shall be habitable unless provided with current service for:

A. Electricity;

B. Water;

C. Sanitary sewer; and

D. Weekly removal and disposal of trash.

Temporary interruptions of service for routine maintenance or emergency repairs shall not constitute a violation of this section. [BC 8.07.110, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.115 Vacant Dwellings.

A. A vacant dwelling shall meet the standards of this code to be habitable.

B. Measures taken to secure a vacant dwelling from unauthorized entry, including boarding of windows and nailing or screwing doors into door frames, shall be removed before a vacant dwelling may be inhabited. [BC 8.07.115, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.120 Roofs.

A. The roof and flashing of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects that admit water.

B. Roof drainage of a dwelling shall channel water into approved receivers and shall be adequate to prevent water buildup or ponding from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts of a dwelling shall be free from obstructions and maintained in good repair, so as not to be plugged, overflowing, or in a state of deterioration. Any building or structure having originally been designed for and fitted with gutters and downspouts shall continuously be maintained with such devices, in sound condition and good repair.

C. In any two-year period, tarps, tar paper or other similar materials shall not be exposed to weather on the exterior of a structure for a cumulative period of more than three months. [BC 8.07.120, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.130 Chimneys.

A. Every chimney, stovepipe and vent pipe of a dwelling shall remain adequately supported, free from obstructions, and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair, so as to assure there will be no leakage or backup of noxious gases.

B. Every chimney, stovepipe and vent pipe of a dwelling shall be reasonably plumb.

C. Any loose chimney brick or block shall be rebounded, and any loose or missing mortar shall be replaced.

D. Unused openings in the interior of the structure for chimneys, stovepipes and vent pipes shall be permanently sealed using appropriate, durable materials. [BC 8.07.130, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.140 Foundations and Structural Members.

A. A foundation shall adequately support its structure and be free of rot, crumbling, or similar deterioration.

B. All supporting structural members of a foundation shall show no significant evidence of deterioration or decay that would substantially impair the ability of a foundation to carry imposed loads. [BC 8.07.140, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.150 Exterior Walls and Exposed Surfaces.

A. Every exterior wall and weather-exposed exterior surface of a dwelling shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions likely to admit water or dampness to the interior portions of the dwelling. 

B. All exterior wood surfaces of a dwelling shall be made substantially impervious to the adverse effects of weather by periodic application of a protective coating of weather-resistant preservative such as paint or stain and be maintained in good condition, substantially free from peeling or flaking.

C. Exterior metal surfaces of a structure shall be protected from rust and corrosion.

D. Every section of exterior brick, stone, masonry, or other veneer of a structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair and be adequately supported and tied back to its supporting structure. 

E. In any two-year period, tarps, tar paper or other similar materials shall not be exposed to weather on the exterior of a structure for a cumulative period of more than three months. [BC 8.07.150, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.160 Stairs and Porches.

Every stair, porch, and attachment to stairs or porches shall be:

A. Safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected.

B. Be kept in sound condition and good repair, including replacement as necessary of flooring, treads, risers, and stringers so there is no excessive wear and no broken, warped, or loose parts. [BC 8.07.160, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.170 Handrails and Guardrails.

A. Every flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on at least one side. Handrails shall be between 30 and 38 inches high, measured from the tread or floor of the landing or walking surface. Handrails shall be continuous the full length of the stairs.

B. Every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface that is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Guardrails shall not be less than 36 inches high. Guardrails shall have intermediate rails or ornamental closures which will effectively exclude the passage of an object four inches or more in diameter.

C. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened, maintained in sound condition and good repair, and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected. [BC 8.07.170, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.180 Windows.

A. Every habitable space shall have at least one window facing an exterior yard or courtyard or shall be provided with approved artificial light. The minimum total window area for each habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of the space, except for a habitable space in a basement, where the minimum shall be five percent of the floor area of the space. 

B. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window or openable skylight for ventilation purposes unless equipped with mechanical ventilation. 

C. Every bathroom and toilet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for a habitable space except that no window shall be required in a bathroom or toilet compartment if the bathroom or toilet compartment is equipped with artificial lighting and a mechanical ventilation system that discharges to the outdoors.

D. All windows of a dwelling unit that are openable and that are within ten feet of the exterior grade shall be able to be both opened and locked from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. 

E. All windows of a dwelling unit that are openable and are accessible from the outside, regardless of height from the exterior grade, such as a balcony window or a fire escape window, shall be able to be both opened and locked from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.

F. Every window of a dwelling shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, substantially weathertight, and shall comply with the following:

1. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute without open cracks and holes.

2. Every window sash shall be in sound condition and good repair and fit weathertight within its frame.

3. Every window frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to substantially exclude wind and rain from entering the dwelling. [BC 8.07.180, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.190 Doors.

A. Every dwelling shall have at least one exit door leading to the exterior, or in the case of a duplex or apartment, to the exterior or to an approved exit. Exit doors shall be able to be opened from the inside without any special knowledge or effort. Screen doors and storm doors must be able to be opened from the inside without any special knowledge or effort. 

B. In apartments, duplexes, single-room occupancies and social care facilities, exit doors in common corridors or passageways shall be able to be opened from the inside with one hand in a single motion, such as pressing a bar or turning a knob, without the use of any special knowledge or effort.

C. Every door to the exterior of a dwelling shall be equipped with a lock designed to discourage unwanted entry and to permit opening from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.

D. Every exterior door of a dwelling shall comply with the following:

1. The door hinge, door lock, and strike plate shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 

2. When closed, the door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and be weathertight.

3. Every door frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to substantially exclude wind and rain from entering the dwelling. 

E. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks and shall be capable of being opened and closed. [BC 8.07.190, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.200 Interior Walls, Floors, and Ceilings.

A. All interior surfaces of a dwelling shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair, so to permit the interior to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Walls, floors, ceilings, windows, cabinets and doors shall be free of holes larger than four inches in diameter and cracks wider than one-half inch.

B. Peeling, chipping, flaking, or abraded paint in a dwelling shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster or wall paper, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be repaired or replaced.

C. Every toilet compartment, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface of a dwelling shall be constructed and maintained to be substantially impervious to water and to permit the floor to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. [BC 8.07.200, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.205 Street Addresses. 

No person shall occupy or allow occupancy of a dwelling unless a street number assigned pursuant to BC 9.02.010 through 9.02.070 is displayed in accordance with the requirements of BC 9.02.040. [BC 8.07.205, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.210 Cleanliness and Sanitation.

A. The interior of every dwelling shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from the accumulation of rubbish, garbage and any material that:

1. Provides a breeding place for insects, rodents or vermin; or 

2. Produces dangerous or offensive gases, odors or bacteria; or 

3. Blocks exits, hallways or corridors. 

B. An occupant of a dwelling shall be responsible for keeping that part of the dwelling he or she occupies or is in control of in a clean and sanitary condition.

C. The owner of any residential property with shared or common areas, including apartments, single-room occupancies, social care facilities, mobile home parks, trailer parks and manufactured home parks, shall be responsible for maintaining the shared or common areas of the property in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. [BC 8.07.210, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.220 Interior Dampness.

Every dwelling, including its basement and crawl space shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness so as to prevent conditions conducive to decay, mold growth, or deterioration of the structure. [BC 8.07.220, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.225 Standing Water.

A. No person shall cause or permit water to stand outdoors on property the person owns or controls in containers or objects that have not been emptied within seven days. 

B. No person shall allow or cause containers or objects that collect water, including buckets, pots and unmounted tires, to be left outdoors for more than seven days on property the person owns or controls. [BC 8.07.225, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.230 Insect and Rodent Harborage.

A. Every dwelling shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. Infestations of insects or rodents shall be promptly exterminated by methods that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.

B. The owner of any residential property shall be responsible for extermination within any structure prior to any occupancy thereof. 

C. The occupant of a single-family dwelling shall be responsible for extermination within the dwelling during the occupancy thereof.

D. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for extermination within the structure. [BC 8.07.230, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.240 Bathroom Facilities.

A. Except as otherwise noted in this code, every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls in safe, clean and sanitary working condition:

1. A toilet located in a room that is separate from the habitable space and that allows privacy; 

2. A lavatory basin; and 

3. A bathtub or shower located in a room that allows privacy.

B. In single-room occupancies and social care facilities where private toilets, lavatories, or baths are not provided, there shall be at least one toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower provided for every twelve residents or less. Toilets, bathtubs, and showers shall be in a room, or rooms, that provide privacy. [BC 8.07.240, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.250 Kitchen Facilities.

A. Every dwelling shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory basin required under BC 8.07.240, with the exception of single-room occupancy, which shall comply with BC 8.07.390 and social care facilities complying with BC 8.07.250(C). 

B. Except as otherwise provided for in BC 8.07.250(C) and 8.07.390, every dwelling shall have approved service connections and facilities for refrigeration and cooking.

C. A social care facility may be provided with a community kitchen with facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils. [BC 8.07.250, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.260 Plumbing Facilities.

A. Every plumbing fixture or device within a structure shall be properly connected to a public or an approved private water system and to a public or an approved private sanitary sewer system.

B. Sinks, lavatory basins, bathtubs and showers within a dwelling shall be supplied with both hot and cold running water. Every dwelling shall be supplied with water heating facilities for each dwelling unit. Water heating facilities within a dwelling shall be capable of heating an adequate amount of water to provide water at a temperature of at least 120 degrees Fahrenheit at each hot water outlet for at least 10 minutes.

C. In every dwelling, all plumbing or plumbing fixtures shall be:

1. Properly installed, connected, and maintained in good working order;

2. Kept free from significant obstructions, leaks, and defects;

3. Capable of performing the function for which they are designed; and

4. Installed and maintained so as to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. [BC 8.07.260, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.270 Heating Equipment and Facilities.

A. Every dwelling shall have a permanently installed heat source capable of maintaining a temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet from the floor and two feet from any wall in all habitable spaces, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

B. All heating devices or appliances shall be listed, approved, and properly vented. No cooking appliance, inverted flame heaters or open flame heaters may be used as a heating source in a dwelling. 

C. All heating equipment in a dwelling, including equipment used for cooking, water heating and clothes drying shall be: 

1. Maintained in sound condition and good repair;

2. Free from leaks and obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health, and accident hazards; and

3. Capable of performing the function for which they are designed. [BC 8.07.270, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.280 Electrical System, Receptacles, and Lighting.

A. Electric power to any structure shall be from an approved source; receptacles and fixtures shall be safely connected to an approved electrical system. The electrical system within a structure shall not constitute a hazard by reason of inadequate service, deterioration, damage, improper fusing, improper wiring or installation.

B. In addition to other electrical system components that may be used to meet cooking, refrigeration, and heating requirements listed elsewhere in this code, the following receptacles and lighting fixtures are required in a dwelling: 

1. Every habitable space shall contain at least two operable electric receptacles or one receptacle and one operable electric light fixture. 

2. Every toilet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or other wet location shall contain at least one operable electric light fixture and one grounded electrical receptacle or a receptacle with a ground-fault interrupter. 

3. Every furnace room and all similar nonhabitable spaces in a dwelling shall have one operable electric light fixture. 

4. Every public hallway, corridor, and stairway in apartments, single-room occupancies and social care facilities shall be adequately lighted at all times with an average intensity of illumination of at least one foot candle at principal points such as angles and intersections of corridors and passageways, stairways, landings of stairways, landings of stairs and exit doorways, and at least one-half foot candle at other points. Measurement of illumination shall be taken at points not more than four feet above the floor. [BC 8.07.280, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.290 Bedroom Requirements.

A. Every bedroom in a dwelling shall be a habitable space.

B. Every bedroom in a dwelling shall have at least one emergency exit for escape or rescue, either an openable window or exterior door. 

C. Windows in a dwelling provided to meet emergency exit requirements in bedrooms shall have a sill height of no more than 44 inches above the floor or a permanently installed step. The step must not be more than 12 inches higher than the floor and must be at least 20 inches wide and at least 12 inches deep.

D. Windows in a dwelling that are provided to meet emergency exit requirements in bedrooms shall have a minimum net clear opening at least 20 inches wide, at least 22 inches high, and, if constructed after July 1, 1974, at least five square feet in area. 

E. Windows in a dwelling provided for emergency exit in bedrooms shall be opened from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort and be held open by window hardware. [BC 8.07.290, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.300 Overcrowding.

A. No dwelling unit shall be overcrowded. A dwelling unit is overcrowded if there are more occupants than one, plus one additional occupant for every 150 square feet of floor area of the habitable space in the dwelling unit.

B. If a dwelling has three, four or five occupants, the dwelling must have a dining room and living room with a combined area of not less than 200 square feet, plus kitchen space of not less than 50 square feet. If a dwelling has six or more occupants, it must have a dining room and living room with a combined area of not less than 250 square feet, plus kitchen space of not less than 50 square feet. [BC 8.07.300, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.310 Emergency Exits.

A. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. Emergency exit windows must be openable from the inside without special knowledge, effort or tools. Windows used to meet this requirement shall meet the size and sill height requirements described in BC 8.07.290. All below-grade windows used to meet this requirement shall have a window well the full width of the window constructed of permanent materials with a three-foot clearance measured perpendicular to the outside wall. The bottom of the well may not be more than 44 inches below grade.

B. Required exit doors and windows in a structure shall be free of encumbrances or obstructions that block access to the exit.

C. All doorways, windows and any device used in connection with exits in a structure shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 

D. In addition to other exit requirements, all fire escapes and stairways, stair platforms, corridors or passageways that may be used as a means of emergency exit from an apartment, single-room occupancy or social care facilities:

1. Shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.

2. Shall be kept free of encumbrances or obstructions of any kind.

3. Shall not be used for storage of flammable or combustible materials.

E. Where doors to stair enclosures in a structure are required by a building code or other applicable law to be self-closing, the self-closing device shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. No person shall wedge or hold open a self-closing door to stair enclosures except by means of an approved magnetic device connected to a functioning fire alarm system.

F. Windows and doors in a structure leading to fire escapes shall be secured against unwanted entry with approved devices that permit opening from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge, effort or tool.

G. Apartments, single-room occupancies, and social care facilities shall have directional signs visible throughout common passageways to indicate the way to exit doors and fire escapes. Emergency exit doors and windows in apartments, single-room occupancies, and social care facilities shall be clearly labeled for their intended use as emergency exits. [BC 8.07.310, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.320 [Intentionally Omitted].

[BC 8.07.320, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.330 Hazardous Materials.

A. Residential property shall be free of dangerous levels of hazardous materials, contamination by toxic chemicals, or other materials that would render the property unsafe.

B. No person shall keep in an unreasonably dangerous manner any highly combustible or explosive materials or any materials that may be dangerous or detrimental to life or health. No residential property shall be used for the storage or sale of paints, varnishes or oils used in the making of paints and varnishes, except as reasonably needed to maintain the dwelling in sound condition and good repair. [BC 8.07.330, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.340 Maintenance of Facilities and Equipment.

A. In addition to other requirements for the maintenance of facilities and equipment described in this code:

1. All required facilities in every dwelling shall be constructed and maintained to properly and safely perform their intended function.

2. All nonrequired facilities or equipment present in a dwelling shall be maintained to prevent structural damage to the building or hazards of health, sanitation, or fire. [BC 8.07.340, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.350 [Intentionally Omitted].

[BC 8.07.350, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.360 Illegal Residential Occupancy.

Human habitation of a tent, camper, motor home, recreational vehicle, or other similar structure or space that is not intended for permanent residential use is prohibited, unless:

A. Authorized by a declaration of local emergency; or

B. Limited in any three-month period to a cumulative period of not more than 14 days. [BC 8.07.360, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.370 Fences.

Fences, whether built as part of a subdivision or added thereafter, shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. Fence posts shall be kept in a vertical position, and rails shall be kept in a horizontal position. Fence posts and rails with evidence of significant rot or deterioration must be replaced to keep the fence safe and prevent catastrophic failure. Fence posts and rails that lean or sag more than 15 degrees will be considered to be in violation of this section. Missing fence boards must be replaced within 30 days, unless dogs are kept inside a fenced yard, in which case missing boards must be replaced immediately. Fences of weather-resistant wood, such as redwood or cedar, need not be painted or stained, but if paint or stain is applied, it must be maintained free of peeling, bubbling or flaking. [BC 8.07.370, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.380 Swimming Pools.

A. Swimming pools shall comply with the provision of BC 8.05.005 through 8.05.100.

B. Special pools and swimming pools that hold or are capable of holding water exceeding 24 inches in depth at any point must be maintained so that the water does not become green, brown or black.

C. Special pools and swimming pools that hold or are capable of holding water exceeding 24 inches in depth at any point must be maintained so that the water is not stagnant and does not provide a habitat for amphibians, mosquitoes or other insect pests. [BC 8.07.380, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.390 Special Standards for Single-Room Occupancy Housing Units.

In addition to meeting requirements for dwellings described elsewhere in this code, single-room occupancies shall comply with the following: 

A. Either a community kitchen with facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils shall be provided on each floor, or each single-room occupancy shall have facilities for cooking, refrigeration and washing utensils. In addition, facilities for community garbage storage or disposal shall be provided on each floor. 

B. Where cooking units are provided in single-room occupancies, they shall conform to these requirements:

1. The Mechanical Specialty Code shall be used for installation standards for cooking appliances. Cabinets over cooking surfaces shall be 30 inches above the cooking surface, except that this distance may be reduced to 24 inches when a noncombustible heat shield with one inch airspace and extending at least six inches horizontally on either side of the cooking appliance is provided. Cooking appliances shall be located with at least a six-inch clear space in all directions from the perimeter of the cooking element or burner;

2. All cooking appliances shall be installed so as to provide a minimum clear space in front of the appliance of 24 inches. [BC 8.07.390, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]

PART 3 – ENFORCEMENT


8.07.500 Penalties.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, violation of a provision of this code is a Class 1 civil infraction to be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050 punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $250.00. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense.

B. Violation of BC 8.07.205 or 8.07.380 is a Class 2 civil infraction to be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050 punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $150.00. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 

C. Violation of BC 8.07.225 is a Class 3 civil infraction to be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050 and punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $50.00. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.

D. Violation of BC 8.07.110, 8.07.210, 8.07.310, 8.07.360 or 8.07.510 is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $6,250 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. [BC 8.07.500, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.510 Prohibited Habitation.

A. No person shall inhabit, remain in, or enter a dwelling or structure that has been duly posted with a notice to vacate or with an order forbidding occupancy pursuant to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the City; provided, however, the building official may grant a person express written permission to enter said dwelling or structure for purposes reasonably related to repair or demolition.

B. No person shall remove or deface any notice to vacate or order forbidding occupancy duly posted on a dwelling or structure pursuant to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the City until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. [BC 8.07.510, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


8.07.520 Additional Remedies.

A. Any penalty or remedy imposed pursuant to this code is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty, sanction or remedy otherwise authorized by law. 

B. A violation of this code is a public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated by repair in accordance with the provisions of BC 5.05.200 through 5.05.260. 

C. A violation of this code is a public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. For purposes of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, this code shall be deemed a housing code. 

D. A court of competent jurisdiction may appoint a receiver pursuant to the Oregon Housing Receivership Act, ORS 105.420 to 105.455, to perform an abatement of residential property found in violation of this code. For purposes of the Oregon Housing Receivership Act, this code shall be deemed a housing code.

E. A citation for a violation of this code shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to maintain residential property in accordance with this code. The abatement of a violation pursuant to this code does not prejudice the right of any person to recover damages arising out of or related to the violation. 

F. If a citation alleging a violation of BC 8.07.110, 8.07.210, 8.07.310 or 8.07.320 is issued, and if the affected dwelling unit is or becomes vacant, no person shall reoccupy or permit reoccupancy of the dwelling unit until all repairs have been made by the responsible party and inspected by the code official. [BC 8.07.520, added by Ordinance No. 4448, 8/20/07]


Title 9 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

Chapters:

9.01    Permits

9.02    Streets: Names and Addresses

9.03    Street Vacations

9.04    Improvement, Maintenance and Repair Within Public Rights-of-Way

9.05    Site Development

9.06    Neighborhood Associations

9.07    Life Safety and Fire Regulations

9.08    Limitations on Use of Certain City Property


Chapter 9.01 PERMITS

Sections:

I. HOLIDAY DECORATION PERMITS

9.01.010    Permit Required.

9.01.020    Application.

9.01.030    Issuance of the Permit.

9.01.040    Permittee’s Responsibilities.

9.01.050    Refusal to Issue, Revocation, or Suspension of the Permit.

9.01.060    Violation.

II. BASKETBALL BACKBOARD PERMITS

9.01.200    Short Title.

9.01.205    Purpose and Scope.

9.01.210    Definitions.

9.01.215    Permissible Locations.

9.01.220    Abutting Landowner’s Duties and Liabilities.

9.01.225    City Immunity from Liability.

9.01.230    Removal of Fixtures.

9.01.235    Penalty.

III. PLACEMENT OF SIDEWALK BENCHES, TRANSIT SHELTERS, NEWSRACKS AND OTHER FACILITIES

9.01.300    Placement Permit.

9.01.302    Permit Required.

9.01.305    Procedure for Permit Application.

9.01.306    Permit Conditions.

9.01.310    Issuance of Permit.

9.01.312    Location, Installation and Maintenance of Newsracks.

9.01.315    Revocation, Suspension, Refusal to Issue or Renew Permit.

9.01.320    Removal of Bench, Transit Shelter Newsrack or Other Facility.

9.01.325    Violations.

9.01.330    Penalty.

I. HOLIDAY DECORATION PERMITS


9.01.010 Permit Required.

Decorations and electric lights may be installed, operated and maintained for decorative purposes over and upon the streets of the City during the period after November 15 of any year to January 15 of the succeeding year only if a permit has been applied for and issued pursuant to BC 9.01.010 through 9.01.060.


9.01.020 Application.

Application for a permit shall be made to the mayor on a form prescribed by the mayor and shall include:

A. Name and address of the applicant;

B. Proposed commencement and expiration dates of the permit;

C. Number, height and location of the decorations or lights;

D. Manner in which decorations and lights are to be installed, operated or maintained;

E. Any services or assistance requested of the City by the applicant;

F. Any other relevant information required by the mayor.


9.01.030 Issuance of the Permit.

The mayor shall decide whether to issue the permit and may attach conditions to the permit to prevent personal and property damage or to minimize public inconvenience.


9.01.040 Permittee’s Responsibilities.

A. Unless otherwise specifically provided for in the permit, the permittee shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance and operation of the lights and decorations until the end of the permit period.

B. The permittee must comply with all other Code sections, ordinances and regulations of the City relating to placement or use of the decorations or lights.

C. The permittee shall be responsible for removal of decorations or lights at the end of the permit period.


9.01.050 Refusal to Issue, Revocation, or Suspension of the Permit.

A. The mayor may refuse to issue, revoke, or suspend the permit in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.05.050 through 2.05.066.


9.01.060 Violation.

Violation of BC 9.01.010 through 9.01.060 constitutes a Class 2 Civil Infraction, and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

II. BASKETBALL BACKBOARD PERMITS


9.01.200 Short Title.

BC 9.01.200 through 9.01.235 shall be known and may be cited as the “Basketball Hoop and Backboard Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this ordinance.” [BC 9.01.200, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]


9.01.205 Purpose and Scope.

This ordinance is intended to regulate the duties and responsibilities associated with affixing a fixture consisting of a basketball backboard, hoop, net and supporting apparatus to the public right-of-way. [BC 9.01.205, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]


9.01.210 Definitions.

For the purpose of this ordinance, the following mean:

Basketball fixture – Any part of a basketball backboard, hoop, net or supporting apparatus.

Pedestrian – Any person afoot or confined in a wheelchair.

Public roadway – The improved portion of the public right-of-way designed for vehicular travel. The term is not intended to refer to off-street bicycle paths.

Sidewalk – The improved portion of the public right-of-way designed for preferential or exclusive use by pedestrians.

Supporting apparatus – The post, pole or similar object that is affixed into the ground and that supports the basketball backboard, hoop and net. [BC 9.01.210, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]


9.01.215 Permissible Locations.

The place where the supporting apparatus of a basketball fixture is affixed to the public right-of-way must be:

A. Zoned for residential use;

B. Apart from any sidewalk or public roadway;

C. Abutting a public roadway designated in the Functional Classification Plan of the Beaverton Area Comprehensive Plan as a residential local road, class L-2 or L-3, where vehicular traffic is limited to a maximum speed of 25 miles-per-hour or less;

D. At least 150 feet from the nearest lateral curb line or boundary line of any intersection of two or more public roadways; however, this subsection shall not apply to an L-shaped intersection of two public roadways, class L-2 or L-3, provided that all other requirements of this section are met;

E. At least one foot back from the nearest curb line or boundary line of a public roadway; and

F. Outside of the sight clearance area required by Beaverton Ordinance 2050, section 60.60.50, if calculated without regard to driveways or other private access ways. [BC 9.01.215, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92; Ordinance No. 4059, 9/15/99]


9.01.220 Abutting Landowner’s Duties and Liabilities.

A. Any person owning, possessing, occupying or having control of property that abuts the public right-of-way where a basketball fixture is affixed shall properly, safely and responsibly construct, maintain, inspect, repair, use and supervised the use of the fixture.

B. A person who is injured or otherwise damaged by reason of any violation of this section shall have a cause of action for the actual damages sustained and, when appropriate, punitive damages. [BC 9.01.220, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]


9.01.225 City Immunity from Liability.

A. No recourse whatsoever shall be had against the City, its Council, Mayor, employees or agents for damage or loss to person or property arising out of the negligent or otherwise wrongful construction, maintenance, inspection, repair, use or supervision of use of any basketball fixture affixed to the public right-of-way or for any act or omission in violation of this ordinance.

B. In consideration for the City allowing a person owning, possessing, occupying or having control of property that abuts the public right-of-way to construct, maintain, inspect, repair, use or supervise the use of a basketball fixture affixed to the public right-of-way, such person shall indemnify, defend and hold the City, its Council, Mayor, employees and agents harmless against any claim, suit or action made against the City, its Council, Mayor, employees and agents as a result of any person’s failure to satisfy any obligation imposed by this ordinance. [BC 9.01.225, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]


9.01.230 Removal of Fixtures.

Any person owning, possessing, occupying or having control of property that abuts the public right-of-way where a basketball fixture is affixed in violation of this ordinance shall remove the fixture. [BC 9.01.230, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]


9.01.235 Penalty.

A. Violation of any provision of this ordinance constitutes a class 2 civil infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate infraction.

C. The penalties imposed by this ordinance are in addition to and not in lieu of any other lawful remedies available to the City. [BC 9.01.235, amended by Ordinance No. 3814, 6/15/92]

III. PLACEMENT OF SIDEWALK BENCHES, TRANSIT SHELTERS, NEWSRACKS AND OTHER FACILITIES


9.01.300 Placement Permit.

A. The uncontrolled placement of sidewalk benches, transit shelters, newsracks and other similar facilities in the public rights-of-way presents an inconvenience, aesthetic annoyance and danger to the safety and welfare of the public.

B. Sidewalk benches, transit shelters, newsracks and other similar facilities so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way, and unsightly sidewalk benches, transit shelters, newsracks and other similar facilities constitute public nuisances.

C. BC 9.01.300 through 9.01.330 are intended to provide a procedure for application and issuance of permits for placement of sidewalk benches, transit shelters, newsracks and other similar facilities in public rights-of-way pursuant to BC 5.05.115, subsection E 11. [BC 9.01.300, amended by Ordinance No. 3373, 6/5/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.302 Permit Required.

It shall be unlawful to place any sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other similar facility in public rights-of-way without first having obtained a permit from the City. One permit may be issued to include any number of items, shall specify the exact location of such item(s), and shall be signed by the applicant. [BC 9.01.302, added by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.305 Procedure for Permit Application.

A. Application for the permit shall be made to the mayor. The mayor may delegate the responsibility for approval and issuance of the permit and enforcement of BC 9.01.300 through 9.01.330 to a City employee.

B. The application for the permit shall include:

1. the applicant’s true name and permanent address;

2. the true name and address of a person for whom the applicant is acting as agent;

3. written and signed approval of the owner, lessee and/or tenant of the property abutting the proposed location of the bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility;

4. sketch of the proposed bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility showing size, design and specific proposed location; and

5. an application fee set by the mayor. [BC 9.01.305, amended by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.306 Permit Conditions.

A. As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the applicant thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the City, its officers, directors, and employees against any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs for personal injury and property damage resulting from the installation, use or maintenance of a sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other similar facility within the City. The applicant shall provide a surety bond, whose surety is a justified surety insurer under ORS 743.732 or an insurance policy with a certificate of insurance naming the City, its officers, directors, agents and employees as additional insured in the amounts set by ORS 30.270.

B. Permits may be issued for the installation of sidewalk benches, transit shelters, newsracks and other similar facilities without prior inspection of the location, but such sidewalk benches, transit shelters, newsracks and other similar facilities and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon observance of the provisions of this Code.

C. Such permits shall be valid for three years and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original applications.

D. Stickers showing the permit number shall be issued with the permit and must be displayed on the front of each sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack and other similar facility. [BC 9.01.306, added by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.310 Issuance of Permit.

A. In determining whether to issue the permit, the mayor or the mayor’s designee shall consider the following:

1. the extent to which the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility may impair clearance vision of motorists at or near intersections;

2. any hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic created by placement of the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other similar facility;

3. possibility of congestion at or near the proposed location of the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other similar facility;

4. the extent to which the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other similar facility will interfere with pedestrian traffic access to parked vehicles, the use of driveways, or the use of other facilities such as telephones, fire hydrants and the like.

B. No permit shall be issued for any newsrack which fails to comply with the following conditions:

1. no newsrack shall exceed four feet in height, 30 inches in width or two feet in thickness;

2. each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event the person is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.

3. each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in this section.

4. newsracks shall be designed to be stable under a wind load of at least twenty pounds per square foot without attachment to the pavement or any other object. [BC 9.01.310, amended by Ordinance No. 3373, 6/5/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.312 Location, Installation and Maintenance of Newsracks.

Any newsrack subject to this Code shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this section.

A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway or any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.

B. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any legally parked or stopped vehicle, residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location.

C. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture or tree located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks.

D. No newsrack may be placed within 100 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street unless they are side-by-side or within a common enclosure which shall not exceed four feet in height, 30 inches in width, or two feet in thickness. A maximum of five unenclosed side-by-side newsracks may be allowed in one location if they meet the other standards of this section. In case of conflict over location, the first to apply for a permit shall have priority.

E. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

1. within three feet of any marked crosswalk;

2. within 12 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

3. within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

4. within five feet of any driveway;

5. within three feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

6. within three feet of the outer end of any bus bench;

7. at any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet; or

8. within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.

F. Newsracks shall not be located in the public right-of-way in any residential zoning district as defined in the Development Code.

G. Newsracks shall not be located along any arterial or collector street as defined in BC 3.15.015.

H. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:

1. it is reasonably free of dirt and grease;

2. it is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint;

3. it is reasonably free of rust and corrosion;

4. the clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;

5. the paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and

6. the structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.

I. If the mayor determines that any newsrack interferes with any present or proposed public use of the right-of-way by any utility, the mayor may rescind the permit and order such newsrack to be removed upon ten days written notice by mail to the permit holder. Failure to comply with such order shall be a Class 1 Civil Infraction. [BC 9.01.312, added by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.315 Revocation, Suspension, Refusal to Issue or Renew Permit.

Any permit applied for under the provisions of BC 9.01.300 through 9.01.330 may be revoked, suspended or the application for renewal or issuance denied for the following reasons:

A. If any of the grounds set forth in BC 2.05.054 exist;

B. Violation of present or past permit or conditions of the permit;

C. Violation of BC 9.01.325;

D. Ownership or tenancy of the property abutting the sidewalk changes and the present owner or tenant has not given written signed approval.


9.01.320 Removal of Bench, Transit Shelter Newsrack or Other Facility.

A. Upon termination of the permit for any reason, the applicant shall at the applicant’s own risk and expense, remove the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility and leave the site in a clean condition and in as good a state of repair as when installation was made.

B. If the applicant fails to remove the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility or apply for a new permit within 20 days of the termination date of the permit, the City may proceed to remove the sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility. [BC 9.01.320, amended by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.325 Violations.

A. No person shall cause a sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility to be placed or maintained on a public street or sidewalk or in any other public way or place without first obtaining a valid permit under BC 9.01.300 through 9.01.330.

B. Any sidewalk bench, transit shelter, newsrack or other facility placed or maintained in violation of this Code constitutes a Class 1 Civil Infraction. [BC 9.01.325, amended by Ordinance No. 3520, 6/16/86]


9.01.330 Penalty.

Violation of this ordinance constitutes a Class 3 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.


Chapter 9.02 STREETS: NAMES AND ADDRESSES

Sections:

9.02.010    Definitions.

9.02.020    Street Numbering System.

9.02.030    Mayor’s Duties.

9.02.040    Display of Assigned Street Number Required.

9.02.050    Selection of Street Names.

9.02.060    Change of Street Name.

9.02.070    Violation – Penalty.


9.02.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of BC 9.02.010 through 9.02.070, the following mean:

Accessory building – Small, detached buildings used in connection with another building that is required to display a street number.

Accessway – Shall have the same meaning as the Fire Department Access Road as required in the Fire Code.

Building – Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

Building Code – Shall have the same meaning as it is given in BC 8.02.015.

Complex – is a group of two or more buildings on the same property served by two or more accessways.

Mayor – The mayor or the mayor’s designee responsible for enforcing this ordinance.

Townhouse – is a multi-story dwelling unit in which one or more functions for living (kitchen, bathroom, living room, bedroom) are located on a separate floor or story and may be contiguous to one or more similar units and open on at least two sides, with or without property lines between units. A Townhouse may also be known as a Rowhouse.

Vehicular Access – is a place, means or way by which emergency vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress from a street. [BC 9.02.010, amended by Ordinance No. 4145, 3/5/01]


9.02.020 Street Numbering System.

A. The street numbers for all buildings or structures in the City shall be established and assigned in accordance with the numerical system established for the City of Portland and Multnomah and Washington Counties.

B. Numbering shall be based on 2000 numbers to the mile with even numbers assigned to structures located on the east or south sides of the street.


9.02.030 Mayor’s Duties.

The mayor shall be responsible for:

A. Assignment of street numbers for all buildings in the City;

B. Maintenance of a master street and number map for the City;

C. Making address number changes;

D. Giving notice of street number changes to affected persons;

E. Establishing a street numbering policy in cooperation with the Beaverton United States Postmaster.


9.02.040 Display of Assigned Street Number Required.

A. Except for accessory buildings or buildings classified by the Building Code as a Group U Occupancy, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued or final inspection approved, and no person shall occupy or allow occupancy of any building, unless a street number assigned under BC 9.02.010 through 9.02.070 is displayed on the building in accordance with the following requirements:

1. Numbers shall be plainly visible and legible as determined by the Building Official from the street or accessways;

2. Numbers shall be displayed on the building to which they are assigned. As an alternative to displaying the numbers on the building, the Building Official may approve the display of an assigned number on an accessory building when the orientation of the accessory building or monument sign affords better visibility of the building’s address from the street or accessway.

3. Numbers displayed on one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses facing the street or accessway shall be no less than four inches in height. Numbers displayed on buildings other than one and two family dwellings and townhouses facing the street or accessway shall be no less than six inches in height. The Building Official may require numbers displayed on a building to be larger than the minimum height if a larger height is needed to make the numbers plainly visible and legible from the street or accessway;

4. Numbers shall be in wide stroke block numerical form. Scroll numbers, spelled numbers or numbers on mailboxes may be used in addition to those in numerical form but shall not be considered adequate substitutes;

5. When a complex of commercial, multi-family and/or townhouse buildings are assigned separate unit numbers or more than one street number, and all unit numbers or street numbers do not face a single street or accessway, a directory sign shall be displayed indicating where the buildings and assigned street numbers or unit numbers are located. The directory sign shall be provided in addition to the numbers required to be displayed on the buildings. Directory signs shall be located and plainly visible and legible from each vehicular access into the site from a street. Directory signs shall indicate all buildings, streets and accessways within the complex. The Building Official may also require directional signs within the complex indicating the assigned street numbers or unit numbers for buildings abutting the accessway. Directional signs shall be plainly visible from the accessway;

6. Numbers shall be of a contrasting color to the background to which they are attached;

7. Numbers shall be arranged in a horizontal, or near horizontal, configuration. The arrangement shall not exceed 45 degrees from horizontal.

8. Numbers shall not be covered or obscured by landscaping, fencing, accessory structures, vehicles or other objects that impair their visibility from the street or accessway.

B. All buildings and structures in existence on or before March 5, 2001 may continue to display their assigned address numbers in accordance with Ordinance No. 3885. The display of address numbers for all buildings or structures not in existence on or before March 5, 2001 shall comply with the requirements of subsection A. [BC 9.02.040, amended by Ordinance No. 3885, 2/14/94; Ordinance No. 4145, 3/5/01]


9.02.050 Selection of Street Names.

A. Streets shall be named in accordance with “Street Name Plan” developed by the planning department and approved by the Council.

B. Designators such as road, avenue or lane for new streets shall conform to the “Street Name Plan”.

C. A street name proposed pursuant to the “Street Name Plan” shall be submitted to the mayor prior to final approval of the street name by the planning commission or Council pursuant to subsection D. The mayor may recommend rejection of a proposed street name that in the mayor’s judgment would tend to cause confusion, error or delay in matters affecting public safety.

D. The planning commission may approve all street names proposed as part of the subdivision approval process; all other street names shall be approved by the Council.


9.02.060 Change of Street Name.

The Council shall have complete legislative discretion to change the name of any street in the City. Street name changes shall be made by ordinance and shall be filed with Washington County. The Council may use the following procedures in considering changes in street names.

A. A person, including the City, who desires a street name change shall submit a written request to the planning commission stating the reasons for the proposed name change and shall attach a scale diagram of the street.

B. Any proposed name change must meet the requirements of BC 9.02.050 B and C.

C. The planning commission shall consider the request at a public hearing.

1. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with provisions of section 128.2 A, B, and C of the Development Code except that written notice shall be provided to the owners of property fronting the street instead of owners included in the area of the proposed amendment and the United States Postal Service.

2. The scope of the hearing shall be limited to the change of the street name.

3. At the close of hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation in writing to the Council and identify the factors supporting the recommendations.

4. No recommendation for a name change shall be made unless the planning commission finds that a strong public need for the change exists.

5. The applicant’s request for the name change, the planning commission’s recommendation and any comments of the mayor shall be submitted to the Council for its consideration.

The Council may hold a public hearing to gather additional information. If a hearing is held, notice shall be given in accordance with subsection C 1.


9.02.070 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of BC 9.02.010 through 9.02.070 constitutes a Class 3 Civil Infraction, and shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.


Chapter 9.03 STREET VACATIONS

Sections:

9.03.010    Repealed.

9.03.020    Repealed.

9.03.030    Repealed.

9.03.040    Repealed.

9.03.050    Repealed.

9.03.060    Repealed.


9.03.010 Repealed.

[BC 9.03.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8-19-02]


9.03.020 Repealed.

[BC 9.03.020, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8-19-02]


9.03.030 Repealed.

[BC 9.03.030, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8-19-02]


9.03.040 Repealed.

[BC 9.03.040, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8-19-02]


9.03.050 Repealed.

[BC 9.03.050, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8-19-02]


9.03.060 Repealed.

[BC 9.03.060, repealed by Ordinance No. 4224, 8-19-02]


Chapter 9.04 IMPROVEMENT, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

9.04.010    Inspection, Definitions.

9.04.020    Permits Required.

9.04.030    Permit Conditions.

9.04.040    Posting of Bond.

9.04.050    Permit Fees.

9.04.060    Driveway Approaches and Curb Cuts.

9.04.070    Areas of Limited Street Improvements.

9.04.080    Abandoned Driveway Approaches.

9.04.090    Public Property.

9.04.100    Variances Where Unusual Conditions Exist.

9.04.110    Appeal From City Engineer’s Decision.

9.04.120    Violation of Ordinance, Continuing Violations, Penalty.


9.04.010 Inspection, Definitions.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.020 Permits Required.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.030 Permit Conditions.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.040 Posting of Bond.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.050 Permit Fees.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.060 Driveway Approaches and Curb Cuts.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.070 Areas of Limited Street Improvements.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.080 Abandoned Driveway Approaches.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.090 Public Property.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.100 Variances Where Unusual Conditions Exist.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.110 Appeal From City Engineer’s Decision.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.04.120 Violation of Ordinance, Continuing Violations, Penalty.

[BC 9.04.010, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


Chapter 9.05 SITE DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

9.05.005    Short Title.

9.05.010    Findings and Objectives.

9.05.015    Definitions.

9.05.016    Interpretation.

9.05.020    Permits Required.

9.05.025    Permit Exemptions.

9.05.030    Permit Issuance by Building Official.

9.05.032    Permit Fees.

9.05.035    Permit Application.

9.05.040    Requirements for Scale Plans and Drawings.

9.05.045    Technical Standards.

9.05.046    Extension of Facilities.

9.05.050    Application Referred to Director of Community Development, Planning Commission or Board of Design Review.

9.05.055    Permit Issuance or Denial by City Engineer.

9.05.060    Permit Issuance or Denial – Floodplain District.

9.05.065    Designation of Routes.

9.05.070    Security for Performance.

9.05.075    Liability Insurance.

9.05.080    Transferability.

9.05.083    Approval by Planning Commission or Board of Design Review.

9.05.085    Effective Date of Permit.

9.05.090    Appeal by Affected Person.

9.05.091    Appeal Authorized.

9.05.092    Revocation, Suspension, Modification.

9.05.093    Review by Council.

9.05.095    Expiration; Extension.

9.05.100    Providing Copy of Permit to Workers.

9.05.105    Inspection by City.

9.05.110    Excavations.

9.05.115    Fills.

9.05.120    Compaction of Fills.

9.05.125    Maintenance.

9.05.130    Repair.

9.05.135    Drainage Requirements.

9.05.140    Additional Safety Precautions.

9.05.145    Protection of Adjacent Public Property.

9.05.150    Deposits Prohibited.

9.05.155    Certificate of Completion.

9.05.156    Failure to Obtain Permit.

9.05.160    Abatement of Violations.

9.05.165    Penalties.

9.05.170    Conflicting Provisions.


9.05.005 Short Title.

BC 9.05.005 through 9.05.170 shall be known and may be cited as the “Site Development Ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this ordinance.” [BC 9.05.005; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; amended by Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.010 Findings and Objectives.

The Council finds and declares that it is necessary to adopt this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by accomplishing the purposes set forth in this section, and it is intended that this ordinance be administered in accordance with those purposes. Specifically, this ordinance is intended to:

A. Insofar as practicable and in permitting reasonable development of land and minimizing fire hazard, ensure the maximum retention of groundcover and runoff to aid in protection against flooding, erosion, earth movement, siltation, and other similar hazards;

B. Protect property values by insuring the maximum preservation of the natural vegetation for wildlife and the scenic character and visual continuity of the City consistent with the reasonable economic enjoyment of property;

C. Ensure that the development of each parcel of land, as well as water courses, streets and other public lands and places, occurs in a manner harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of flooding, drainage, erosion, earth movement and similar hazards;

D. Ensure, insofar as practicable, that site development will take place in a manner that complements the public street system and public utilities;

E. To provide a review process for development proposed in any floodplain to ensure that the development will be designed and constructed in a manner likely to minimize the danger present to life or property as a result of all development within the floodplain area;

F. Ensure that site development design and construction are of good quality and are done in conformance with proper and accepted engineering principles;

G. Ensure that site development, design and construction are accomplished with a minimum of disruption to the public. [BC 9.05.010, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.015 Definitions.

For the purpose of this ordinance, the following mean:

Agriculture – The term includes farming, dairying, pasturage, horticultural, floriculture, viticulture, apiaries, and animal and poultry husbandry; it does not include the operation of a feed lot or other commercial feeding of animals. [Added by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Area of shallow flooding – A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. [Added by Ordinance No. 3400, 9/10/84; amended by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Area of special flood hazard – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.” [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87; amended by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

Base flood – The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letter “A” or “V.” [Amended by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Board – The Board of Site and Design Review as established in BC 2.03.130. The Board’s jurisdiction and powers are set out in the Development Code. [Added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85]

Channelization – The process of modifying a waterway to reduce its floodway and/or floodplain by increasing the cross-sectional area of the waterway, to realign the waterway so that the centerline of the water will follow a new alignment, or for any other purpose. [Added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85]

Development – Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. [Amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Elevated building – For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.

Engineer, City Engineer – The City Engineer of the City of Beaverton or the City Engineer’s designee. The City Engineer has authority to interpret this ordinance pursuant to BC 9.05.016, and is the Mayor’s designee for this purpose throughout this ordinance. The Engineer is Beaverton’s Floodplain Administrator. [Added by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]

Excavation – An act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and includes the conditions resulting from the act.

Fill – An act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is deposited, placed, pulled or transported, and includes the conditions resulting from the act.

FIRM – The flood insurance rate map. An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).   [Added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85]

Flood insurance study – An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Flood management area – (USA) – Pursuant to USA Design and Construction Standards and the City Development Code, Chapter 60, the area equal to the floodplain. [Added by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

Floodplain – The area along a water course enclosed by the outer limits of land that is subject to inundation in its natural or lower revised contours by the base flood, inclusive of the floodway and the floodway fringe, and equal to the FIRM designation of an area of special hazard. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

Floodplain district – The overlay zoning district as established by the Development Code or as determined by a flood study. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Floodway – The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Floodway fringe – The area of the floodplain lying outside the floodway, which does not contribute appreciably to the passage of flood water, but serves as a retention area. [Added by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

Grading – Excavation or fill or any combination of excavation or fill and includes the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.

Grading, finish – The final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan.

Grading, rough – The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

Lowest floor – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this ordinance. [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Manufactured home – A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” A manufactured home may also be referred to as a “manufactured dwelling.” [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Manufactured home park or subdivision – A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Natural resource area, important natural resource area or significant natural resource area – The areas defined in the Comprehensive Plan and designated on the Plan’s Natural Resource Map as important or significant natural resource areas. [Added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

New construction – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Public utilities – Service furnished by the City or other public agency including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer service, telephone, natural gas, cable and electricity. [Amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]

Site – A lot or parcel of land or a series of lots or parcels of land joined together under one ownership where development occurs. The term “site” also includes a subdivision that has received preliminary plat approval. [Amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]

Start of construction – Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any other work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Structure – A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87]

Substantial damage – Any damage of any origin to a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its original condition would be equal to or exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure before the alteration occurred.

Substantial improvement – Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” [Added by Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Vegetative corridor – (CWS) – Pursuant to Clean Water Services District, Design and Construction Standards, a corridor adjacent to a water quality sensitive area that is preserved and maintained to protect the water quality functions of the water quality sensitive area. [Added by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Water course – A channel, creek, stream, river, swale, or stone drain pipe in which a flow of water occurs for either storm runoff or intermittent or year-round stream flow. [Amended by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

Water quality sensitive area or sensitive area – (CWS) – Pursuant to Clean Water Services District, Design and Construction Standards, shall include the following:

1. Existing or created wetlands;

2. Rivers, streams, and springs with year-round flow;

3. Impoundments (including natural lakes and ponds) with average water in the summer of one acre-foot or more, or with an average depth of three feet or more;

Sensitive areas shall not include: stormwater treatment ponds or swales, detention ponds, stormwater treatment wetlands, vegetative corridor adjacent to the sensitive area; off stream lake, lagoon, fire pond, reservoir, or upland ditches for the sole purpose of draining roads, lots and outfalls of storm drains. [Added by Ordinance No. 4155, 4/9/01]

Work (alone or as in “site development work” or “development work”) – Any construction, alteration or the bringing about of any physical change in the use or appearance of land or improvements thereon, including demolition of structures, pavement, or other site improvements that disturb the site outside of existing building footprints, disturbance of the existing surface of the site, multiple trips by vehicles over undisturbed ground, multiple-day parking of multiple construction vehicles on undisturbed ground, clearing or stripping of vegetation, groundcover, debris or topsoil, removal of trees or shrubs, depositing debris, depositing, stockpiling or storage of soil, sand, gravel, crushed rock, demolition materials, recycled concrete, asphalt or other recycled demolition materials, construction staging, grading, excavation or filling as defined herein, pot-holing, geotechnical test drilling, exploratory excavations or well-drilling. Additionally, this shall include physical changes to any structure in an area of special flood hazard. [Added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]

Zoning ordinance – Ordinance No. 2050 and amendments thereto. [Added by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]

[BC 9.05.015, amended by Ordinance No. 4078, 11/9/99; Ordinance No. 4107, 5/1/00; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.016 Interpretation.

A. The City Engineer shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this ordinance. A person requesting such an interpretation shall do so in writing and upon forms to be provided by the City Engineer.

B. If the person requesting an interpretation disagrees with the City Engineer’s interpretation, it may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to BC 9.05.091. [BC 9.05.016, added by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.020 Permits Required.

A. Within right-of-way, easements or other real property of the City, City franchise holder, or other public agency, no person shall perform any work, development, excavation, or fill; or construct or alter streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or utilities; or in any way tamper with pavement without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer.

B. No person shall cause or allow the following on private property or the public right-of-way without a current, valid permit issued under this ordinance by the City Engineer:

1. Outside of a special flood hazard area, grading, excavation, fill, depositing, stockpiling or storage of soil, sand, gravel, crushed rock, demolition materials, recycled concrete, asphalt or other recycled demolition materials, or any combination thereof, in excess of 50 cubic yards in volume or over an area that exceeds 500 square feet;

2. Disturbance of the existing surface of the site, depositing debris, depositing, stockpiling or storage of materials, excavation or fill that will encroach on or alter a natural drainage channel or water course, or concentrate or accelerate drainage entering adjacent property or public right-of-way, with the exception of tilling of the soil for agricultural purposes, gardening and maintaining or upgrading existing landscaped areas that can be performed without violating any other provision of this subsection;

3. Demolition of structures, pavement and other site improvements, disturbance of the existing surface of the site, scraping the ground surface, multiple trips by vehicles over undisturbed ground, multiple-day parking of multiple construction vehicles on undisturbed ground, clearing, stripping or removal of trees, vegetation, groundcover or topsoil, grading, excavation, fill, depositing debris, depositing, stockpiling or storage of soil, sand, gravel, crushed rock, demolition materials, recycled concrete, asphalt or other recycled demolition materials, or construction staging, or any combination thereof, over an area that exceeds 500 square feet on private property, or removal of the vegetation, groundcover or any tree within the public right-of-way, with the exception of tilling of the soil for agricultural purposes, gardening and the planting, maintaining or upgrading of landscaped areas on a single-family residential lot that can be performed without violating any other provision of this subsection;

4. The construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or installation of a structure in any water course;

5. The construction of a private driveway, private road or parking lot on a lot;

6. Site development work by a public utility, public agency, or City franchise holder in a significant natural resource area.

C. A separate permit shall be required for each separate noncontiguous site. One permit may cover both an excavation and a fill on the same site. A permit for excavation on one site does not approve the disposal on another site.

D. A permit shall be required for any construction, storage, or development in an area of special flood hazard.

E. Demolition materials from existing buildings and site improvements shall be promptly removed from the site and not stored on site, except as provided in subsection F of this section.

F. The City may issue a permit under this ordinance for the stockpiling of demolition materials to be recycled that have a volume in excess of 50 cubic yards or occupy an area that exceeds 500 square feet. Such demolition materials shall not be stored in their raw or recycled form on site for more than 60 calendar days and shall be provided with dust controls and erosion controls in accordance with this ordinance and other City requirements. [BC 9.05.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87; Ordinance No. 3887, 3/21/94; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.025 Permit Exemptions.

The permit provided for in BC 9.05.020 shall not be required for the following:

A. Site development work in connection with a public improvement or public work for which inspection is provided by the City or other public agency as approved by the City Engineer in an area other than a significant natural resource area.

B. Except in a floodplain district, an excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, swimming pool or underground structure authorized by a valid building permit where the cost of the excavation is included in the building permit valuation. This exception shall not affect the applicability of this ordinance to, nor the requirement of a grading permit for, a fill made with the material from the excavation.

C. Tilling of the soil for agricultural purposes. [BC 9.05.025, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.030 Permit Issuance by Building Official.

[BC 9.05.030, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.05.032 Permit Fees.

A. To defray expenses incurred in connection with the processing of applications, preparation of reports, publication of notices, issuance of permits, review and maintenance of plans and records, appeals and other matters, the City shall collect filing and other fees as established by Council resolution. The required fees shall be paid to the City on filing an application or at any other time specified by the resolution. Failure to submit the required fees with an application or a notice of appeal, including return of checks unpaid or other failure of consideration may preclude the processing of that application, and in the case of an appeal, preclude the processing thereof.

B. Fees are nonrefundable, except when the City has incurred no cost in the processing of a terminated or withdrawn application. Municipal corporations and other public agencies are exempt from the payment of application fees.

C. The Council may reduce or waive required fees on a showing of just cause.

D. A person who begins work on a project requiring a permit under BC 9.05.005 through 9.05.170 without first securing a permit shall in addition to the permit fee for a permit issued under this ordinance pay as a penalty an amount equal to the permit fee (sometimes referred to as the “double permit fee” or “double permit penalty”), unless the city engineer determines either (1) that it was not reasonably possible to obtain a permit before commencing the work, or (2) the person who requires a street tree permit is the owner of adjacent property or agent of the owner and the property is used for a single family residence, or (3) the Council reduces the penalty on appeal after conducting a public hearing on the matter. Payment of the penalty shall not relieve or excuse a person from the forfeitures imposed for violation of BC 9.05.005 through 9.05.170 and/or conformance with Code requirements. Payment of the penalty shall not foreclose any other enforcement provisions.

E. If the penalty is appealed, and after conducting a hearing the Council rules in the appellant’s favor, the Council may waive or reduce the penalty on a showing of just cause. In doing so, the Council may base its decision on any of the following considerations:

1. The past conduct of the appellant when doing business in the City, including the appellant’s familiarity with City permit processes, the quality of similar work performed by the appellant in the past and the number of past violations by the appellant, if any.

2. The efforts of any person in charge of the site where the work was done to prevent the work from being started without a permit or to mitigate the adverse impacts of the work.

3. The actual results of any actions taken by any person in charge of the site to prevent the work from being done or mitigate the adverse impacts of the work.

4. The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct any adverse impacts of the violation, the cost to the City of processing the appellant’s penalty and appeal, including bringing an enforcement proceeding, and the cost to the City of processing the appeal.

5. The level of cooperation shown by the appellant when informed that the work was unpermitted and issued a Stop Work Order by the City, including the appellant’s responsiveness, mitigation of any adverse impacts, willingness to follow the City’s procedures, and actual performance in doing so.

6. Any economic advantage(s) or relief from a penalty or penalties that the appellant enjoyed by performing the unpermitted work.

7. Any benefit(s) enjoyed by the public as a result of the appellant’s performing the unpermitted work, such as recycling of demolition materials or others.

8. The severity of the violation, including the type(s) and extent(s) of the unpermitted work and the resulting adverse impacts of the unpermitted work.

9. Other extenuating circumstances.

F. If the penalty is appealed, and the Council rules in the appellant’s favor, the Council may reduce the penalty amount to less than the “double permit fee” penalty by applying either of the following alternative remedies, individually or in combination:

1. Application of the remedies and fines for a Class 1 Civil Infraction pursuant to BC 9.05.160 through 9.05.165.

2. Reduction of the penalty amount to less than the “double permit fee” amount in consideration of the extenuating circumstances determined by the City Council under subsection E of this section.

G. If the Council decides to reduce the penalty, the Council may set the penalty amount to correspond to the estimated cost of the component(s) of work begun without a permit.

1. The estimated cost of each component of work begun without a permit shall be provided by the applicant, shall be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer or architect licensed by the state of Oregon and shall be in a form satisfactory to the city engineer.

2. If an appellant has not yet provided the City an itemized cost estimate for all work requiring a permit issued under this ordinance at the time of the violation, the appellant shall be given 30 calendar days from the date of the City’s written notification of the violation to the appellant to provide an itemized cost estimate for all such work, in the quantities required to complete the project.

3. If the appellant fails to provide an acceptable cost estimate within the allotted time, the city engineer may prepare the cost estimate upon which the reduced penalty amount is to be based.

4. If the city engineer prepares the cost estimate used to establish the penalty amount, the City may increase the penalty amount to recover the cost of the staff time required to prepare the estimate. [BC 9.05.032, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 3979, 4/22/97; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.035 Permit Application.

A. To obtain a permit required by this ordinance, the applicant shall file a written application on forms furnished by the city engineer.

B. The application shall be completed to the extent necessary as determined by the city engineer and shall contain the following:

1. The purpose of the work;

2. The amount of material proposed to be excavated and the amount of fill in cubic yards;

3. The legal description of the property on which the work is to be performed;

4. The street address at the point of access to the property where the work is to be performed;

5. The name and address of the owner of the property on which the work is to be performed;

6. A description of the equipment and methods to be used in performing the work;

7. The name, address and phone number of the person who will be performing the work;

8. The route or routes proposed to be followed within the City in coming to and going from the site by the equipment used to haul the excavation or fill equipment and material;

9. The estimated dates for starting and completing the work to be done;

10. An engineering geological investigation, based on the plan for the work proposed under the permit. The engineering geological report shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, and conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions, including consideration of seismic hazards and slope stability in natural materials on the proposed development. All reports shall be subject to approval by the city engineer and supplemental reports and data may be required as the city engineer considers necessary. Recommendations included in the report and approved by the city engineer shall be incorporated in the grading plan. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer when it appears from the condition of the property that such a report is not necessary;

11. A soil engineering investigation, based on the plan for the work proposed under the permit. The reports shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, and design criteria for corrective measures. Recommendations included in the report and approved by the city engineer shall be incorporated in the grading plan or specifications. Recommendations may be waived by the city engineer when it appears from the conditions outlined in the report that incorporation of the recommendations is not necessary;

C. For sites identified as Significant Natural Resource Areas, an environmental assessment report, prepared by a qualified biologist or other professionals qualified to assess the particular resource issues on the site will be required and the application will be referred to the Director of Community Development pursuant to BC 9.05.050. The Director of Community Development may waive the requirement if sufficient information already exists to address the issues present. For sites not identified as Significant Natural Resource Areas, the city engineer may require such an assessment to determine the impact on such factors as soil erosion and water quality.

D. If the proposed work requires the approval of any other governmental agency or public utility, such as the Corps of Engineers or Oregon Division of State Lands, the applicant shall also submit evidence of having made such application for approval prior to or simultaneously with the City submittal and shall submit duplicate copies of these applications to the city engineer. The city engineer shall coordinate approvals by the City with those of other agencies to the extent necessary and feasible. Any permit issued by the city engineer pursuant to this ordinance shall not be valid until other agency approvals have been obtained.

E. The city engineer may require additional information necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. This information may include, but is not limited to, traffic studies, soils reports, geological investigations, and detailed construction cost estimates for all proposed work that is governed by this ordinance. Any cost estimates required by the city engineer shall be provided by the applicant, shall be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer or architect licensed by the state of Oregon and shall be in a form satisfactory to the city engineer. The person or persons providing this information shall be qualified with regard to education, training and experience. The city engineer may also waive any of the requirements in subsection B, above, as he determines they are not necessary or applicable on a case by case basis.

F. Additional information for property wholly or partly within the floodplain district.

1. As a condition to any permit for development, the applicant first shall provide and the city building official shall record and keep available for public inspection, the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of any new or substantially improved structures, and the fact of whether or not the structure contains a basement. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures, the city building official shall require documentation of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) and maintain the floodproofing certifications required by BC 9.05.060, subsections C and D.

2. The city engineer may require the applicant to provide:

a. A detailed hydrologic data report prepared by a registered engineer with a background in the area of hydrology. This report shall include, but is not limited to, water profiles and discharge rates for the channel and the hydrology for the tributary areas; and/or

b. An environmental assessment report, prepared by a qualified individual, satisfactory to the city engineer. This report shall include, but is not limited to, the impact on soil erosion, damage to significant vegetation and displacement of wildlife, on both the subject property and adjoining properties. It shall identify the factors on which the report is based, and the reasons for conclusions drawn. [BC 9.05.035, amended by Ordinance No. 3400, 9/10/84; Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87; Ordinance No. 3770, 4/1/91; Ordinance No. 3775, 6/24/91; Ordinance No. 3887, 3/21/94; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.040 Requirements for Scale Plans and Drawings.

A. The application required by BC 9.05.035 shall be accompanied by five copies of scale plans or drawings prepared and signed as appropriate by a registered civil engineer, architect, or landscape architect showing sufficient details and information to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. Following are examples of information which may be required:

1. Property lines of the property on which the work is to be performed;

2. Location of buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any building or structure on land of adjacent property owners that is within 15 feet of the property on which the work is to be performed;

3. Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and the slopes of all work proposed to be done, shown on a contour map, and an estimate of the quantity of excavation and fill involved. The contour map shall show the existing contours of the land and the proposed contours of the land after completion of the proposed work. Contours shall be shown at even two-foot or other intervals required by the City Engineer;

4. Detailed plans of walls, cribs, drains, dams, erosion control planting or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and estimated cubic feet per second runoff of the area served by any drainage facility;

5. A map or photo showing and describing the major plant materials and a map delineating riparian and wetland boundaries on the site;

6. Detailed engineering plans showing construction details for streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, water, sewer, storm drains, parking lots and utilities;

7. Any other applicable plans or drawings the City Engineer may require in order to carry out the purposes of this ordinance including, on sites in excess of one-half acre, work on streets or utilities that will become part of the public street.

B. The City Engineer may waive the requirement for scale drawings if the City Engineer finds that the information on the application is sufficient to show that the work will conform to the requirements of this ordinance.

C. The City Engineer shall review the plans in accordance with generally accepted engineering standards, methods, and specifications and may make such requirements as are necessary to ensure that the plans submitted and the development, design or construction comply therewith. [BC 9.05.040, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.045 Technical Standards.

A. The City Engineer may formulate those technical standards the City Engineer finds necessary or convenient to implement this ordinance, provided such standards are not inconsistent with law.

B. Before the technical standards formulated by the City Engineer may take effect, the City shall adopt the standards by ordinance or resolution. The City shall adopt the standards by ordinance if legally required, but otherwise the City may choose the manner of adoption the City deems most appropriate.

C. A compilation of all applicable technical standards adopted under this section, whether by resolution or ordinance, shall be kept on file in the office of the city engineer and made available to the public. The compilation may be referred to as the “Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings”. [BC 9.05.045, added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4059, 9/15/99; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.046 Extension of Facilities.

A. To provide for orderly development of the adjoining property or to provide an adequate grid of the City system, the City Engineer or designee shall require extension of water lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and may require extension of streets through applicant’s property to the property line of the adjoining or abutting property in a manner approved by Facilities Review in accordance with Ordinance No. 2050 (the Development Code) and may designate maximum or minimum slopes and compaction to be used. Facilities required in accordance with this section shall be consistent with the acknowledged Comprehensive Plan.

B. Where physical or topographical conditions make the extension of a facility impracticable, the City Engineer or designee may require instead cash payment to the City. The payment shall be in lieu of the extension of the facility, and shall be in an amount reasonably estimated to equal the cost of extending the facility under practicable conditions. [BC 9.05.046, added by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; amended by Ordinance No. 4059, 9/15/99; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.050 Application Referred to Director of Community Development, Planning Commission or Board of Design Review.

A. When the work to be done on a site occurs in a Significant Natural Resource Area, or in an Important Natural Resource Area within 100 feet of a Significant Natural Resource Area, the application shall be referred by the city engineer to the Director of Community Development for study, review and recommendation. The Director of Community Development shall report on how the proposal may impact the resource and aesthetic values of the site, alternative methods of development which could result in less loss or damage to scenic, wildlife or natural features of the site, and shall recommend possible preferred methods of mitigation or development.

The Director of Community Development, on completion of investigation, shall transmit the report, with findings and recommendations to the city engineer. In addition, the report shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission (Commission) or the Board of Design Review (Board) if the proposal involves a development project within the Commission’s or Board’s jurisdiction, or to the Commission, in the event the approval involves a subdivision, as set out in the Development Code. No permit shall be issued by the city engineer, Board or Commission until the report has been received.

B. Pursuant to the process set out in BC 9.05.083 the city engineer shall submit to the Commission or Board, as appropriate, all permit applications for work within the Commission’s or Board’s jurisdiction under the Development Code and all permit applications for channelization or relocation of the floodway. The Commission or Board, as appropriate, shall review these applications under the Commission’s or Board’s standards contained in the Development Code and may attach conditions to its approval. [BC 9.05.050, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.055 Permit Issuance or Denial by City Engineer.

A. Grounds For Denial. The permit shall be denied when, in the judgment of the City Engineer, the proposed work would:

1. Directly or indirectly create a hazard to human life, or a substantial risk of hazard to human life;

2. Directly or indirectly harm real or personal property or create a substantial risk of harm to real or personal property;

3. Cause damage or substantial risk of damage to any public sewer, storm drain, water course, street, street improvement or any other public real or personal property; or

4. Cause irreparable or unreasonable harm or create substantial risk of harm to a significant natural resource area.

B. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, conditions contained in subsection A of this section can be eliminated or mitigated by imposing conditions or by a specified method of performing the work, or through redevelopment or rehabilitation of the site, the City Engineer may grant the permit on the condition that the specified protection and precautionary work or mitigation shall be done to the City Engineer’s satisfaction or on the condition that a specified method of performing the work shall be used.

C. Conditions on Issuance. In granting a permit under this ordinance, the City Engineer may attach conditions to ensure conformity with the provisions of subsection A of this section. No person shall violate any conditions imposed by the City Engineer. In addition to conditions which address subsection A of this section, the City Engineer may impose additional conditions which may include, but shall not be limited to:

1. Limitations on the hours of operation or the period of year in which work may be performed;

2. Restrictions on the size and type of equipment;

3. Designation of routes on which materials may be transported;

4. The completion date for the permit;

5. Requirements as to the laying of dust and tracking of dirt, the prevention of noises and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general public or any portion of the public or the neighborhood;

6. Manner of use of public streets and places in the course of the work;

7. Requirements to protect the environment and natural resources, on or off site.

D. The effective date of the permit is governed by BC 9.05.085. [BC 9.05.055, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.060 Permit Issuance or Denial – Floodplain District.

A. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in the FIRM are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

2. If subsection (A)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.

3. For property within the floodway fringe of Beaverton Creek (main stem) from Murray Boulevard upstream to State Highway 8 (Canyon Road), fill that facilitates development may be placed without regard for the holding capacity of the property in question; provided, that the fill is shown not to raise the base flood elevation or create additional flooding inside and outside the established flood hazard area of tributaries to Beaverton Creek that cross the floodway fringe and converge with Beaverton Creek within those boundaries.

B. Grounds for Denial.

1. In addition to the grounds for denial contained in BC 9.05.055, the City Engineer shall also deny a permit for development in an area of special flood hazard if the City Engineer finds that any of the following circumstances exist:

a. The proposed development will diminish the flood carrying capacity of the water course;

b. The proposed development does not maintain the holding capacity of the site;

c. The proposed development will significantly raise the flood surface elevations up or down stream from or adjacent to the site;

d. The proposed development will endanger life or property on or off the site;

e. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source, proposed construction will not be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates;

f. All necessary permits have not been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

2. In lieu of denial, the City Engineer may grant the permit with any conditions necessary to assure that the provisions of this section will be met.

C. General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

1. Anchoring.

a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

b. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

2. Construction Materials and Methods.

a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

3. Utilities.

a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

b. New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

4. Subdivision Proposals.

a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

d. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, and the City Engineer determines base flood elevation data to be necessary to properly administer regulations within an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation data shall be generated. 

5. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, highwater marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

D. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), the following provisions are required:

1. Residential Construction.

a. In new construction or the substantial improvement of any residential structure the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated to not less than one foot above the base flood elevation. If within the special flood hazard area of Beaverton Creek (main stem) from Murray Boulevard upstream to State Highway 8 (Canyon Road), the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated to not less than two feet above the base flood elevation. 

b. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

i. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

2. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the level of the base flood elevation and, if within the special flood hazard area of Beaverton Creek (main stem) from Murray Boulevard upstream to State Highway 8 (Canyon Road), be elevated to not less than two feet above the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

a. Be floodproofed to an elevation one foot above the base flood level and, if within the special flood hazard area of Beaverton Creek (main stem) between Murray Boulevard upstream to State Highway 8 (Canyon Road), be floodproofed two feet above the base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight and with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Building Official as set forth in BC 9.05.035(F);

d. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (D)(1) of this section;

e. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below).

3. Manufactured Homes.

a. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30 and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection (C)(1) of this section;

b. For new manufactured home parks and subdivisions; for expansions to existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions; for existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the street, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home park or subdivision, it is required that:

i. Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at or above the base flood level;

ii. Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and

iii. In the instance of elevation on pilings, that:

(A) Lots are large enough to permit steps,

(B) Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart, and

(C) Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level.

4. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in the FIRM are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

b. If the requirements of subsection (D)(4)(a) of this section are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection C of this section. [BC 9.05.060, amended by Ordinance No. 3400, 9/10/84; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 3564, 5/5/87; Ordinance No. 3887, 3/21/94; Ordinance No. 3984, 6/10/97; Ordinance No. 4078, 11/9/99; Ordinance No. 4107, 5/1/00; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.065 Designation of Routes.

[BC 9.05.065, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.05.070 Security for Performance.

A. The applicant shall submit a bond or other security in an amount satisfactory to the city engineer and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the sum of 100 percent of the estimated cost of the development governed by this ordinance, not including the cost of parking lot construction, to guarantee the faithful performance of the work specified in the permit within the time specified by the city engineer.

B. When the public improvements described in a site development permit are substantially complete and are acceptable to the city, the applicant shall submit a maintenance bond or other security in an amount satisfactory to the city engineer and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the sum of 25 percent of the cost of those improvements, as determined by the city engineer, to guarantee the quality of workmanship and materials used to complete the work, for at least one year following substantial completion and acceptance or for a longer period to be determined by the city engineer if necessary or desirable to guarantee the viability of one or more improvements. In the event it becomes necessary for one or more of those improvements to be repaired or replaced on account of deficient workmanship or materials, then the maintenance bond or other security shall be extended for one year following substantial completion and acceptance of corrected improvements.

C. The security instrument shall obligate the principal to faithfully perform the work specified in the permit within the time specified by the city engineer and shall further provide that it will not be canceled or terminated until the City has approved the work in writing.

D. Surety Bond – Notice of Default. When the city engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of a permit, written notice of the default shall be given to the principal and to the surety of the bond. The notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost, and the period of time considered by the city engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.

E. Interference Prohibited. No person shall interfere with or obstruct ingress to or egress from the premises by an authorized representative or agent of a surety or of the City engaged in completing the work required to be performed under the permit or in complying with the permit terms or conditions.

F. Termination of Security. All security posted shall be effective from the date of the posting to the date of completion to the satisfaction of the city engineer of all the permit terms and conditions for the work. The completion shall be evidenced by a statement signed by the principal on request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor or the depositor’s assigns on the termination of the bond, except any portion of it that may have been used. [BC 9.05.070, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 3798, 1/27/92; Ordinance No. 3993, 9/23/97; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.075 Liability Insurance.

If, in the city engineer’s opinion, the nature of the work regulated by this ordinance is such that it might create a hazard to human life or adjoining property or property at a higher or lower level, a street or street improvement, or any other public property, the city engineer may, before issuing the permit, require that the permit applicant file a certificate showing that the applicant is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as claims for property damage, including damage to the City by deposit or washing of material onto City streets or other public improvements, that may arise from the performance of the work, whether the performance is by the applicant, the applicant’s subcontractor or any person directly or indirectly employed by the applicant. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the city engineer in accordance with the nature of the risks involved. The insurance shall include protection against liability arising from completed operations. The insurance shall be written by a company that is approved by the City and shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees against loss or liability that may arise during the performance of, or that may result from, any work required to be done. [BC 9.05.075; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.080 Transferability.

No permit required by BC 9.05.020 shall be transferable without the written consent of the city engineer. [BC 9.05.080; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.083 Approval by Planning Commission or Board of Design Review.

Where a permit also requires review by the Planning Commission (Commission) or the Board of Design Review (Board) under BC 9.05.050, the Commission’s or Board’s approval must be obtained prior to the issuance of the permit by the city engineer. The city engineer shall transmit in writing recommendations for preliminary approval and conditions based on this ordinance to the Commission or Board, as appropriate, prior to the Commission’s or Board’s decision. If the city engineer denies the permit, the denial is immediately appealable by the applicant under BC 9.05.091 and the denial does not need to be reviewed by the Commission or Board. If the Commission or Board denies the proposed work on grounds within its authority, the site development permit shall be automatically denied without any further action of the city engineer. If application for a site development permit is made after the Commission’s or Board’s approval of a site plan, the preliminary approval and conditions shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development who shall review it for conformity to the Commission’s or Board’s approval, requirements and conditions. If the Director of Community Development finds it has a major impact on the Commission’s or Board’s prior approval, the applicant shall be required to resubmit plans to the Commission or Board, as appropriate. [BC 9.05.083, added by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.085 Effective Date of Permit.

A. Fill permits outside the floodplain district or outside a Significant Natural Resource Area or which do not require Planning Commission (Commission) or Board of Design Review (Board) approval shall be effective when issued by the city engineer pursuant to this ordinance.

B. Permits outside a floodplain district, but subject to review by the Director of Community Development, Commission or Board under BC 9.05.050 shall not be effective until:

1. The provisions of BC 9.05.083 have been met for permits subject to Board approval under BC 9.05.050;

2. The city engineer has mailed or caused to be delivered a notification of issuance of the permit to the Director of Community Development, the applicant and any other interested party who requested such notification for a permit reviewed by the Director of Community Development under BC 9.05.050, but not the Commission or Board;

3. The time to petition for review as set out in BC 9.05.091 has elapsed; and

4. Any review proceeding initiated under BC 9.05.091 has been completed.

C. Permits in the floodplain district shall not become effective until:

1. The provisions of BC 9.05.083 have been met for a permit subject to Commission or Board approval under BC 9.05.050; and

2. Notice adjacent communities, the Department of Land Conservation and Development and other appropriate State and Federal agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; and

3. The City Engineer has delivered written notice of the decision to grant the permit by certified mail or personal delivery to those persons on a list provided by the permit applicant, certified to be accurate, of the names and addresses of all property owners within an area enclosed by lines parallel to and 500 feet from the boundary of the property on which the work is to be performed. The City Engineer shall also cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. If a subdivision or a design review application, with public notice, has previously been processed by the Director of Community Development for the proposed work in a floodplain district, certified mailing to property owners as described above is not required; and

4. The time to petition for review as set out in BC 9.05.091 has elapsed; and

5. Any review proceeding initiated under BC 9.05.091 has been completed. [BC 9.05.085, amended by Ordinance No. 3400, 9/10/84; Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4078, 11/9/99; Ordinance No. 4107, 5/1/00; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.090 Appeal by Affected Person.

[BC 9.05.090, repealed by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86]


9.05.091 Appeal Authorized.

A. An applicant for a permit, a permittee or any person aggrieved by any action, decision or interpretation of the City Engineer may appeal to the Council by filing with the City Recorder the following:

1. A written notice of appeal, specifying the basis of the appeal; specific legal and factual bases for appeal; the specific reasons why the appellant contends that the City Engineer’s action, decision or interpretation is incorrect or is not in conformance with the applicable requirements; and specific facts showing the appellant has a substantial interest in the action, decision or interpretation and that the Council’s decision will have a practical effect on the appellant; and

2. An appeal filing fee, unless the appeal is filed by or on behalf of the Mayor or another public agency or is waived by motion and order of the Council.

The written notice of appeal and filing fee shall be filed within ten calendar days from the date of mailing of notice of the city engineer’s action or the date of actual notice, whichever is earlier.

B. Failure to file an appeal within the time allowed by this Ordinance and according to the requirements set forth in this section is jurisdictional. In such cases, the staff decision shall be deemed the City’s final decision on the matter.

C. If the decision to issue the permit is contested, the burden shall be on the permit applicant to establish that the requirements for issuance of a permit have been met.

D. If the adequacy of the conditions attached by the city engineer is contested, the petitioner shall have the burden of showing grounds for modification or addition of conditions. The hearing shall be de novo. However, the City Engineer shall furnish for Council consideration all written evidence previously received or generated by the City Engineer bearing on the appeal.

E. At the conclusion of the hearing, and after argument if any, the Council shall rule on the issues presented. The order shall, as applicable, grant or deny the permit, and may attach conditions consistent with this ordinance.

F. The order shall be in writing and contain findings on all contested issues, with specific reference to the evidence upon which the findings were based. If an emergency exists, the order may be made orally and shall be reduced to writing as soon as practicable. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the permit applicant if any, the petitioner and the city engineer. The decision of the Council shall be final.

G. If an appellant has applied for both a permit issued under this ordinance and a “grading only” (or “early grading”) permit for the same project, but has not received either permit when the violation occurs, and the Council denies the appeal, the penalty shall be based on the permit fee for a permit issued under this ordinance, not the “grading only” permit.

H. If a penalty is appealed and the Council rules in favor of the appellant, the Council may refund all, part or none of the appeal filing fee to the appellant. If the Council approves a refund, the City shall refund any monies due the appellant within 30 calendar days after the Council approves the Final Order.

I. If an appellant pays a penalty before the appeal is heard by the Council, and the appeal is granted by the Council, the City shall refund any monies due the appellant within 30 calendar days after the Council approves the Final Order. [BC 9.05.091, amended by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4744, 10/17/18]


9.05.092 Revocation, Suspension, Modification.

A. The city engineer may revoke, suspend, or modify a permit issued under this ordinance for any of the following reasons:

1. violation of a condition of the permit;

2. violation of a provision of this ordinance or any other applicable code section or law relating to the work;

3. the existence of a condition or the doing of an act constituting or creating a nuisance or directly or indirectly creating a hazard to human life, or a substantial risk of hazard to human life, directly or indirectly harming real or personal property or creating a substantial risk of harm to real or personal property; or

4. a material error or misrepresentation by the applicant;

5. any of the grounds set forth in BC 2.05.054.

B. Revocation or suspension shall be in accordance with the procedures contained in BC 2.05.055 through 2.05.066.

BC 2.05.060 procedures may be used by the city engineer, except that no serious danger to the public health or safety shall be required prior to issuance of a cease and desist order or suspension. Instead, the procedures in BC 2.05.060 may be used if the city engineer determines that the existence of a condition or the doing of an act constitutes or creates a nuisance or directly or indirectly harms real or personal property or creates a substantial risk of harm to real or personal property. The procedures in BC 2.05.056 through 2.05.058 will be used in all other cases, except as otherwise provided herein. [BC 9.05.092, renumbered by Ordinance No. 3440, 4/2/85; amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.093 Review by Council.

A. The Council may by resolution order a public review of any permit issued under this ordinance, and may order suspension pending a public hearing. The resolution shall state the matters to be reviewed and, if suspension is ordered, the reasons for the suspension.

B. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered to the permit holder by certified mail return receipt requested or personal delivery. If the resolution orders suspension of the permit pending Council review, the notice shall be served by posting on the site and either personal delivery or by certified mail return receipt requested to the applicant at the address stated on the application. Suspension of the permit is effective upon posting notice and mailing to the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent accepting service at the address stated on the application.

C. If the permit is suspended pending review, such review shall be conducted within 15 days of the date of resolution, unless the permit holder requests a continuance.

D. Scope of Review.

1. The Council may review compliance with the terms of the permit and as it deems necessary for the public health, safety or welfare, it may modify the conditions attached by the city engineer, or attach additional conditions to the permit consistent with this ordinance.

2. If the Council is of the opinion that the permit should be revoked, it shall direct the city engineer to initiate revocation proceedings pursuant to BC 9.05.090. In that event, the permit shall remain suspended until the city engineer renders a decision on the question of revocation. [BC 9.05.093; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.095 Expiration; Extension.

A permit issued under this ordinance shall expire one year after the date granted, unless a shorter time is specified in the permit conditions. If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified time, the permittee may, before expiration of the permit, present in writing to the city engineer a request for an extension of time, stating the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, such an extension is necessary, the city engineer may grant additional time for completion of the work. [BC 9.05.095; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.100 Providing Copy of Permit to Workers.

A. The permit holder shall provide every worker immediate access to a copy of the permit. 

On request by a private citizen or public official, the worker shall display the permit. Failure or inability to display the permit shall be grounds for suspension of the permit without prior notice and the suspension shall continue in effect until a copy of the permit is displayed.

B. For purposes of this section, “immediate access” means in the possession of the worker or at some location on the subject property; “worker” includes every person involved in the development, whether or not employed by the permit holder. [BC 9.05.100; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.105 Inspection by City.

A. The inspections of plans, materials, designs and workmanship provided by this section are intended for the protection of the City and the public. In performing these inspections, the city engineer is entitled to rely on more specific and detailed inspection reports submitted by others and is not required to inspect each particular aspect of a project in detail. The applicant is responsible for the quality of construction and shall not be relieved of this due to passing inspections provided by the City. The holder of any permit issued under this ordinance shall notify the city engineer as follows:

1. Initial inspection. Forty-eight hours before work is commenced;

2. Utilities. Upon completion of utility installation, but prior to covering the work;

3. Subgrade rock. When subgrade rock has been installed prior to paving or pouring concrete (when paving or pouring of concrete is to take place);

4. Grading. When all rough grading has been completed and again when finish grading is to occur, that is, when all work including installation of drainage structures and other protective devices has been completed;

5. Final inspection. Upon completion of all work for final inspection.

B. On receiving the notice the city engineer shall promptly inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify the permittee in what respects there has been failure to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. Any portion of the work that does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the permittee. [BC 9.05.105, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.110 Excavations.

This section applies to all excavations in the City regardless of whether a permit is required by this ordinance for the excavations, except that the tests and reports specified by this section shall not be necessary in connection with excavations for which no permit is required.

A. Slope Standards Generally. No permanent excavation shall be made with a face steeper in slope than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical, unless a retaining wall or other approved support is provided to support the face of the excavation.

B. Deviation From Slope Standard. The city engineer may on request, permit deviations from the above standard that do not conflict with the purpose of this ordinance, provided that the owner shall first furnish the city engineer with a written opinion of a soils engineer, certifying that the soils engineer has investigated the site and that the proposed deviations will not endanger property.

C. Flatter Excavation Face; When Required. The city engineer may require the excavation to be made with an excavation face flatter in slope than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical if the city engineer finds the material in which the excavation is to be made unusually subject to erosion or if other conditions make the flatter excavation necessary for stability and safety.

D. Erosion Control. All demolition areas, exposed slopes (excavation and fill slopes), stockpiles, grading areas and other areas of the site to be disturbed shall receive erosion control treatment meeting applicable standards of the City, Washington County Clean Water Services, and Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency, those standards affording the most protection to persons and property off-site shall apply. Before any area or combination of areas that exceed 500 square feet of the surface of a site is disturbed by, or for purposes of, any of the following construction activities or combination thereof, all downstream property lines of the site shall be fenced with erosion control (silt) fencing, downstream street inlets and water courses shall be protected from sedimentation, and construction vehicle accesses shall be provided with a gravel construction (wash-down) entrance pad for each access:

1. Demolition.

2. Construction staging.

3. Multiple trips by vehicles over undisturbed ground or parking of multiple construction vehicles on undisturbed ground.

4. Clearing, stripping, or removal of existing trees, vegetation, groundcover or topsoil.

5. Scraping of the ground surface, as for example, in or around a stockpile area to remove materials that would otherwise contaminate the materials to be stockpiled (such as clean fill material or clean crushed rock for roadbuilding).

6. Depositing debris.

7. Grading, excavation or filling.

8. Depositing, stockpiling or storage of soil, sand, gravel, crushed rock, demolition materials, recycled concrete, asphalt or other recycled demolition materials.

9. Pot-holing, geotechnical test drilling, exploratory excavations or well-drilling.

E. Distance From Property Line. The beginning of an excavation shall be located one-half its vertical height but not less than ten feet from an adjoining property line. Request for waiver of this requirement may be made to the city engineer by presentation of detailed plans along with appropriate substantiating evidence in the form of a written opinion of a soils engineer or engineering geologist to support justification for the waiver.

F. Rounding of Excavations Required. The top of excavations slopes and the ends of excavations shall be rounded as required by the city engineer. [BC 9.05.110; amended by Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.115 Fills.

This section applies to all fills in the City regardless of whether a permit is required by this ordinance for such fills, except that the tests and reports specified by this section shall not be necessary in connection with fills for which no permit is required.

A. Slope Standards. No fill shall be made that creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical. The city engineer may, on request, permit deviations from the above standard that do not conflict with the purposes of this ordinance, provided that the owner furnishes the city engineer with the written opinion of a soils engineer or engineering geologist certifying that the soils engineer or engineering geologist has investigated the site and that the proposed deviations will not injure property.

B. Flatter Fill Surface; When Required. The city engineer may require that the owner furnish a written opinion of a soils engineer, certifying that the soils engineer has investigated the site and recommending maximum allowable fill slope and type of slope treatment for stability.

C. Distance From Property Line. The toe of filled slopes shall be located one-half the vertical height of the fill but not less than ten feet from an adjoining property line. Request for waiver of this requirement may be made to the city engineer by presentation of detailed plans along with appropriate substantiating evidence in the form of a written opinion of a soils engineer or engineering geologist to support justification for the waiver. [BC 9.05.115; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.120 Compaction of Fills.

A. Fill slopes shall be compacted as necessary for safety; to prevent the saturation, adverse settlement, slipping or erosion of the fill and to achieve a stable slope. Wherever possible, compaction shall not be so dense that it precludes planting on the slope. Where compaction is required it shall be to a minimum of ninety percent compaction and made under supervised grading. The city engineer may specify the maximum thickness of the layers of fill to be compacted.

B. Fills shall be compacted, inspected and tested in accordance with the following provisions:

1. the space over which fills are to be made shall first be cleared of all trash, brush, trees, stumps, timber or debris and shall be scarified;

2. all filling shall be done with good sound earth, gravel or materials approved by the city engineer;

3. when an existing fill is to be widened or a new fill is to be made on a hillside, the new material shall be bonded to the old by plowing deep longitudinal furrows, or by removing top soil and vegetation and by compacting the fill upon a series of terraces;

4. all exposed fill slopes shall be protected immediately upon completion with landscaping, an approved sprinkler system or other erosion control devices approved and considered necessary by the city engineer;

5. in addition to the inspection of fills by the city engineer, the city engineer may require that a written report in duplicate be submitted by a soils engineer certifying the results of tests of the fill at selected stages. If favorable conditions exist, the city engineer may by prior approval waive requirements for supervision of soil testing. If the fill is to support buildings, structures or roadways, the city engineer may require the report to include recommendations on bearing capacities. [BC 9.05.120, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.125 Maintenance.

The owner of property or any other person or agent in control of the property on which development covered by this ordinance has been made under a permit granted under this ordinance, shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, planted slopes and other protective devices shown in the approved plans or drawings submitted with the application for the grading permit or as required by the city engineer. [BC 9.05.125, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.130 Repair.

When the city engineer determines by inspection that an existing development covered by this ordinance, from any cause, has become a hazard or creates a substantial risk of hazard to people, or harms property or creates a substantial risk of harm to property, or affects the safety, usability or stability of public property, the owner of the property on which the development is located or other person or agent in control of the property, on receipt of notice in writing from the city engineer, shall, within one hundred eighty days from the date of the notice, repair or reconstruct the development so that it will conform to the requirements of this ordinance. A shorter period of time may be specified by the city engineer if an imminent and immediate hazard is found to exist. A person receiving notice from the city engineer may appeal from the notice in the manner provided by BC 2.05.056, subsections B to G. [BC 9.05.130, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.135 Drainage Requirements.

A. Drainage Generally. All graded sites shall be developed and maintained to provide control of storm and surface waters. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent storm or surface waters from damaging the face of an excavation or the sloping face of a fill, and to prevent grading or other construction activity from causing significant concentration or acceleration of drainage entering adjacent property without an easement from the owner of the adjacent property, which shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and recorded at the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation. All drainage provisions shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and shall be designed to maintain all storm and surface water draining on site or to carry all or part of storm and surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural water course, approved by the city engineer as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters.

B. Building Pad. Building pads on graded sites shall be sloped at a minimum of two percent to the street or an approved drainage device.

C. Subdrainage. When the city engineer considers it necessary, adequate subdrainage shall be provided in connection with fills.

D. Control of Excessive Runoff.

1. Where a one-half acre or larger site is involved, the site drainage design shall provide for retention of storm waters by use of impoundments that constitute an approved drainage device to limit the amount of runoff to a rate that approximates the run-off rate of the site in its undeveloped state. Flat-roof buildings shall provide rooftop catchments with a maximum runoff of the entire roof area limited to one-half inch per hour.

2. On sites of less than one-half acre where flat-roof buildings are constructed, the requirements of subsection (D)(1) of this section, as they apply to roofs, shall apply. [BC 9.05.135, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03; Ordinance No. 4412, 12/4/06]


9.05.140 Additional Safety Precautions.

If at any stage of development requiring a permit by this ordinance the city engineer determines by inspection that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger life, real or personal property or public property, the city engineer may require reasonable safety precautions as a condition of allowing further work to be done. [BC 9.05.140, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.145 Protection of Adjacent Public Property.

No person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger an adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property, without supporting and protecting them from settling, cracking, or other damage that might result from the excavation. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the nature of the excavation creates a hazard to life unless adequately fenced, the city engineer may require the applicant to construct fences or guard rails to safeguard persons using the public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property. [BC 9.05.145; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.150 Deposits Prohibited.

A. Premises of Another Person. No person shall dump, move or place earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material so as to cause the material to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon or over the premises of another without the express consent of the owner of the premises so affected or upon or over any public place or way.

B. Spilling. No person shall, when hauling earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material over any public street, alley or other public place, allow the material to blow or spill over and upon a public street, alley or place or adjacent private property.

C. Removal of Debris. If, due to a violation of subsection A or B, earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any public place or way, the person responsible or the permittee shall cause the material to be removed from the public place or way immediately or within such time as authorized by the city engineer or operations director. If it is not so removed, the city engineer or operations director shall cause its removal and the cost of the removal shall be paid to the City by the person who failed to remove the material. Failure to cause the removal of the material when notified or failure to pay the costs of removal of the material incurred by the City shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the permit or issuance of a civil infraction complaint. [BC 9.05.150, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.155 Certificate of Completion.

A. On completion of the project, the permittee or a civil engineer in charge of the project on the permittee’s behalf shall certify in writing to the city engineer that the project was done in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and the permit, plans and specifications submitted, and shall furnish a final contour map.

B. If, on final inspection of development requiring a permit under this ordinance, it is found that the work authorized by the permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance, the permit, and the plans and specifications, the city engineer shall issue to the owner a completion certificate covering the work.

C. Upon completion of construction in the floodplain, the permittee or a civil engineer in charge of the project on the permittee’s behalf shall submit to the city engineer a completed Elevation Certificate (FEMA 81-31, April 82, 593-117, as amended from time to time). The City shall maintain for public inspection such records as required under federal law. (44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)). [BC 9.05.155, amended by Ordinance No. 3400, 9/10/84; Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.156 Failure to Obtain Permit.

A. When a permit is required by BC 9.05.020, but is not obtained prior to work or development, the city engineer may issue a stop work order. The issuing officer shall provide notice by posting a notice on-site.

B. The notice shall include:

1. the fact of the cease and desist order and the reason therefore; and

2. a statement that a permit is required and that application may be made through the city engineer.

C. In addition to the cease and desist order, the city attorney may pursue injunctive relief in the appropriate court.

D. In addition to other action, failure to obtain a permit when one is required is a civil infraction. [BC 9.05.156, added by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.160 Abatement of Violations.

Violations of this ordinance are declared to constitute public nuisances. When the city engineer determines that conditions violating this ordinance exist, the city engineer may require or provide for abatement of the violation pursuant to the provisions for abatement of nuisances in Chapter Five. The city attorney may institute any legal proceedings necessary to abate a public nuisance. These remedies are not exclusive and are in addition to other remedies provided under this ordinance or under any other law. [BC 9.05.160, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.165 Penalties.

A. Violation of this ordinance constitutes a Class 1 Civil Infraction to be processed in accordance with the procedures provided in BC 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

B. Each violation of a separate provision of this ordinance constitutes a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of this ordinance is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate infraction.

C. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies available to the City under BC 9.05.160 or State law. [BC 9.05.165; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


9.05.170 Conflicting Provisions.

If the provisions of this ordinance conflict with other provisions of the Beaverton Code or any other City ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. [BC 9.05.170, amended by Ordinance No. 3487, 1/14/86; Ordinance No. 4249, 4/7/03]


Chapter 9.06 NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS

Sections:

9.06.010    Purpose.

9.06.015    NAC Policy Statement.

9.06.020    Criteria for Formal Recognition of a NAC.

9.06.022    Criteria for Eligibility for Fee Reimbursement for NAC Appeals.

9.06.025    Termination of Recognition.

9.06.030    City Support of NACs.

9.06.035    Newly Annexed Areas.

9.06.040    Council Review of NACs.


9.06.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose of BC 9.06.010 through 9.06.040 is to encourage and endorse citizen involvement through the formal recognition of groups of citizens that desire to form neighborhood association committees (NACs) for particular purposes, and to provide certain criteria for the formation, operation and continuation of the recognized NACs in order to insure a maximum opportunity for involvement by the citizens of Beaverton in the processes of government as well as other activities concerning neighborhood and community livability.

B. Although a major function of the NACs will be to augment the citizen involvement process in land use related matters, such as planning and zoning activities, as is required by applicable law, it is the intent of the Council to provide the basis for a wide range of activities that promote the general health and welfare of the community and a spirit of harmony and pride for all citizens of Beaverton.

C. Nothing in BC 9.06.010 through 9.06.040 shall limit the right of any person, group of persons or organization from exercising a lawful right. Membership in a recognized NAC confers no extraordinary rights, standing or legal capacity solely on the basis of membership, nor is the NAC itself given any special status by this legislation that is intended to influence a court of law as to its capacity to commence litigation. [BC 9.06.010, amended by Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05]


9.06.015 NAC Policy Statement.

The Council hereby establishes criteria whereby it may formally recognize NACs within the City limits and adjacent areas. The Council encourages and endorses the formation, operation and continuation of such NACs pursuant to the criteria set forth below, to provide maximum citizen involvement in the community. [BC 9.06.015, amended by Ordinance No. 3544, 12/16/86; Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05]


9.06.020 Criteria for Formal Recognition of a NAC.

A NAC that seeks formal recognition by the City shall meet and continue to maintain conformity with the following minimum criteria for formal recognition:

A. General Membership Criteria.

1. a resident, a property owner, a business and a representative of a non-profit organization within the recognized boundary of a NAC shall be entitled to membership.

2. a member who is at least eighteen years of age shall have one vote on any matter to be decided by the NAC. One high school student government representative from each high school within the NAC boundary who also lives within the boundaries of the particular NAC and who has been appointed by his/her school to serve as a NAC member, shall also have one vote and may be under eighteen years of age.

3. membership or other participation shall not be conditioned on the requirement of the payment of dues or fees. However, a NAC may accumulate funds to carry out its purposes through other means, including voluntary contributions, projects, grants, contracts and subscription to newsletters. Each NAC solely shall be responsible to account to the state and federal governments for the NACs private revenues and expenditures, if any. A NAC’s use of public funds provided to it directly or indirectly by a public entity shall be limited to only those uses allowed by controlling law.

4. membership shall not be limited by race, creed, color, sex, national origin, income or any other status protected under federal, state or local law.

B. NAC Boundaries. In order to implement the Council’s stated purpose of insuring maximum opportunity for citizen involvement, the Council shall adopt a map containing suggested boundaries for NACs that will encompass the entire area of the City. Persons seeking formal recognition of a NAC may propose alternatives to the map suggestions. Following input in writing or through oral testimony at a City Council meeting by interested persons, the Council shall finally determine the boundaries of a NAC in accordance with as many of the following criteria as may be applicable under the circumstances:

1. boundaries should be contiguous and mutually exclusive of those of other formally recognized NACs;

2. boundaries should follow readily identifiable physical features, such as property lines or arterial or collector streets, or be set at some other clearly defined and relatively permanent natural or man-made feature; and

3. boundaries describing the territory should be logical, considering such other factors as:

a. a community of interests, common identity and social communication;

b. existing commercial patterns;

c. existing boundaries of other agencies, such as school districts; and

d. the views and desires of citizens seeking NAC recognition.

C. Organization and By-laws. Following determination of a boundary for a NAC, the person or persons seeking formal recognition shall:

1. Hold at least one public organizational meeting that has been well publicized in the neighborhood, with City assistance and approval, and adopt written by-laws that provide, at a minimum, for the following:

a. Election of officers, provided that every elected officer and the NAC’s representative on the Beaverton Committee for Citizen Involvement (BCCI) meet the membership requirements of BC 9.06.020(A);

b. Meetings of the general membership, and board, executive committee and subcommittee meetings, provided that general membership meetings shall be held on any matter on which the NAC acts in an advisory capacity to the City Council or to the Planning Commission or other advisory body to the Council, including but not limited to action by the NAC on a pending application to the City for a land use permit or land use decision;

c. All decisions of a NAC shall be by majority vote of the duly constituted board;

d. Votes of the general membership shall be advisory only to the board;

e. Any such meetings shall be conducted in conformance to the requirements of Oregon public meetings law and Oregon public records law regardless of the size of its membership;

f. Written minutes as required by the Oregon public meetings law and that also record minority opinions and provided that copies of minutes and meeting sign-in sheets be forwarded to the City within a time period determined by the City;

g. A current list of the names and addresses of the officers of the NAC to be kept on file with the City; and

h. A minimum of one general neighborhood meeting to be held per calendar year and the time, place and meeting agenda be publicized throughout the neighborhood through mail, on the City website, and in local newspapers no fewer than five business days in advance of the meeting.

2. Following adoption, a copy of the NAC’s by-laws shall be filed with the City subject to review and approval by the City Attorney for compliance with applicable federal, state, and local law, including this code, and that any amendments be forwarded to the City in a reasonable time period with all such amendments subject to similar review and approval.

D. Formal Recognition. Providing the NAC meets the criteria set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section, a NAC may be considered formally recognized by Council resolution. The mayor shall given written notice of the Council’s formal recognition, within 60 days of the adoption of the resolution, to eligible members of the NAC. The Council’s resolution shall include at least the following:

1. An encouragement to participate in the activities of the newly formed NAC;

2. A map or other designation describing in general terms the NAC boundaries;

3. The names and addresses of the NAC’s officers and board members; and

4. The name, if any, of the City’s designated liaison person who will be serving as a primary contact with the NAC. [BC 9.06.020, amended by Ordinance No. 3544, 12/16/86; Ordinance No. 4059, 9/15/99; Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05; amended during 5/13 supplement]


9.06.022 Criteria for Eligibility for Fee Reimbursement for NAC Appeals.

The City, through the mayor’s office or the mayor’s designee, may reimburse a recognized NAC for the fee payable for an appeal of a City land use decision or City Traffic Commission decision to the City Council, Planning Commission, or Board of Design Review. Each NAC is eligible to apply for reimbursement for one appeal per fiscal year. Budgeted funds for such appeals are at the discretion of the City Council. Reimbursement will only be for appeal of a land use or Traffic Commission decision occurring within the boundary of the subject NAC. Eligibility can not be transferred to another NAC or carried over to the next fiscal year. The NAC may appeal a decision issued by another jurisdiction; however, the fee associated with the appeal of a decision made by a jurisdiction other than the City of Beaverton is not eligible for reimbursement from the City. Nothing in this code shall prevent a NAC from appealing a land use or traffic decision made by another entity at the NAC’s initiative and expense. In order to be eligible for reimbursement, a NAC must meet the following criteria.

A. Recognition Status. The NAC shall be a recognized NAC, meeting the criteria listed under BC 9.06.020.

B. Meeting Requirements. The NAC shall hold at least one public meeting as to the potential appeal that has been publicized in accordance with BC 9.06.020(C) and that meets, at minimum, the following:

1. The NAC shall be notified of the meeting no fewer than five business days before the date of the meeting;

2. The meeting shall be conducted in conformance with Oregon public meetings law and Oregon public records law;

3. The vote to appeal conforms to the voting procedures and voting requirements in the NAC’s by-laws;

4. NAC board members shall conduct a vote on whether or not to appeal the action and whether or not to request reimbursement; and

5. The subject of the potential decision to file an appeal shall appear on the meeting agenda.

C. Filing the Appeal Reimbursement Request. The NAC shall file the written request attached to the appeal within the appropriate appeal period with the City Recorder’s Office or Community Development Department, as appropriate. In addition to the appeal, a NAC filing a request for reimbursement shall include the following:

1. The appropriate appeal fee as established by City Council;

2. The minutes from the meeting in which the NAC voted to appeal and voted to request reimbursement of the City’s appeal fee; and

3. All other requirements for appeals as required by City ordinance.

D. The mayor, or designee, shall determine whether there is money in the budget for the fee reimbursement and whether the request complies with the requirements above. This decision is not a land use decision and the above criteria on fee reimbursement shall not be applied to determine whether the NAC properly filed their appeal or the merits of any appeal. Nothing in this code obligates the City to appropriate funds for or to reimburse the appeal filing fee nor creates any right or entitlement in any NAC or any person to a claim on City funds.

E. If the NAC meets the above criteria and the fee reimbursement is granted, the City shall reimburse, within a timely manner, the appeal fees to the NAC. [BC 9.06.022, added by Ordinance 4376, 11/14/05]


9.06.025 Termination of Recognition.

The formal recognition of a NAC may be terminated by the Council for failure to abide by its by-laws or the provisions of BC 9.06.010 through 9.06.040. The NAC in question shall have notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Council prior to termination. [BC 9.06.025, amended by Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05]


9.06.030 City Support of NACs.

The City may, through the mayor’s office and subject to the mayor’s judgment concerning the availability of resources or budgetary limitations, provide support and assistance to recognized NACs. The mayor or the mayor’s designee shall develop administrative procedures, as the mayor considers appropriate, to provide such support which may include:

A. Materials, supplies and services to aid a NAC in formation, recognition and operation;

B. Staff assistance, as available;

C. Use of City facilities for regular membership, board, executive, and subcommittee meetings; and

D. As determined by the City in its sole discretion, other economic assistance and support. [BC 9.06.030, amended by Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05]


9.06.035 Newly Annexed Areas.

The Washington County Citizen Participation Organization (CPO) that includes the area of a proposed annexation to the City within that CPO boundary and the Beaverton NAC whose boundary is nearest that same area, shall be deemed to be “interested parties” as referenced in Chapter 3.09 of Metro Code relating to notice of annexation and shall be notified of any proposed annexation of such area to the City. When an area is annexed to the City, based on the circumstances of each case the Council shall determine:

A. That the area be added to the territory of an existing NAC;

B. That the area be recognized as immediately appropriate for one or more NACs and its citizens encouraged immediately to seek formal recognition as a new NAC;

C. That the area be recognized as appropriate in the future for one or more NACs but, because it is yet undeveloped or is of too small a size, it should be represented temporarily by another NAC, until such time as it is appropriate to be formally recognized as a separate NAC; or

D. That some other treatment of the area is deemed appropriate under the circumstances. [BC 9.06.040; amended by Ordinance No. 4257, 7/7/03; Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05]


9.06.040 Council Review of NACs.

From time to time, the Council may seek review of one or all of the NACs, their boundaries or the criteria for formal recognition and may amend, modify or change any decision made pursuant to the criteria for formal recognition or any other provision of BC 9.06.010 through 9.06.040. [BC 9.06.040, amended by Ordinance No. 4376, 11/14/05]


Chapter 9.07 LIFE SAFETY AND FIRE REGULATIONS

Sections:

9.07.010    Required Peep Holes.


9.07.010 Required Peep Holes.

Except as provided in section 3305(h) of the Structural Specialty Code, the primary entry door of each dwelling unit of a multi-family dwelling shall be equipped with a peep hole allowing an occupant to have a wide field of view of the area immediately outside the door without opening the door. [BC 9.07.010, added by Ordinance No. 3886, 2/14/94]


Chapter 9.08 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF CERTAIN CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

9.08.020    Purpose.

9.08.040    Scope.

9.08.080    Special Event Permit Required.

9.08.100    Limitations on Use of Certain City Property.

9.08.120    City Property Hours of Use.

9.08.130    Fires, Stoves and Barbecues.

9.08.140    Music/Amplification Systems.

9.08.150    Repealed.

9.08.160    Alcohol and Controlled Substances.

9.08.170    Use of Self-Propelled and Motorized Vehicles.

9.08.180    Firearms and Projectiles.

9.08.190    Animals.

9.08.195    Solicitation/Signs.

9.08.200    Vendors/Concessions.

9.08.210    Repealed.

9.08.220    Repealed.

9.08.230    Enforcement.

9.08.240    Repealed.


9.08.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the unique features of certain City property by limiting use of same for casual recreational, educational and cultural activities that do not unreasonably interfere with use by others nor interfere with the quiet enjoyment of adjacent property. [BC 9.08.020, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.040 Scope.

A. The limitations on use of City property provided in this chapter shall apply to:

City Park (1S116AD09100);

West Parking Lot and Greenspace (1S115BC09200);

The City Library premises (1S115BC09300);

The North and South Plaza at the Round (1S116AA0880 and 1S116AA08900).

B. The Mayor may add other City property to the scope of this chapter and shall give notice of same by any means intended to provide actual notice to potential users. [BC 9.08.040, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.080 Special Event Permit Required.

A person who seeks to use any City property within the scope of this chapter for a special event shall make application for same under the provisions of Chapter 7.05 BC. A person may apply for exceptions to the limitations on use provided in this chapter as part of the application for a special event permit. [BC 9.08.080, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.100 Limitations on Use of Certain City Property.

No person present on City property that is within the scope of this chapter shall:

A. Use abusive or threatening language or gestures or commit any act that constitutes an offense against a person or offense against the public as defined by federal, State or local law;

B. Remove, destroy, damage, alter or obstruct any vegetation, land, equipment, materials or supplies;

C. Defecate or urinate, except in a restroom facility;

D. Walk, stand, sit, or climb on any equipment or structure not intended for such purpose;

E. Apply graffiti or possess graffiti implements with the intent of applying graffiti;

F. Dump or leave any rubbish, yard debris or refuse of any type on the property, except in refuse receptacles provided for such purposes;

G. Excavate the surface or place any fixture or structure on the property except for temporary placement of personal property such as chairs, awnings, and tables;

H. Leave personal property unattended;

I. Camp or stay overnight in any vehicle on the property or within a City-owned parking lot adjacent to the property;

J. Engage in any sport activity that involves more than six people;

K. Operate a motorized or flying toy or one propelled by combustion; or

L. Disobey any reasonable direction or order of a City employee or police officer who acts to enforce a provision of this chapter or who gives such direction based on this chapter or who is acting in the course and scope of an emergency. [BC 9.08.100, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.120 City Property Hours of Use.

Use of City property under this chapter is allowed from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. [BC 9.08.120, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.130 Fires, Stoves and Barbecues.

The Mayor may allow for the use of outdoor cooking appliances and fixtures at designated locations for designated events. [BC 9.08.130, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.140 Music/Amplification Systems.

No person may use an amplified public address system on City property except as allowed by a special event permit. In no case shall the sound level generated by such use disturb the quiet enjoyment of any neighboring property. [BC 9.08.140, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.150 Model Devices.

[BC 9.08.150, repealed by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.160 Alcohol and Controlled Substances.

No person on City property shall consume any alcoholic beverages except under the terms and conditions of a special event permit. [BC 9.08.160, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.170 Use of Self-Propelled and Motorized Vehicles.

No person on City property shall:

A. Ride a bicycle, skateboard, scooter or use roller skates or in-line skates or other self-propelled device in an area where notice is posted prohibiting such activity;

B. Use a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller skates, in-line skates or other self-propelled device at a rate of speed or in a manner that unreasonably endangers persons or property;

C. Use a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller skates, in-line skates or other self-propelled device on any surface not intended for travel, including a table, sport court, water fountain, railing, stairwell, entry ramp, planter, sculpture, or other artwork;

D. Leave a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller skates, in-line skates, or other self-propelled device where it may obstruct or endanger pedestrian traffic;

E. Operate a motorized vehicle on other than a roadway or parking areas designated for such use by motor vehicles other than when necessary to accommodate a disability;

F. Operate a motorized vehicle carelessly or in a manner that endangers the rights or safety of others. [BC 9.08.170, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.180 Firearms and Projectiles.

No person on City property shall possess, use, or discharge across, on or into the property any weapon or device that threatens bodily injury or property damage or harm to wildlife or natural habitat, nor discharge any projectile by means of compressed gas, air, combustible fuel, or electricity. [BC 9.08.180, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.190 Animals.

No person on City property shall:

A. Release animals, domestic, exotic or native, to run at large;

B. Feed any waterfowl or other wildlife;

C. Do any act constituting cruelty to any animal;

D. Allow an animal to injure or intimidate another animal or person;

E. Allow an animal to cause damage to property;

F. Allow an animal to roam at large or on a leash more than eight feet in length;

G. Fail to keep an animal in the person’s care or custody under control;

H. Fail to immediately remove from the property all solid waste left by an animal under the person’s care or custody; or

I. Tie an animal to any tree or work of art.

The Mayor may exclude domestic animals from City property during special events if and when the public health, safety and welfare so require. [BC 9.08.190, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.195 Solicitation/Signs.

No person shall attach signs, markers, or inscriptions of any type to City property and shall not carry signage in such a way as to threaten or endanger other persons. The Mayor may designate certain areas of City property as limited public forums for the exercise of free speech and expressive conduct. [BC 9.08.195, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.200 Vendors/Concessions.

No person shall operate a fixed or mobile concession or offer or advertise for sale any goods or services on City property except as allowed by a special event permit. [BC 9.08.200, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.210 Assemblies/Meetings.

[BC 9.08.210, repealed by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.220 Reservations.

[BC 9.08.220, repealed by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.230 Enforcement.

The City may enforce the regulations on use of City property provided in this chapter by any lawful remedy available to it, including but not limited to an order excluding the person from the property and a summons and citation for a violation. A person who fails or refuses to leave City property on the lawful order of a City law enforcement officer or another City employee in charge of the premises commits the crime of trespass. [BC 9.08.230, added by Ordinance No. 4565, 5/17/11; amended by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]


9.08.240 Appeal Procedures.

[BC 9.08.240, repealed by Ordinance No. 4588, 7/18/12]

 


Ordinance List

This table lists all codified ordinances beginning with Ordinance 4380. The location of an ordinance in the code is cited by chapter number at the end of the ordinance description. For information concerning ordinances prior to 4380, contact the office of the city recorder.

	4380	Adds BC 5.05.093, graffiti (5.05)

	4384	Adds BC 6.02.323, commercial camping (6.02)

	4385	Amends Ord. 4377, inventory of prisoner personal property (2.08)

	4386	Adds BC 5.05.081, vacant buildings (5.05)

	4393	Amends BC 8.02.015(A) and adds amendments to Appendix G of Structural Specialty Code (8.02)

	4394	Adds BC 7.12.005 – 7.12.060, regulations on payday lending (7.12)

	4403	Amends BC 6.02.390(B), downtown permit parking district (6.02)

	4412	Amends BC 5.05.090(B)(7), 5.05.110(A), 5.05.110(B), 5.05.133, and 9.05.135(A), Tualatin Basin Goal 5 Program (5.05, 9.05)

	4415	Deletes BC 6.02.310(F), 72-hour parking prohibition (6.02)

	4423	Adds BC 5.08.250 – 5.08.270; amends BC 5.08.225, replica firearms (5.08)

	4434	Amends BC 8.02.015(A) and (E), building code (8.02)

	4445	Adds BC 6.02.085; amends BC 6.02.050, traffic issue process (6.02)

	4448	Adds BC 8.07, residential property maintenance code (8.07)

	4452	Adds BC 2.06.487, 2.06.488 and 2.06.489, voters’ pamphlet (Repealed by 4748)

	4454	Adds BC 2.04.040, municipal court (2.04)

	4467	Amends BC 6.02.085 and 6.02.390, parking (6.02)

	4468	Adds BC 7.17, shopping carts (7.17)

	4472	Amends BC 2.07, regulatory claims procedure; repeals Ord. 4333 (2.07)

	4477	Amends BC 8.02.015(C), building code (8.02)

	4481	Adds BC 2.03.239, public art (2.03)

	4493	Visioning advisory committee (Repealed by 4625)

	4494	Sister cities advisory board (2.03)

	4497	Adds BC 4.08.500 – 4.08.540; amends BC 4.08.030, business recycling requirement (4.08)

	4506	Adds BC 2.04.101, nuisance abatement warrants (2.04)

	4507	Deletes definition of “discarded vehicle” in BC 6.02.030 and 6.05.010, vehicles and traffic (6.02, 6.05)

	4521	Adds §§ 8.02.125 and 8.02.126; amends § 8.02.120, building code (8.02)

	4530	Adds §§ 2.03.160 through 2.03.164, urban redevelopment agency (2.03)

	4533	Repeals § 2.03.130, board of design review (Repealer)

	4543	Amends Ch. 2.11, council procedures (2.11)

	4549	Adds Ch. 5.09, urban chickens (5.09)

	4556	Adds § 8.02.015(H), building code (8.02)

	4560	Amends § 2.03.052, committee for citizen involvement (Repealed by 4624)

	4565	Adds Ch. 9.08, use of city property (9.08)

	4588	Amends §§ 5.05.115(F) and 5.05.130(B) and Chs. 7.05 and 9.08, temporary use of city property and public right-of-way for special events (5.05, 7.05, 9.08)

	4612	Amends §§ 2.08.026 and 2.08.035, inventory of prisoner personal property (2.08)

	4613	Amends Ch. 4.08, solid waste and recycling (4.08)

	4614	Amends § 6.02.310, prohibited parking or standing (6.02)

	4619	Adds Ch. 3.20, nonprofit corporation low-income housing tax exemptions (3.20)

	4620	Adds §§ 2.03.500 – 2.03.520, diversity advisory board (2.03)

	4621	Adds §§ 2.03.340 – 2.03.365 [2.03.360 – 2.03.385], social services funding committee (2.03)

	4623	Strikes and replaces §§ 2.03.150 and 2.03.170 through 2.03.178, budget committee and audit committee (2.03)

	4624	Strikes §§ 2.03.050 through 2.03.054 and adds new §§ 2.03.050 through 2.03.056, committee for community involvement (2.03)

	4625	Strikes and replaces §§ 2.03.330 through 2.03.336, visionary advisory committee (2.03)

	4627	Amends § 4.02.036, systems development charge (4.02)

	4633	Amends §§ 5.02.220 and 7.10.030(D), criminal history background checks (5.02, 7.10)

	4636	Adds §§ 7.02.005 – 7.02.085, medical marijuana (7.02)

	4637	Amends §§ 2.03.210 – 2.03.214, local contract review board (2.03)

	4647	Adds §§ 7.03.005 – 7.03.070, marijuana tax (Repealed by 4705)

	4650	Amends §§ 8.02.015(A) and 8.02.140, flood-resistant construction (8.02)

	4658	Amends Ch. 2.01, emergency management code (2.01)

	4661	Adds Ch. 3.07, transportation system development charge (3.07)

	4668	Amends Ch. 3.20, nonprofit corporation low-income housing tax exemptions (3.20)

	4670	Amends Ch. 2.08, inventory of personal property of persons in custody (2.08)

	4675	Adds § 5.05.120; amends § 5.05.133, exterior lighting (5.05)

	4678	Adds Ch. 5.17, residential picketing (5.17)

	4679	Adds Ch. 5.15; repeals § 5.05.130, noise (5.15)

	4680	Adds § 2.03.245; amends §§ 2.03.002, 2.03.230 – 2.03.240 and 2.03.260 – 2.03.315, boards, committees and commissions (2.03)

	4684	Adds Ch. 4.15; repeals Ch. 4.20, utility facilities in public rights-of-way (4.15)

	4687	Adds Ch. 7.18, lodging tax (7.18)

	4688	Amends Ch. 2.10, civil infractions (2.10)

	4689	Amends Ch. 7.02, marijuana facility licensing (7.02)

	4690	Amends Ch. 7.15, alarms (7.15)

	4705	Repeals and replaces Ch. 7.03; repeals Res. 4384, marijuana tax (7.03)

	4709	Amends § 5.05.115(E), obstructing the public right-of-way (5.05)

	4713	Amends Ch. 7.05, use of city property and right-of-way for special events (7.05)

	4732	Adds §§ 5.05.117 and 5.05.118, nuisances (5.05)

	4737	Amends §§ 7.18.015(P) and 7.18.020(A), lodging tax (7.18)

	4740	Adds §§ 2.03.550 through 2.03.560; amends § 2.03.265, human rights advisory commission and bicycle advisory committee (2.03)

	4741	Amends § 2.08.030, inventory of personal property of persons in custody (2.08)

	4742	Adds §§ 6.02.801 through 6.02.803; amends § 6.02.010; repeals and replaces Article X of Ch. 6.02; repeals §§ 6.02.805 through 6.02.890, parking enforcement (6.02)

	4743	Adds §§ 6.02.322 and 6.02.324; amends § 6.02.323, vehicle camping (6.02)

	4744	Amends development code and §§ 5.05.110, 8.02.140, 9.05.005, 9.05.010, 9.05.015, 9.05.016, 9.05.020, 9.05.025, 9.05.040, 9.05.045, 9.05.055, 9.05.060, 9.05.085 and 9.05.091, site development (5.05, 8.02, 9.05)

	4745	Amends §§ 2.01.050 and 4.08.100(G), solid waste franchise (2.01, 4.08)

	4747	Adds Ch. 1.08, municipal court security (1.08)

	4748	Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.06, elections (2.06)

	4749	Amends Ch. 7.10, secondhand dealers (7.10)

	4750	Amends §§ 3.10.010, 3.10.015, 3.10.020, 3.10.025 and title of Ch. 3.10; repeals §§ 3.10.030 and 3.10.035, acquisition of property (3.10)

	4760	Amends § 3.20.010, nonprofit corporation low-income housing tax exemptions (3.20)



-----------------------------

The Beaverton City Code is current through Ordinance 4760, passed March 20, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Beaverton City Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://www.beavertonoregon.gov/ City Telephone: (503) 526-2491

Code Publishing Company

Development Code
of the
City of Beaverton
Ordinance 2050 adopted October 20, 1978
Date of this printing: September 2019
Effective through: Ordinance 4759
ORDINANCE No. 2050
AN ORDINANCE
ESTABLISHING THE ZONING STANDARDS, REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES;
PROVIDING RELATED DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS; PROVIDING PENALTIES: AND
REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 550 AND ALL AMENDMENTS THERETO.
THE CITY OF BEAVERTON DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
Table of Contents i 09/04/2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Chapter 10 GENERAL PROVISIONS GP 1-32
This chapter provides the basis for regulations governing land use, development and design within the City of Beaverton.
10.05. Title 1
10.10. Purpose 1-3
10.15. Compliance 4
10.20. Interpretation and Application of Code Language 5-6
10.25. Classification of Zoning Districts 7
10.30. Zoning Map 8
10.35. Interpretation of District Boundaries 9
10.40. Annexation 10-11
10.45. Relationship to Other Regulations and Restrictions 12
10.50. Authorization for Similar Uses 13
10.55. Fees 14
10.60. Burden of Proof 15
10.63 Provide Orderly Development 16
10.65. Conditions of Approval 17-19
10.70. Enforcement 20-21
10.75. Administrative Rules 22
10.80. Severability 23
10.85. Repeal 24
10.90. Saving Clause 25
10.93. Hearings Officer 26
10.95. Development Review Participants 27-32
10.95.1. City Council 27
10.95.2. Planning Commission 28-31
10.95.3. Facilities Review Committee 31-32
Table of Contents ii 09/04/2019
Chapter 20 LAND USES LU 1-63
This chapter identifies the types of uses that are Permitted, may be Conditionally permitted, or are Prohibited within zoning districts, and the site development requirements associated specifically with the zoning districts.
20.05. RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS 1-9
20.05.05. Residential Areas 1
20.05.10. Purpose 1
20.05.15. Site Development Standards 2-4
20.05.20. Land Uses 5-8
20.05.25. Use Restrictions 9
20.10. COMMERCIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS 10-19
20.10.05. Corridor and Main Street Areas 10
20.10.10. Purpose 10
20.10.15. Site Development Standards 11-12
20.10.20. Land Uses 13-16
20.10.25. Use Restrictions 17-18
20.10.30. Other NS Zoning Requirements 18
20.10.35. Other CS Zoning Requirements 19
20.10.40. Other CC Zoning Requirements 19
20.15. EMPLOYMENT / INDUSTRIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS 20-33
20.15.05. Employment and Industrial Areas 20
20.15.10. Purpose 20
20.15.15. Site Development Standards 21-22
20.15.20. Land Uses 23-27
20.15.25. Use Restrictions 28-31
20.15.30. Supplemental Development Requirements 32-33
20.20. MULTIPLE USE DISTRICTS 34-57
20.20.05. Multiple Use Areas 34
20.20.10. Purpose 34-36
20.20.15. Site Development Standards 37-40
20.20.20. Land Uses 41-48
20.20.25. Use Restrictions 49-55
20.20.30. Other TC-MU and TC-HDR Zoning Requirements 56
20.20.35. Other SC-E Zoning Requirements 56
20.20.40 Other SC-S Zoning Requirements 56-57
Table of Contents iii 09/04/2019
Chapter 20 LAND USES - continued LU 1-63
20.25. DENSITY CALCULATIONS 58-63
20.25.05. Minimum Residential Density 58-59
20.25.10. Floor Area Ratio 59-61
20.25.15. Density Allowances 61
20.25.20. Supplemental Multiple Use Density Standards 62-63
A. Regional Center 62-63
B. Town Center 63
Chapter 30 NONCONFORMING USES NU 1-7
This chapter contains regulations that apply to lots, uses, structures and buildings which no longer comply with current land use regulations.
30.05. Purpose 1
30.10. Pending Building Permits and Certain Existing or 1-3
Approved Nonconforming Uses
30.15. Nonconforming Lots of Record 3
30.20. Nonconforming Uses 4-5
30.25. Nonconforming Structures 5-6
30.30. Repairs and Maintenance 6
30.35. Uses Under Conditional Use Provisions Not
Considered Nonconforming Uses 6
30.40. Nonconforming Parking, Loading, Signs or 7
Other Characteristics of Use
30.45. Determination of Nonconforming Status 7
Chapter 40 APPLICATIONS AP 1-207
This chapter identifies the land use and design permits issued by the City of Beaverton and the applications which must be filed to request such permits. Identified with each permit are the threshold, procedure type, and approval criteria by which a request is to be reviewed. Also identified are regulations pertaining to submission requirements, special conditions, and the appeal, expiration, and extension of decisions on a request.
40.03. FACILITIES REVIEW COMMITTEE 1-4
Table of Contents iv 09/04/2019
Chapter 40 APPLICATIONS - continued AP 1-207
40.05. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 5-7
40.05.05. Purpose 5
40.05.10. Applicability 5
40.05.15. Application 5
1. Accessory Dwelling Unit 5-7
40.10. ADJUSTMENT 8-21
40.10.05. Purpose 8
40.10.10. Applicability 8
40.10.15. Application 8
1. Minor Adjustment 8-11
2. Major Adjustment 12-15
3. Minor Adjustment-Affordable Housing 16-18
4. Major Adjustment-Affordable Housing 19-21
40.15. CONDITIONAL USE 22-36
40.15.05. Purpose 22
40.15.10. Applicability 22
40.15.15. Application 22
1. Minor Modification of a Conditional Use 22-25
2. Major Modification of a Conditional Use 26-28
3. New Conditional Use 29-30
4. Planned Unit Development 31-34
5. Modification of a Nonconforming Use 35-26
40.20. DESIGN REVIEW 37-52
40.20.05. Purpose 37
40.20.10. Applicability 38-41
40.20.15. Application 41
1. Design Review Compliance Letter 41-44
2. Design Review Two 45-48
3. Design Review Three 49-52
40.25. DIRECTOR’S INTERPRETATION 53-55
40.25.05. Purpose 53
40.25.10. Applicability 53
40.25.15. Application 53
1. Director's Interpretation 53-55
Table of Contents v 09/04/2019
Chapter 40 APPLICATIONS - continued AP 1-207
40.30. FLEXIBLE AND ZERO YARD SETBACKS 56-68
40.30.05. Purpose 56
40.30.10. Applicability 56
40.30.15. Application 56
1. Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement 56-58
2. Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement 59-60
3. Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division 61-62
4. Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed 63-65
Residential Land Division
5. Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential 66-68
Land Division
40.32. FOOD CART PODS 69-73
40.32.05. Purpose 69
40.32.10. Applicability 69
40.32.15. Application 69
1. Food Cart Pod Modification 69-71
2. Food Cart Pod 72-73
40.35. HISTORIC REVIEW 74-83
40.35.05. Purpose 74
40.35.10. Applicability 74
40.35.15. Application 75
1. Alteration of a Landmark 75-77
2. Emergency Demolition of a Landmark 78-79
3. Demolition of a Landmark 80-81
4. New Construction in a Historic District 82-83
40.40. HOME OCCUPATION 84-92
40.40.05. Purpose 84
40.40.10. Applicability 84-85
40.40.15. Application 85
1. Home Occupation One 85-88
2. Home Occupation Two 89-92
Table of Contents vi 09/04/2019
Chapter 40 APPLICATIONS - continued AP 1-207
40.45. LAND DIVISION 93-119
40.45.05. Purpose 93
40.45.10. Applicability 93
40.45.15. Application 93
1. Property Line Adjustment 93-96
2. Replat One 97-99
3. Replat Two 100-103
4. Preliminary Partition 104-106
5. Preliminary Subdivision 107-110
6. Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition 111-113
7. Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision 114-116
8. Final Land Division 117-118
9. Expedited Land Division 119
40.47. LEGAL LOT DETERMINATION 120-122
40.47.05. Purpose 120
40.47.15. Application 120
1. Legal Lot Determination 120-122
40.50. LOADING DETERMINATION 123-125
40.50.05. Purpose 123
40.50.10. Applicability 123
40.50.15. Application 123
1. Loading Determination 123-125
40.55. PARKING DETERMINATION 126-133
40.55.05. Purpose 126
40.55.10. Applicability 126
40.55.15. Application 126
1. Parking Requirement Determination 126-128
2. Shared Parking 129-131
3. Use of Excess Parking 132-133
40.57. PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITY 134-136
40.57.05. Purpose 134
40.57.10. Applicability 134
40.57.15. Application 134
1. Public Transportation Facility 134-136
Table of Contents vii 09/04/2019
Chapter 40 APPLICATIONS - continued AP 1-207
40.58. SIDEWALK DESIGN MODIFICATION 137-132
40.58.10. Purpose 137
40.60.10. Applicability 137
40.60.15. Application 137-139
40.60. SIGN 140-142
40.60.05. Purpose 140
40.60.10. Applicability 140
40.60.15. Application 140
1. Sign 140-142
40.65. SOLAR ACCESS 143-145
40.65.05 Purpose 143
40.65.10. Applicability 143
40.65.15. Application 143
1. Solar Access 143-145
40.75. STREET VACATION 146-147
40.75.05. Purpose 146
40.75.10. Applicability 146
40.75.15. Application 146
1. Street Vacation 146-147
40.80. TEMPORARY USE 148-166
40.80.05. Purpose 148
40.80.10. Applicability 148
40.80.15. Application 149
1. Temporary Mobile Sales 149-152
2. Temporary Non-Mobile Sales 153-156
3. Temporary Structure 157-159
4. Temporary Real Estate Office 160-162
5. Temporary Displaced Parking 163-166
40.85. TEXT AMENDMENT 167-168
40.85.05. Purpose 167
40.85.10. Applicability 167
40.85.15. Application 167
1. Text Amendment 167-168
Table of Contents viii 09/04/2019
Chapter 40 APPLICATIONS - continued AP 1-207
40.90. TREE PLAN 169-180
40.90.05. Purpose 169
40.90.10. Applicability 169-171
40.90.15. Application 171
1. Tree Plan One 171-173
2. Tree Plan Two 174-176
3. Tree Plan Three 177-180
40.93. THPRD ANNEXATION WAIVER 181-173
40.90.05. Purpose 181
40.90.10. Applicability 181
40.90.15. Application 181
1. THPRD Annexation Waiver 181-183
40.95. VARIANCE 184-177
40.95.05. Purpose 184
40.95.10. Applicability 184
40.95.15. Application 184
1. Variance 184-187
40.96. WIRELESS FACILITY 188-198
40.96.05. Purpose 188
40.96.10. Applicability 188
40.96.15. Application 188
1. Wireless Facility One 188-191
2. Wireless Facility Two 192-195
3. Wireless Facility Three 196-198
40.97. ZONING MAP AMENDMENT 199-207
40.97.05. Purpose 199
40.97.10. Applicability 199
40.97.15. Application 199
1. Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment 199-201
2. Legislative Zoning Map Amendment 202-203
3. Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map 204-205
Amendment
4. Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map 206-207
Amendment
Table of Contents ix 09/04/2019
Chapter 50 PROCEDURES PR 1-78
This chapter identifies the procedures by which specific requests will be processed. In addition to the application completeness procedures, there are generally four procedures to which a request is subject: non-discretionary ministerial decisions, which require no subjective review by staff; Planning Director administrative decisions; Planning Commission public hearing decisions; and appealing a decision.
50.05. Initiation of an Application 1
50.10. Withdrawal of an Application 2
50.15. Classification of Applications 3-4
50.20. Pre-Application Conference 5-7
50.25. Application Completeness 8-11
50.30. Neighborhood Review Meeting 12-15
50.35. Type 1 16-18
50.40. Type 2 19-22
50.45. Type 3 23-30
50.50. Type 4 31-36
50.53. Expedited Land Division 37
50.55. Conduct of Planning Commission Hearing 38-39
50.57. Time Limits on Planning Commission Hearing Testimony 40
50.58. Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence before the
Planning Commission 41
50.60. Appeal of a Type 1 Decision 42-45
50.65. Appeal of a Type 2 Decision 46-49
50.70. Appeal of a Type 3 Decision 50-54
50.75. Appeal of a Type 4 Decision 55-58
50.80. Conduct of Planning Commission Appeal Hearing 59-60
50.82. Time Limits on Planning Commission Appeal Hearing Testimony 61
50.83. Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence before the
Planning Commission 62
50.85. Conduct of the City Council Appeal Hearing 63-65
50.87. Time Limits on City Council Appeal Hearing Testimony 66
50.88. Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence before the City Council 67
50.89. Withdrawal of an Appeal 68
50.90. Expiration of a Decision 69-72
50.93. Extension of a Decision 73-74
50.95. Modification of a Decision 75-76
50.97. Permit Renewal 77
50.99. Re-Application or Supplemental Application after Denial 78
Table of Contents x 09/04/2019
Chapter 60 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS SR 1-293
This chapter contains special requirements which regulate development.
60.05. DESIGN REVIEW PRINCIPLES, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES 1-72
60.05.05. Purpose 1
60.05.10. Design Principles 1-2
60.05.15. Building Design and Orientation Standards 3-16
60.05.20. Circulation and Parking Design Standards 17-24
60.05.25. Landscape, Open Space, and Natural Areas Design Standards 25-44
60.05.30. Lighting Design Standards 45-46
60.05.35. Building Design and Orientation Guidelines 47-52
60.05.40. Circulation and Parking Design Guidelines 53-55
60.05.45. Landscape, Open Space, and Natural Areas Design Guidelines 56-59
60.05.50. Lighting Design Guidelines 60
60.05.55. Major Pedestrian Route Maps 61-65
1. Regional Center Major Pedestrian Routes 61
2. Town Center Major Pedestrian Routes 62
3. South Tektronix Station Community Major Pedestrian Routes 63
4. Merlo Station Community Major Pedestrian Routes 64
5. Sunset Transit Center and Teufel Town Center Major 65
Pedestrian Route Map
Table 60.05-1. Technical Lighting Standards 66-69
Table 60.05-2. Minimum Landscape Buffer Requirements 70-72
60.07. DRIVE-UP WINDOW FACILITIES 73-74
60.07.05. Purpose 73
60.07.10. Standards 73
60.07.15. Abatement 74
60.10. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 75-80
60.10.05. Purpose 75
60.10.10. Floodplain Designation 76-77
60.10.15. Development in Floodway 77-78
60.10.20. Commercial and Industrial Uses in the Floodway Fringe 78
60.10.25. Residential Uses in the Floodway Fringe 78-79
60.10.30 Development of Critical Facilities in the Floodway Fringe 80
Table of Contents xi 09/04/2019
Chapter 60 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS - continued SR 1-293
60.11. FOOD CART PODS 81-85
60.11.05. Purpose 81
60.11.10. Site Design 81-83
60.11.15. Individual Food Cart Design Standards 83
60.11.20. Utilities 84
60.11.25. Parking 84
60.11.30. Signs 85
60.11.35. Lighting 85
60.12. HABITAT FRIENDLY DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES 86-119
60.12.05. Purpose 86
60.12.10. Process 87
60.12.15. Engineered Techniques 87
60.12.20. Guidance 87
60.12.25. Credits 87
60.12.30. Standards 87-89
60.12.35. Habitat Benefit Area Preservation 90-98
60.12.40. Low Impact Development Techniques 99-116
60.12.45. Maintenance 117-119
60.15. LAND DIVISION STANDARDS 120-123
60.15.05. Purpose 120
60.15.10. Grading Standards 120-122
60.15.15. Final Plat Standards 122-123
60.20. MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME REGULATIONS 124-129
60.20.05. Purpose 124
60.20.10. Mobile Home Subdivisions 124-125
60.20.15. Mobile Home Park Regulations 125-127
60.20.20. Manufactured Homes 128-129
60.25. OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS 130-131
60.25.05. Applicability 130
60.25.10. Loading Berth Design 130
60.25.15. Number of Required Loading Spaces 130-131
60.25.20. Loading Facilities Location 131
60.25.25. Loading Determination 131
Table of Contents xii 09/04/2019
Chapter 60 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS - continued SR 1-293
60.30. OFF-STREET PARKING 132-158
60.30.05. Off-Street Parking Requirements 132
60.30.10. Number of Required Parking Spaces 132-154
Table 5.A. Parking Ratio Requirements for Motor Vehicles 136-138
Table 5.B. Parking Ratio Requirements for Bicycles 139-143
Table 6. Parking Ratio Requirements in the Regional Center 144-146
Map Regional Center Parking Districts Map 147
60.30.15. Off-Street Parking Lot Design 155-157
60.30.20. Off-Street Parking Lot Construction 158
60.30.25. Enforcement 158
60.33. PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES AND SERVICES 159
PROVISIONS
60.33.05. Purpose 159
60.33.10. Annexation to THPRD 159
60.33.15. Waiver of Requirement 159
60.35. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 160-180
60.35.05. Purpose 160-161
60.35.10. Modification of Base Zoning Standards 161-165
60.35.15. Open Space 165-168
60.35.20. Building Architecture 168-173
60.35.25. South Cooper Mountain Community Plan 173-177
60.35.30. Development Bonuses and Development Incentives 177-178
60.35.40. Allowed Development Bonuses 178
60.35.50. Development Incentive Options 178-180
60.40. SIGN REGULATIONS 181-204
60.40.05. Purpose 181
60.40.07 Compliance 181-182
60.40.10. Signs Exempt from Permits and Regulation 182-183
60.40.15. Signs not Subject to Permit but Subject to Regulation for 183-184
Size, Dimensions, Location, Duration and Aesthetics.
60.40.20. Signs for which a Sign Permit is Required 184-185
60.40.25. Signs Expressly Prohibited 185-187
60.40.30. General Size and Location Provisions 187
60.40.35. Signs in Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use Zones 188-194
60.40.40. Residential Zones (R1, R2, R4, R5, R7, R10) 194
60.40.45. Temporary Signs 194-200
60.40.50. Electronic Message Centers (EMCs) 201-203
60.40.55 Nonconforming and Illegal Signs 203-204
Table of Contents xiii 09/04/2019
Chapter 60 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS - continued SR 1-293
60.45. SOLAR ACCESS PROTECTION 205-226
60.45.05. Purpose 205-211
60.45.10. Solar Access for New Development 212-216
60.45.15. Solar Balance Point 217-226
60.50. SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS 227-237
60.50.03. Accessory Dwelling Unit 227-228
60.50.05. Accessory Uses and Structures 228-230
60.50.10. Height Regulations 230
60.50.15. Projections into Required Yards and Public Right-of-Way 230-232
60.50.20. Fences 232
60.50.25. Uses Requiring Special Regulation 232-237
60.55. TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES 238-256
60.55.05. Purpose and Intent 238
60.55.10. General Provisions 238-239
60.55.15. Traffic Management Plan 239-240
60.55.20. Traffic Impact Analysis 240-247
60.55.25. Street and Bicycle and Pedestrian Connection 247-253
Requirements
60.55.30. Minimum Street Widths 2353
60.55.35. Access Standards 253-255
60.55.40. Transit Facilities 255-256
60.60. TREES AND VEGETATION 257-266
60.60.05. Purpose 257
60.60.07. Enforcement 257
60.60.10. Types of Trees and Vegetation Regulated 257-258
60.60.15. Pruning, Removal, and Preservation Standards 258-259
60.60.20. Tree Protection Standards during Development 260-261
60.60.25. Mitigation Requirements 261-266
60.65. UTILITY UNDERGROUNDING 267-271
60.65.05. Purpose 267
60.65.10. Authority 267
60.65.15. Regulation 267-268
60.65.20. Information on Plans 269
60.65.25. Optional Fee-In-Lieu of the Undergrounding Requirement 269-270
60.65.30. Fees to be Paid In-Lieu of Undergrounding 270-271
60.65.35. City to Establish Priorities 271
Table of Contents xiv 09/04/2019
Chapter 60 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS - continued SR 1-293
60.67. SIGNIFICANT NATURAL RESOURCES 272
60.67.05. Local Wetland Inventory 272
60.67.10. Significant Riparian Corridors 272
60.70. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 273-293
60.70.05. Purpose 273
60.70.10. Applicability 273-274
60.70.15. Federal and State Compliance 274
60.70.20. Exemptions 274-275
60.70.25. Nonconforming Use Status 276-277
60.70.30. Permit Process 277
60.70.35. Development Standards for WCF 277-287
60.70.40. Development Standards for Satellite Antennas 288
60.70.45. Requirements for Non-Exempt Amateur Radio Facilities 289
60.70.50. Required Studies and Information 289-291
60.70.55. Temporary Uses 292
60.70.60. Collocation Protocol 292-293
60.70.65. Abandoned Facilities 293
Chapter 70 RESERVED
Chapter 80 RESERVED
Chapter 90 DEFINITIONS DF 1-58
This chapter contains definitions for words and terms used in the Development Code. These definitions shall take precedence in any interpretation of the Development Code and the meaning of the words or terms used therein. Any word or term not defined in this section shall first be used as defined by ORS or OAR and as applicable to this Code, and secondly as defined by "Webster's Third New International Dictionary", copyright 1993. Copies of this dictionary are available for reference at the Community Development Department, the City Attorney's Office and the City Main Library.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title and Purpose
Chapter 10 GP - 1 06/09/2017
CHAPTER 10 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.05. Title. This Code shall be known and may be cited as the "Beaverton Development Code" and shall be referred to herein as "this Code." [ORD 3226; October 1981] [ORD 4224; September 2002]
10.10. Purpose.
1. This Code has been designed in accordance with the goals, policies, and statements of intent of the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan, the officially enacted Comprehensive Plan for the City of Beaverton and its environs. It is the general purpose of this Code, therefore, to provide one of the principal means for the implementation of the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan.
2. In adopting this Code, the City Council is responding to the development of the City of Beaverton and the issues concerning that development. The Council is anticipating that, as future growth and urbanization continues, control will be required to preserve and enhance the amenities necessary to the prosperity and appearance of the community. [ORD 4224; September 2002]
3. This Code is designed to regulate the division of land and to classify, designate and regulate the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses in appropriate places, and for said purposes to divide the City of Beaverton into districts of such number, shape, and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement; to encourage the most appropriate use of lands; to conserve and preserve natural resources; to conserve and stabilize the value of property, to provide adequate open spaces for light and air and prevention of fires; to prevent undue concentrations of population; to facilitate adequate provisions for critical urban services such as fire, water, sewer, streets, and storm drainage systems; to facilitate adequate provision for essential urban services such as police, transit, schools, parks, libraries and other public service requirements; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. [ORD 3226; October 1981] [ORD 4224; September 2002]
4. To further implement the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan, this Code is adopted for the following special purposes:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title and Purpose
Chapter 10 GP - 2 06/09/2017
10.10.4.
A. To promote coordinated, sound development, taking into consideration the City's natural environment, amenities, views, and the appearance of its buildings and open spaces.
B. To achieve a balanced and efficient land use pattern, to protect and enhance real property values, to promote safe and uncongested traffic movement and to avoid uses and development which might be detrimental to the stability and livability of the City.
C. To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so that the demand for housing may be met by a greater variety in the type and design of dwellings and by the conservation and more efficient and attractive use of open space.
D. To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the City through advancement of effective land use, architectural design and site planning which reflect improvements in the technology of urban development.
E. To provide an orderly, efficient and speedy process of reviewing applications for development activities and to avoid increased development costs borne by citizens and consumers as a result of unnecessary delay.
F. [ORD 4224; September 2002] To enable interested and affected persons to provide input in the development process.
5. Unless specifically indicated in the Comprehensive Plan, the provisions contained in this Code shall not apply to any application for Comprehensive Plan Amendment. Unless specifically indicated in this Code, the provisions contained in the Comprehensive Plan policies shall not apply to any applications regulated by this Code. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
6. All use or development of land or structures in Beaverton shall comply with the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan, the City of Beaverton Charter, and applicable regional, state, federal and local laws. Determination of compliance with regional, state, federal or local laws shall be made by the applicable regional, state, federal or local authority responsible for administering these laws. A determination of compliance with any such law shall not be a standard or condition of approval, except that proof
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title and Purpose
Chapter 10 GP - 3 06/09/2017
10.10.6
that mandatory permits have been obtained may be required by specific standards of this Code or as a condition of approval imposed by the decision making authority. Nothing in this Code shall relieve a use or development from compliance with other applicable laws except as provided herein. [ORD 4744; October 2018]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Compliance
Chapter 10 GP - 4 06/09/2017
10.15. Compliance.
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this Code, no building or other structure shall be constructed, improved, altered, enlarged or moved, nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the City be commenced or changed, nor shall any condition of or upon real property be caused or maintained after November 18, 1978, except in conformity with conditions prescribed for each of the zones and general regulations established hereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, or use, or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this Code contrary to the provisions of this Code. Where this Code imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this Code shall control.
2. No yard or other open space provided about any building or on any building lot for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Code shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other building or any other building lot.
3. Special events are exempt from the provisions of this Code. Commercial activities not connected with a special event and activities specifically covered by this Code are subject to the provisions of this Code. Signs for Special Events are subject to regulation under Section 7.05 of the Beaverton Municipal Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
4. No person shall divide land without first complying with the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State of Oregon. [ORD 3226; October 1981]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Interpretation of Code Language
Chapter 10 GP - 5 01/15/2009
10.20. Interpretation and Application of Code Language.
1. The terms or words used in this Code shall be interpreted as follows where the context demands; words in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive; the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter; the term "this Code" shall be deemed to include the text of this Code, the accompanying zoning map and all amendments made hereafter to either.
2. The Director shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this Code. The City Council shall have the final authority to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this Code. Other persons requesting such an interpretation in writing shall do so in accordance with Section 40.25. (Director's Interpretation). [ORD 4224; August 2002]
3. [ORD 4224; August 2002] The Code shall be read literally. Regulations are not more or less strict than as stated.
4. [ORD 4224; August 2002] Proposals for uses where the code is silent or where the rules of the Code do not provide a basis for concluding that the use is allowed are prohibited.
5. [ORD 4224; August 2002] Uses of land not expressly allowed or not incidental to a Permitted or Conditional Use are Prohibited. [ORD 4498; January 2009]
6. [ORD 4224; August 2002] Where it is unclear whether or in what manner sections of this Code apply to a given situation, or if terms or sections are ambiguous or vague, the following should be applied as warranted under the circumstances:
A. Terms defined in Chapter 90 (Definitions) have specifically stated meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
B. Terms not defined in Chapter 90 (Definitions) shall have the meaning set forth in Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, 1993, copies of which are available for reference in the Community Development Department and Beaverton City Library.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Interpretation of Code Language
Chapter 10 GP - 6 01/01/2005
10.20.6.
C. This Code shall be interpreted reasonably, reading questioned regulations in relation to other sections such that an interpretation most fully effectuates the intent and purpose of the regulations.
7. [ORD 4224; August 2002] This Code shall be interpreted most favorably to provide all necessary authority to carry out its purposes and provisions.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Classification of Zoning Districts
Chapter 10 GP - 7 06/01/2012
10.25. Classification of Zoning Districts. The City is divided into the following zoning districts, each of which shall include a suffix letter designator with its map symbol to indicate its classification:
ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATION
Residential Districts
Urban High Density (1,000) R1
Urban Medium Density (2,000) R2
Urban Medium Density (4,000) R4
Urban Standard Density (5,000) R5
Urban Standard Density (7,000) R7
Urban Low Density (10,000) R10
Commercial Districts [ORD 3352; January 1984]
Neighborhood Service Center NS
Community Service CS
Corridor Commercial CC
General Commercial GC
Industrial Districts
Office Industrial OI
Industrial IND
Multiple Use Districts
Regional Center—Transit Oriented RC-TO
Regional Center—Old Town RC-OT
Regional Center—East RC-E
Office Industrial—Washington Square OI-WS
Commercial—Washington Square C-WS
Town Center—Multiple Use TC-MU
Town Center—High Density Residential TC-HDR
Station Community—Multiple Use SC-MU
Station Community—High Density Residential SC-HDR
Station Community—Sunset SC-S
Station Community—Employment Sub Area 1 & 3 SC-E1 & 3
[ORD 4005; February 1998] [ORD 4058; September 1999] [ORD 4075; December 1999] [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4542; June 2010]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Zoning Map
Chapter 10 GP - 8 01/01/2005
10.30. Zoning Map.
1. The boundaries of the zoning districts established in this Code are indicated on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Beaverton" which shall hereinafter be referred to as the "City zoning map". The City zoning map and all amendments and changes thereto, and all legends, symbols, notations, references and other matters shown thereon, are hereby adopted by reference.
2. Amendments to the City zoning map may be made in accordance with Section 40.97. of this Code. Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the document adopting the map amendment and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting document, on file in the office of the City Recorder. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
3. The Director shall maintain an up-to-date copy of the City zoning map to be revised from time to time so that it accurately portrays changes of zone boundaries. [ORD 3739; September 1990] [ORD 4224; August 2002]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Interpretation of District Boundaries
Chapter 10 GP - 9 01/01/2005
10.35. Interpretation of District Boundaries.
1. [ORD 4224; August 2002] When bordering a public right-of-way, all zoning district boundaries shall extend to the centerline of the right-of-way as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
2. Where due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the City zoning map or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundary, the exact location of a district boundary line shall be determined by the Director in accordance with the following standards:
A. Street Lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of a right-of-way, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
B. Street Vacations. Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated the lands formerly within such public right-of-way shall be subject to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to the underlying property unless the zoning is changed by separate action. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
C. Lot Lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. If a district boundary divides a lot into two or more districts, the entire lot shall be placed in the district that accounts for the greater area of the lot by the adjustment of the district boundary, provided that the boundary adjustment is for a distance of 20 feet or less. If an adjustment of more than 20 feet is required, the change in the district boundary shall be treated as a change of zone. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
D. Water Courses. District boundary lines are intended to follow the center lines of water courses unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the City zoning map.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Annexation
Chapter 10 GP - 10 03/22/2019
10.40. Annexation.
1. Any area annexed to the City shall retain the zoning classification of its former jurisdiction until changed by the City. In the interim period, the City shall enforce the zoning regulations of the former jurisdiction along with any conditions, limitations or restrictions applied by the former jurisdiction as though they were a part of this Code, except that the provisions of Chapters 30 through 80 of this Code shall supersede comparable provisions of the zoning regulations in force in the former jurisdiction at the time of annexation.
2. The City may consider the zoning for any area proposed for annexation at the same time as it considers annexation of the area or at a later time. The zoning decision shall not be a final decision for the purposes of judicial review until the date that the question of annexation has received all approvals required by City and State law and has become effective. [ORD 4135; December 2000] [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4397; August 2006]
3. [ORD 4135; December 2000] The process for zoning map amendments that are associated with annexations shall be as follows:
A. Section V.B of the Washington County – Beaverton Urban Planning Area Agreement (UPAA) says: “Upon annexation, the City shall initiate changes to the Comprehensive Plan land use and zoning designations corresponding as closely as possible to designations already adopted by the County. The City shall maintain a list of County land use designations and corresponding City Comprehensive Plan and zoning designations.” This list has been adopted as Table 1 in Section 1.5.2. of the Comprehensive Plan. For parcels where the table provided in that section identifies a specific City zoning designation and leaves no discretion about which zoning district to assign, the City Council may adopt the required zoning map amendment without a public hearing pursuant to Section 40.97.15.3. (Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zone Change) of this Code. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
B. For parcels where Table 1 in Section 1.5.2. of the Comprehensive Plan does not identify a specific City zone and discretion is required, a public hearing shall be held pursuant to Section 40.97.15.4. (Discretionary Annexation Related Zone Change) of this Code. The Planning Commission may conduct the public
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Annexation
Chapter 10 GP - 11 03/22/2019
10.40.3
hearing on the zone change unless State law requires the City Council to hold a public hearing in which case the zoning map amendment hearing will be conducted by the City Council and the Planning Commission hearing will not be required. Upon annexation, the City shall initiate changes to the Comprehensive Plan land use and zoning designations corresponding as closely as possible to designations already adopted by the County as required by the UPAA. Criteria for annexation-related zone changes requiring discretion are in Section 40.97.15.4.C. [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4397; August 2006] [ORD 4759; March 2019]
4. [ORD 4224; August 2002] Development, uses, or both which have received approval from the former jurisdiction shall continue to be approved and subject to the conditions of approval established by the former jurisdiction, if any. After the effective date of either Annexation Related Zone Change application, any change to any development or uses annexed into the City shall be subject to the City zoning regulations in effect at the time of the proposed change.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Relationship to Other Regulations and Restrictions
Chapter 10 GP - 12 06/17/2010
10.45. Relationship to Other Regulations and Restrictions. It is not intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Code shall govern.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Authorization for Similar Uses
Chapter 10 GP - 13 06/17/2010
10.50. Authorization for Similar Uses. The Director may authorize that a use, not specifically named in the allowed uses, be Permitted if the use is of the same general type and is similar to the allowed uses; provided, however, that the Director may not permit a use already allowed in any other zoning district of this Code. Application for such a decision shall be processed as a Director’s Interpretation, as provided by Section 40.25. of this Code. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Fees
Chapter 10 GP - 14 06/17/2010
10.55. Fees.
1. In order to defray expenses incurred in connection with the processing of applications, preparation of reports, publications of notices, issuance of permits and other matters, the City may charge and collect filing and other fees as established by resolution of the Council. The required fees shall be paid to the City upon filing of an application or at such other time as may be specified in this Code. The City may charge double the usual application fee to those who fail to apply for any permit or other approval required by the City. The failure to submit a required fee with an application or an application for appeal, including return of checks unpaid or other failure of consideration, may preclude the processing of that application or appeal. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
2. The Council may reduce or waive required fees upon a showing of just cause to do so. [ORD 3823; August 1992] [ORD 4224; August 2002]
3. [ORD 4224; August 2002] If a governmental agency requires removal or relocation of a sign, the fee for any application (Section 40.60.) to replace or relocate that sign is waived.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Burden of Proof
Chapter 10 GP - 15 06/17/2010
10.60. Burden of Proof. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
1. Except as otherwise provided, the applicant shall bear the burden of proof and persuasion that the proposal is in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code.
2. Failure to comply with applicable procedural provisions of this Code shall invalidate an action only if it prejudices the substantial rights of the person alleging the error. Persons alleging a procedural error shall have the burden of proof and persuasion as to whether the error occurred and whether the error has prejudiced the person’s substantial rights.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Provide Orderly Development
Chapter 10 GP - 16 06/17/2010
10.63. Provide Orderly Development. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
1. To provide for orderly development of the adjoining property or to provide an adequate grid of the City system, the City Engineer or designee shall require extension of water lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines through applicant’s property to the property line of the adjoining or abutting property.
2. Extension of streets shall conform to the requirements of Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities).
3. Facilities required in accordance with this section shall be consistent with the acknowledged Comprehensive Plan.
4. Where physical or topographic conditions make the extension of a facility or facilities impracticable, the City Engineer or designee may require a cash payment to the City in lieu of the extension of the facility or facilities, the amount of which shall be equal to the estimated cost of the extension(s) under more suitable conditions.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Conditions of Approval
Chapter 10 GP - 17 01/01/2005
10.65. Conditions of Approvals. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
1. The decision making authority cannot approve applications the impacts of which cannot be mitigated through reasonable roughly proportional conditions of approval. Therefore, the decision making authority may impose conditions on any Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 approval. Such conditions shall ensure that the proposal complies with the appropriate approval criteria. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
2. In addition to conditions imposed pursuant to Section 10.65.1. above, a condition is valid and enforceable when the applicant has:
A. Requested the condition;
B. Allowed the decision to become final; or
C. Taken a substantial step in reliance on the permit that includes the condition.
3. Contract for Conditions. When the approval requires a contract, conditions may be set forth in a contract executed between the City, acting by and through the Mayor, and the property owner and any contract purchasers, and approved as to form by the City Attorney. If a contract is required, no development permits in connection with approval shall be issued until the properly executed contract is recorded with the Department of Records and Elections of Washington County at the expense of the applicant. The condition, as set forth in the contract and recorded, shall constitute a covenant running with the land in favor of the City of Beaverton and, unless otherwise provided, shall be removed only with the express authorization of the City Council. In return for the granting of the application, the property owner, contract purchasers and their heirs, successors and assigns shall be responsible for performing the conditions set forth therein. Said contract shall contain provisions that it is enforceable against the signing parties, their heirs, successors and assigns by the City by appropriate legal proceedings.
4. Assurance of Compliance with Conditions. A bond, cash deposit, or other security in an amount sufficient to ensure compliance with a condition of approval and accepted by the City may be required from the applicant. Such security shall be posted prior to the issuance of the appropriate construction permit.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Conditions of Approval
Chapter 10 GP - 18 01/01/2005
10.65.
5. Challenge to Condition. If the applicant asserts that it cannot legally be required, as a condition of land use approval, to provide property interests or improvements at the level otherwise required by this section, then:
A. The land use application shall include a "rough proportionality" report, prepared by a qualified civil or traffic engineer, as appropriate, showing:
1. The estimated extent to which the improvements will be used by persons served by the building or development, whether the use is for safety or for convenience;
2. The estimated level of improvements needed to meet the estimated extent of use by persons served by the building or development;
3. The estimated impact of the building or development on the public infrastructure system of which the improvements will be a part; and
4. The estimated level of improvements needed to mitigate the estimated impact on the public infrastructure system; and
B. The applicant shall instead be required to provide property interests and improvements that are reasonably related and roughly proportional to what is needed for the safety or convenience of persons served by the building or development plus those additional easements and improvements that are reasonably related and roughly proportional to what is needed to mitigate the impact of the building or development on the public infrastructure system of which the improvements will be a part, if the impacts are not fully mitigated by the property interests and improvements needed for the safety or convenience of persons served by the building or development. The requirements to be imposed under this subsection shall be determined following consideration of the "rough proportionality" report submitted by the applicant and of any other relevant evidence submitted by the City or others for consideration during the application process.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Conditions of Approval
Chapter 10 GP - 19 01/01/2005
10.65.
6. Recordation of Conditions. All conditions of approval for a specific proposal shall be recorded in the Deed Records for the specific parcel with the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation. The conditions of approval to be recorded may be in the form of a Land Use Order or other City issued document. The City shall conduct the recordation and the applicant shall pay the applicable recording fee.
7. Failure to Fulfill Previous Conditions. As a condition of approval of an application for a permit the City may require the property owner to fulfill or to give security to fulfill a prior condition of approval of a land use permit for the same property that was imposed by any governmental entity with jurisdiction unless the owner shows that to fulfill that condition would be useless, impractical or impossible in light of the use now proposed for the property in the current application for a permit.
8. Modification or Removal of Conditions. Refer to Section 50.95.
9. Revocation. Failure to fulfill any conditions of approval within the time limits provided shall constitute a violation of this Code and the subject approval will be subject to code enforcement proceedings. Enforcement proceedings may include revocation of the subject approval after a hearing by the City Council.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Enforcement
Chapter 10 GP - 20 05/14/2009
10.70. Enforcement.
1. General. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to enforce the provisions of this Code. The term, "this Code", means not only the provisions expressed herein but also the conditions or terms of any permit, certificate, license or approval granted pursuant to this Code. The Mayor may use the resources of any City department to assist in carrying out the City’s responsibilities under this section. [ORD 3226; October 1981]
2. Official Action. All officials, departments and employees of the City vested with authority to issue permits, certificates, licenses, or grant approvals, shall adhere to and require conformance with this Code and shall issue no permit, certificate, license or grant approval for any use, building or purpose which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed by this Code. Any permit, certificate, license or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this Code, intentionally or otherwise, shall be void.
3. Maintenance. [ORD 4224; August 2002] All improvement(s) constructed pursuant to an approval under this Code shall be maintained in perpetuity by the property owner in compliance with the relevant conditions of approval unless otherwise modified by action of the City.
4. Abatement. Any use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged, painted, or maintained contrary to this Code or to any permit or approval granted under this Code shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated as such. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
5. Injunctive Relief. Upon request of the Mayor, the City Attorney may institute a suit in equity in the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon to enjoin the maintenance of any use, occupation, building or structure or any activity being conducted or proposed to be conducted in violation of any provision of this Code. [ORD 3739; September 1990]
6. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provision of this Code shall be deemed to have committed a Class 1 City infraction, such infraction to be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the City Civil Infractions Ordinance.
10.70.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Enforcement
Chapter 10 GP - 21 05/14/2009
7. Presumption. [ORD 4224; August 2002] The City shall have a rebuttable presumption that a violation of the Code was caused or allowed by the person owning or controlling the property.
8. Cumulative Remedies. The right, remedies, and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and not mutually exclusive and are in addition to any other rights, remedies, and penalties available to the City under any other ordinance or law.
9. Violation of Development Agreement. [ORD 4294; April 2004] If the City has entered a development agreement with any party concerning the development of land within the City and has mailed or delivered a written notice that the party is in breach or default of the development agreement, the City may deny any application for land use or building permits on such property because of the breach or default of the development agreement.10.70.
10. Inclement Weather Emergency Shelters. [ORD 4505; May 2009] In the event of Severe Heat or Severe Cold weather conditions, land use approvals for places of worship, secondary public schools, and public buildings shall include use of the facilities as Emergency Shelters, provided such facilities comply with the requirements set forth in the Washington County Severe Weather Shelter Response Plan, or successor plans. The Emergency Shelter shall not remain in activation beyond the Severe Heat or Severe Cold conditions.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Administrative Rules
Chapter 10 GP - 22 06/17/2010
10.75. Administrative Rules.
1. The Mayor may promulgate such rules and regulations as he considers necessary to facilitate the administration and interpretation of this Code.
2. A person aggrieved by the application of this Code to an application for any permit or approval allowed under this Code may appeal such a decision pursuant to Sections 50.60 through 50.75 of this Code. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
3. A person aggrieved by the application of a rule or regulation concerning the interpretation of this Code shall follow the provision for interpreting this Code found in Section 40.25. (Director's Interpretation). [ORD 4224; August 2002]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Severability
Chapter 10 GP - 23 06/17/2010
10.80. Severability. The provisions of this Code are severable. If a portion of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Repeal
Chapter 10 GP - 24 06/17/2010
10.85. Repeal. Ordinance Nos. 550, 556, 620, 631, 639, 727, 783, 820, 828, 829, 843, 877, 939, 952, 1025, 1044, 1059, 1086, 1123, 1141, 1193, 1249, 1394, 1427, 1485, 1498, 1499, 1520, 1600, 1660, 1724, 1737, 1743, 1795, 1900, 1913, 1933, 2001, 2063, 3018, 3030, 3032, 3039, 3058 and 3067 are repealed.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Saving Clause
Chapter 10 GP - 25 06/17/2010
10.90. Saving Clause. The repeal of any ordinance listed in Section 10.85. shall not affect or prevent application of remedies or punishment of a person for an act done or committed prior to November 18, 1978 and in violation of any ordinance repealed and listed in Section 10.85.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Hearings Officer
Chapter 10 GP - 26 06/17/2010
10.93. Hearings Officer. The City Council may by resolution transfer any or all quasi-judicial powers and duties, including quasi-judicial administrative powers and duties, of the Planning Commission as herein provided to a Hearings Officer. Prior to such action, the Commission, as appropriate, shall comment on and recommend to the Council which specific matters should be transferred to the Hearings Officer. [ORD 3216; July 1981]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Development Review Participants
Chapter 10 GP - 27 06/01/2012
10.95. Development Review Participants. [ORD 4224; August 2002] The following are the primary participants in the planning and development review decision making process in the City of Beaverton. The roles of these participants are outlined in this Section and may be further defined by the City Council through ordinance or resolution.
1. City Council.
A. Membership. The City Council is composed of five councilors elected at large to serve a four year term.
B. Responsibility and Authority.
1. The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, create or continue a Planning Commission or Commissions which shall act as planning and development advisory body(s) to the Council and shall have such other powers and authority as described in this Code or as may be specified by the Council through resolution.
2. The City Council, may, by ordinance or resolution, create subcommittee(s) of the Planning Commission(s) and delegate to such subcommittee(s) such powers and authority deemed necessary by the Council.
3. The City Council shall be the decision making authority on the following applications: Street Vacation, Text Amendment, Quasi-Judicial Zone Change, Legislative Zone Change, Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zone Change, Discretionary Annexation Related Zone Change, appeals of Director's Interpretation, and appeals of all Planning Commission decisions on Type 3 applications. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Meetings. The City Council shall hold a regular meeting every Tuesday of each week of each month. However, a meeting need not be held if there are no items submitted for review by the Council or if the designated meeting date falls on a holiday. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Development Review Participants
Chapter 10 GP - 28 01/01/2005
10.95.
2. Planning Commission.
A. Membership.
1. There is hereby continued a Planning Commission which shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council for three year terms or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Terms of office shall begin on the first day of the calendar year.
2. The Mayor, with approval of the Council, shall appoint one or more alternate members of the Commission. The alternate member having seniority as an alternate shall assume the position of a regular member immediately upon a vacancy in that position and for the remainder of the term of that position. Alternate members shall attend all meetings of the Commission, shall be entitled to all information regularly provided to members of the Commission and shall be subject to removal on the same terms and in the same manner as a regular Commission member.
3. Upon the resignation, permanent disqualification, or removal of any member of the Planning Commission, the Mayor, with Council consent, may appoint the senior most alternate to fill out the remainder of the term. If an alternate is not available, the Mayor, with Council consent, may appoint a successor to fill out the remainder of the term.
4. Planning Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and may be removed without cause at any time with the consent of the Council.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Development Review Participants
Chapter 10 GP - 29 06/01/2012
10.95.2.A.
5. Members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the City, except as provided by Section 10.95.2.A.6. below, and are not Council members or City employees. The membership of the Planning Commission should consist of at least two (2) individuals actively engaged in architecture, landscape architecture, design, engineering or in a construction related industry, or the graphic arts.
No more than two (2) members shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate. No more than two (2) members shall be engaged in the same occupation. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
6. The Mayor, with approval of the Council, may appoint as a member of the Planning Commission an urban design professional licensed by the State of Oregon. The residency requirement of Section 10.95.2.A.5. above is not applicable to such an appointment. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
7. The Mayor, the City Attorney, and such other City personnel as the Council may from time to time designate, shall be entitled to sit with the Commission and take part in its discussions, but they shall not have the right to vote.
B. Responsibility and Authority.
1. The Planning Commission has all powers and duties that are now or may hereafter be granted to or imposed on it by Charter, Code and City ordinances, State law and official policies promulgated by the City Council.
2. The Planning Commission shall act on the behalf of the City on the following applications: Major Adjustment, Major Modification of a Conditional Use, New Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development, Design Review Three, Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement, Alteration of a Landmark, Demolition of a Landmark, New Construction in a Historic District, Tree Plan Three, Variance, Wireless Facility Three, and appeals of some decisions of the Director. [ORD 4365; October 2005] [ORD 4532; April 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Development Review Participants
Chapter 10 GP - 30 04/01/2010
10.95.2.B.
3. The Planning Commission shall act on the behalf of the City where there are multiple complete applications for a
single property for which the decision making authority is a combination of either the Director or Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
4. The Planning Commission shall advise the City Council on Text Amendment, Quasi-Judicial Zone Change, Legislative Zone Change, and Discretionary Annexation Related Zone Change application(s). [ORD 4532; April 2010]
5. The Planning Commission may appoint a subcommittee(s) of the Planning Commission to act upon such matters as the Planning Commission may delegate or City Council may delegate through ordinance or resolution.
C. Rules and Procedures.
1. The Planning Commission shall hold a regular meeting every Wednesday of each week of each month. However, a meeting need not be held if there are no applications submitted for review by the Commission or if the designated meeting date falls on a holiday.
2. With the exception to continue an agenda item to a future meeting, the Planning Commission may conduct business only when a quorum of the members is present. For purposes of interpreting the provisions of these rules, every member of the Commission who is present shall be counted for the purposes of constituting a quorum, even if the member does not vote on one or more matter before the Commission.
3. The Planning Commission shall, at or before its first meeting in December each year, elect one of its members to serve as Chairman and another to serve as Vice-Chairman which shall be effective as of the following January 1.
4. Actions by the Planning Commission require a majority vote of those present and voting.
10.95.2.C.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Development Review Participants
Chapter 10 GP - 31 10/19/2006
5. A tie vote on an action shall constitute a denial of the request. However, if the final vote on an application is a tie, the applicant may request a continuance to a future public hearing. If such continuance is granted, the matter shall be continued to a date, time, and location certain for another vote of the Commission. A member not present at the earlier hearing may participate if the member indicates on the record that he or she has reviewed the record of the earlier hearing. If a tie vote remains after the continued proceeding, the action is deemed denied. If a tie vote of the Planning Commission occurs when the Commission is reviewing an appeal of a Director’s decision, the original Director’s decision shall stand.
3. Facilities Review Committee.
A. Membership. There is hereby continued a Facilities Review Committee whose members shall consist of persons with the technical expertise in and responsibility for technical issues including, but not limited to land use, transportation, utilities, police, and fire. The Director shall convene the Facilities Review Committee and the Committee has the power to carry out the duties set forth in this Code. A representative from any unit of local government or public agency with regulation jurisdiction concerning a project shall be entitled to participate as an ex officio member of the Committee in committee meetings, make recommendations on any proposal, or make written comments relevant to the review of a particular proposal.
B. Powers and Duties. The Facilities Review Committee shall review and shall make the necessary recommendations to the Director concerning technical aspects of the proposals based upon the technical criteria listed in Section 40.03. of this Code for the following Type 2 and Type 3 land use applications: all Conditional Use, Design Review Two, Design Review Three, all Land Division, Public Transportation Facility, and Street Vacation. The Facilities Review Committee shall review and shall make recommendations to the Director based on the applicable approval criteria for all other Type 2 land use applications. The Facilities Review Committee may review and may make recommendations to the Director based on the applicable approval criteria for all other Type 3 and Type 4 land
use applications. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Development Review Participants
Chapter 10 GP - 32 10/19/2006
10.95.3.
C. Meetings. The Facilities Review Committee shall hold a regular meeting every Wednesday of each week of each month. However, a meeting need not be held if there are no applications submitted for review by the Committee or if the designated meeting date falls on a holiday.
D. Committee Recommendations. The conditions recommended by the Facilities Review Committee shall represent a consensus of the Committee. Moreover, the conditions recommended by the Facilities Review Committee are for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the technical criteria listed in Section 40.03. of this Code for the following Type 2 and Type 3 land use applications: all Conditional Use, Design Review Two, Design Review Three, all Land Division, Public Transportation Facility, and Street Vacation. The Planning Commission or City Council acting as the decision making authority on an application(s) may change the conditions recommended by the Committee only after requesting and receiving a written report from the Facilities Review Committee detailing the technical aspects concerning the purpose and need for the recommended condition(s). [ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
LAND USES
Residential
Chapter 20 LU-1 05/15/2015
CHAPTER 20 – LAND USES
20.05. RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS
20.05.05. Residential Areas. The areas of the City that are designated as residential densities implement the policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and are identified on the City’s Zoning Map. Full urban services are to be provided.
Six residential zones establish varied levels of residential densities and uses.
20.05.10. Purpose.
1. R1 Residential Urban High Density District (1,000)
The R1 District is intended to establish high density residential developments where a minimum land area of 1,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. R2 Residential Urban Medium Density District (2,000)
The R2 District is intended to establish medium density residential developments where a minimum land area of 2,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. R4 Residential Urban Medium Density District (4,000)
The R4 District is intended to establish medium density residential developments where a minimum land area of 4,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. R5 Residential Urban Standard Density District (5,000)
The R5 District is intended to establish standard density residential developments where a minimum land area of 5,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. R7 Residential Urban Standard Density District (7,000)
The R7 District is intended to establish standard density residential developments where a minimum land area of 7,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. R10 Residential Urban Low Density District (10,000)
The R10 District is intended to establish low density residential home sites where a minimum land area of 10,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
20.05.15. SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 1
2
Site Development Standards support implementing development consistent with the corresponding zoning district. 3
All superscript notations refer to applicable regulations or clarifications as noted in footnotes below. [ORD 4697; 4 December 2016] 5
6 Development Standards Superscript Refers to Footnotes R1 R2 R4 R5 R7 R10 A. Minimum Land Area1 (square feet)
1,000
2,000
4,000
5,000
7,000
10,000 B. Minimum and Maximum Residential Density
Refer to Sections 20.25.05. and 20.25.15.B. C. Lot Dimensions16 1. Minimum Width
a. Interior
14
14
24 / 402
0
65
80
b. Corner
20
20
24 / 402
0
70
90 2. Minimum Depth
a. Interior
None
None
80
0
90
120
b. Corner
None
None
80
0
80
110 D. Minimum Land Area (square feet) for Land Divisions Utilizing Lot Averaging on Sites Less than Two Acres3 16
N/A18
N/A18
N/A18
4,500
6,300
9,000 E. Lot Dimensions for Land Divisions Less than Two acres 16 1. Minimum Width
a. Interior
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
65
75
b. Corner
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
70
85 2. Minimum Depth
a. Interior
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
90
110
b. Corner
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
80
100 F. Minimum Yard Setbacks4 16
1. Front
10
10
10
15
17
25
2. Side
0 or 5 or 105
0 or 5 or 105
0 or 5
10 or 56
5
5
5
3. Rear
15
15
15
20
25
25
4. Garage7
5 or 18.58
5 or 18.58
20
20
20
20
5. Garage Door to Rear9
24
24
24
24
24
24
Chapter 20 LU-2 12/02/2016
LAND USES
Residential
LAND USES
Residential
Development Standards Superscript Refers to Footnotes R1 R2 R4 R5 R7 R10
6. Minimum Between Buildings10
6
6
6
6
6
6 G. Reduced Yard Setbacks11 16
1. Front
N/A17
N/A17
10
10
10
10
2. Rear
N/A17
N/A17
5
5
5
5
3. Side
512
512
5
5
5
5
4. Garage
N/A17
N/A17
20
20
20
20 H. Building Height
1. Maximum
60
40
35
35
35
35 Wireless Communication Facilities I. Maximum Height
1. WCF13
80
80
80
80
80
80
2. WCF in Right-of-Way13
30
30
30
30
30
30
3. Equipment Shelters14
12
12
12
12
12
12
4. Roof Mounted Antennas
Shall not extend above maximum height of underlying zone
or increase the height of any building which is nonconforming due to height. J. Yard Setbacks15
1. Requirements
Shall comply with underlying zoning district requirements
2. Other
Refer to 60.70.35.14.A and B
All Dimensions are in Feet. 1
1. For Detached, minimum land area per dwelling unit in the R5, R7, and R10 zones. For Attached and Detached, minimum parent parcel of land area per 2 dwelling unit in the R1, R2, and R4 zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012] 3
2. 24 foot lot width is required for attached dwellings, 40 feet for detached dwellings. 4
3. Minimum lot area in conjunction with a land division application where the resulting average lot size within the land division is no less than the minimum 5 lot size of the zone. Refer to Section 40.45. 6
4. R4 lots that abut property zoned R5, R7, or R10 shall provide the abutting district setbacks for any setback, which abuts that district. 7
5 If dwellings are attached 0 side yard. Side which is not attached 5 feet. If abutting lower density residential zone 10 feet. 8
6. If dwellings are detached, 5 feet. If dwellings are attached, 0 feet with 10 feet for sides not attached. [ORD 4584; June 2012] 9
7. Carports shall meet the same yard setbacks as the dwelling. Garage setbacks shall be measured from the elevation containing the garage door and vehicle 10 entrance of carports to the property line. For all other garage elevations, the building setback applies. 11
8. Either no greater than 5 feet or a minimum of 18.5 feet. 12
9. Measured from garage door elevation to opposite side of the alley right-of-way, common accessway, common driveway, or access easement line. 13
10. Minimum spacing between buildings on the same parcel or in the same development. 14
11. Upon approval of Flexible Setback 40.30 application. 15
12. Allowed except where abutting a lower density zone where standard setback is applied. 16
13. Inclusive of antenna. 17
14. At-grade equipment shelters. 18
15. Applicable to all WCF towers, antenna arrays, and ground and/or roof-mounted equipment shelters 19
16. In the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan Area Lot Dimensions and Yard Setbacks for proposed Compact Detached Housing shall comply with the 20
Chapter 20 LU-3 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Residential
standards and/or Guidelines in Section 60.05.(Design Review) and Section 60.35 (Planned Unit Development). [ORD 4654; March 2015] 1
17. Not eligible for Flexible Setback application. Any reduction shall be subject to Adjustment or Variance application process. 2
18. Not eligible for Lot Averaging in a Land Division. Any reduction shall be subject to Adjustment or Variance Application. [ORD 4697; December 2016]3
Chapter 20 LU-4 01/03/2017
20.05.20. LAND USES
The following Land Uses are classified in the following three categories: Permitted (P) including their accessory uses and structures, Conditional Uses (C), or Prohibited (N) uses as identified in the table below for Residential Zoning Districts. All superscript notations refer to applicable Use Restrictions Section 20.05.25. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions R111 R211 R411 R511 R711 R10 P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Residential
1. Care
A. Care Facilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
2. Dwellings
A. Accessory Dwelling Units
P
P
P
P
P
P
B. Attached1
P
P
P
N C2
N
N
C. Detached12
P
P
P
P
P
P
D. Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
P
P
E. Manufactured and Mobile Homes3
N
P4
P
P
P
P
F. Manufactured and Mobile Homes Parks and Subdivisions
N
C
C
P
N
N
G. Planned Unit Development
C
C
C
C
C
C Commercial
3. Care
A. Hospitals
C
C
C
C
C
C
B. Medical Clinics
C
C
C
C
C
C
C. Child Care Facilities
C
C
C
C
C
C
D. Residential Care Facilities
C
C
C
C
C
C
4. Lodging
A. Temporary Living Quarters
C5
C5
C5
N
N
N
5. Storage
A. Self-Storage Facilities
C
C
C
N
N
N
B. Storage Yards6
C
C
C
C
C
C
6. Marijuana Dispensary, Retail Marijuana
Sales, Wholesale Marijuana Sales,
Marijuana Processing
N
N
N
N
N
N
Chapter 20 LU-5 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Residential
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions R111 R211 R411 R511 R711 R10 P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Civic
7. Cemetery
C
C
C
C
C
C
8. Education
A. Educational Institutions
C
C
C
C
C
C
B. Commercial Schools
N
N
N
N
N
N
9. Places of Worship
C
C
C
C
C
C
10. Public Buildings and Uses
A. Non-Profit Public Services in Public Buildings
P7
N
N
N
N
N
B. Public Buildings
C
C
C
C
C
C
C. Public Sewer and Water and Utility Transmission Lines
P
P
P
P
P
P
D. Public Sewer, Water Supply, Water Conservation and Flood Control Facilities other than Transmission Lines
C
C
C
C
C
C
11. Recreation
A. Public Parks, Parkways, Playgrounds, and Related Facilities
C
C
C
C
C
C
B. Public Recreational Facilities
C
C
C
C
C
C
C. Community Gardens
P
P
P
P
P
P
12. Utilities
A. Utility Substations and Related Facilities other than Transmission Lines
C
C
C
C
C
C
Chapter 20 LU-6 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Residential
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions R1 R2 R4 R5 R7 R10 W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF)
13. New WCF
A. Tower Construction
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
B. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
C. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity8
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
D. Attachment of a new WCF to buildings or structures and utilize stealth design
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
E. Attachment of WCF to existing structures, tower or pole structures 9
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
14. Collocation
A. New WCF on existing WCF tower
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
15. Antennas
B. New WCF inclusive of antennas on existing WCF tower exceeding height standard
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
A. Attachment of antennas to WCF tower or pole structures other than used for cellular phone service
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
16. Satellite Antennas and Direct to Home Satellite Services
A. DHSS antennas >1 m. in diameter
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
Chapter 20 LU-7 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Residential
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions R1 R2 R4 R5 R7 R10 W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF) in the Right-of-Way
17. New or Collocation of WCF in the Right-of-Way
A. Tower Construction using stealth design10
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
B. Tower Construction not utilizing stealth design10
N
N
N
N
N
N
C. Attachment to existing or new building or structure utilizing stealth design10
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
D. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design10
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
E. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and utilizing stealth design10
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
F. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
N
N
G. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity utilizing stealth design10
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
H. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity not utilizing stealth design10
N
N
N
N
N
N
I. Attachment of WCF to traffic signal light pole
N
N
N
N
N
N
[ORD 4702; January 2017]
Chapter 20 LU-8 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Residential
LAND USES
Residential
Chapter 20 LU-9 01/03/2017
20.05.25. USE RESTRICTIONS
The following Use Restrictions refer to superscripts found in Section 20.05.20. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Existing duplexes as of June 17, 2010 in the R10, R7, and R5 zones are Permitted uses.
2. Duplexes are Conditional Uses, other attached dwellings are Prohibited.
3. The placement of a manufactured home is subject to the design and placement criteria found in Section 60.20.20.
4. Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes are Permitted in approved Manufactured Home Subdivisions and Parks.
5. Limited to uses of Boarding, Rooming, and Lodging House.
6. Storage yards for recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers owned by residents in a residential development or planned unit development.
7. Only when abutting or directly across the street from Regional Center zones.
8. On a location containing an existing tower supporting one carrier and shall be consistent with previous land use approvals.
9. Not permitted on single family dwellings.
10. W3 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Collector, Neighborhood Route, or Local Streets; W2 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Freeways and Arterial Streets. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
11. A Conditional Use Permit-Planned Unit Development pursuant to 40.15.15.4 shall be required for residential development of a site equal to or greater than 10 acres and located within the boundary of the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan Area. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
12. Compact Detached Dwellings on lots fronting common greens, shared courts, or public streets may be permitted on sites that are two acres or greater in size through the Conditional Use-Planned Unit Development process. [ORD 4654; March 2015]

LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-10 06/01/2012
20.10. COMMERCIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS
20.10.05. Corridor and Main Street Areas. These areas of the City implement the Corridor and Main Street policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and are identified on the City’s Zoning Map. Full urban services are to be provided.
Four commercial zones establish varied levels of commercial uses and residential densities.
20.10.10. Purpose.
1. Neighborhood Service (NS)
The NS District is intended to provide minimal areas of service and convenience uses to meet the frequent needs of nearby residents.
2. Community Service (CS)
The CS District is intended to provide for a variety of business types compatible with and of similar scale to commercial activities found principally along the City’s major streets.
3. Corridor Commercial (CC)
The CC District is intended to provide Corridors to develop into multiple use employment and service centers.
4. General Commercial (GC)
The GC District is intended to provide businesses requiring extensive land intensive outdoor storage and/or display of merchandise, equipment, or inventory.
20.10.15. SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Site Development Standards support implementing development consistent with the corresponding zoning district. All superscript notations refer to applicable regulations or clarifications as noted in footnotes below. [ORD 4584; June 2012] Development Standards Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote NS CS CC GC A. Minimum Parcel Area - Non-Residential
7,000
7,000
None
7,000 B. Minimum Land Area1 - Residential
Refer to Section 20.25.05. 1. Attached
1,000 / unit
1,000 / unit
1,000 / unit
1,000 / unit 2. Detached
4,000 / unit
4,000 / unit
4,000 / unit
4,000 / unit C. Lot Dimensions
1. Minimum Width
70
70
None
70
2. Minimum Depth
100
100
None
100 D. Minimum Yard Setbacks
1. Front2
20
20
None
20
2. Side3
a. Interior
10
10
None
10
b. Corner
20
20
None
20
3. Rear4
20
20
None
20 E. Minimum Open Air Display Setbacks5
1. Front
20
20
None
20 F. Building Height
1. Maximum6
35
60
60
60
1. For Attached, minimum parent parcel of land area per dwelling unit; For Detached, minimum land area per dwelling unit.
2. Under the conditions outlined in Section 60.05.15.6. of this Code, buildings in commercial zones located on parcels that exceed 60,000 square feet shall be exempt from Section 20.10.15.D.1., minimum front setbacks. Front yard setbacks for parcels in excess of 60,000 gross square feet shall be governed by the Design Review Design Standard specified in Section 60.05.15.6. Any deviation from that standard shall be reviewed through the Design Review Three application process and the corresponding Design Review Design Guideline.
3. Under the thresholds outlined in Section 40.30., application may be made for zero side yard setbacks.
4. Rear yard setback is applicable to only the portion of the rear yard which abuts a residential zone; otherwise the minimum rear yard setback is 0 feet.
5. Where permitted, open air sales / display / storage of merchandise shall be setback at least 20 feet from the front property line. The area shall be designated and subject to Decision Maker approval.
6. Maximum building height of any building within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property is 35 feet.
Chapter 20 LU-11 06/01/2012
LAND USES
Commercial
Development Standards Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote NS CS CC GC
Wireless Communication Facilities G. Maximum Height
1. WCF7
80
80
80
80
2. WCF in the Right-of-Way7
30
30
30
30
3. Equipment Shelters8
12
12
12
12
4. Roof Mounted Antennas
Shall not extend above maximum height of underlying zone
or increase the height of any building which is nonconforming due to height. H. Yard Setbacks9
1. Requirements
Shall comply with underlying zoning district requirements
2. Other
Refer to 60.70.35.14.A and B
All Dimensions are in Feet.
7. Inclusive of antenna.
8. At-grade equipment shelters.
9. Applicable to all WCF towers, antenna arrays, and ground and/or roof-mounted equipment shelters.
Chapter 20 LU-12 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Commercial
20.10.20. LAND USES
The following Land Uses are Permitted (P), allowed with a Conditional Use (C) approval, or Prohibited (N) as identified in the following table for the Commercial Zoning Districts. All superscript notations refer to applicable Use Restrictions Section 20.10.25.
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions NS CS CC GC P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Residential
1. Care
A. Care Facilities
P
P
P
P
2. Dwellings
B. Accessory Dwelling Units
P
P
P
P
C. Attached
C1
P
P
P
D. Detached
C1
P
P
P
E. Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
F. Manufactured and Mobile Homes
N
N
N
N
G. Manufactured / Mobile Homes Parks and Subdivisions
N
N
N
N
H. Planned Unit Development
C
C
C
C Commercial
3. Animal
A. Animal Care, Major
C
C
C
C
B. Animal Care, Minor
P
P
P
P
4. Care
A. Hospitals
C
C
C
C
B. Medical Clinics
C
C
C
C
C. Child Care Facilities
C
P
P
P
D. Residential Care Facilities
C
C
C
C
5. Eating and Drinking Establishment
P
P
P
P
6. Financial Institutions
P
P
P
P
7. Live / Work Uses
P
P
P
P
8. Office
P2
P
P
P
9. Parking as the Principal Use
N
N
C
P
10. Retail Trade3
P
P
P
P
11. Marijuana Dispensary13
N
P
P
P
12. Retail Marijuana Sales16
N
P
P
P
13. Service Business / Professional Services
P
P
P
P
Chapter 20 LU-13 02/10/2016
LAND USES
Commercial
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-13 02/10/2016
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions NS CS CC GC P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited
14. Storage
A. Self-Storage Facilities
N
N
C
P
B. Storage Yards
N
N
C
P
15. Temporary Living Quarters
N
C
P
P
16. Vehicles
A. Automotive Service, Major
C
C
N
C
B. Automotive Service, Minor
C
P
C
P
C. Bulk Fuel Dealerships
C
P
C
P
D. Sales or Lease
N
N
N
P
E. Rental
N
C
C
P
17. Drive-Up Window Facilities
P
P
P
P
18. Food Cart Pods14
P15
P
P
P Civic
19. Cemetery
N
N
N
N
20. Education
A. Commercial Schools
C
P
P
P
B. Educational Institutions
P
P
P
P
21. Places of Worship
C
P C7
P
P
22. Public Buildings, Services and Uses
C
C
C
C
23. Recreation
A. Public Parks, Parkways, Playgrounds, and Related Facilities
P
P
P
P
B. Recreational Facilities
P
P
P
P
24. Social Organizations
C
P C7
P
P
25. Transit Centers
N
C
C
N
26. Utilities
A. Utility Substations and Related
Facilities other than Transmission Lines
C
C
C
C
B. Transmission Lines
P
P
P
P Hours of Operation
27. Uses Operating between 10:00 pm and 7:00 am5 13 16
P C6
P C6 7
P
P C8
[ORD 4662; Sept 2015] [ORD 4674; February 2016]
LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-14 09/01/2015
LAND USES
Commercial
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions NS CS CC GC W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF)
28. New WCF
A. Tower Construction
W3
W3
W3
W3
B. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design
W3
W3
W3
W3
C. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity9
W1
W1
W1
W1
D. Attachment of a new WCF to buildings or structures and utilize stealth design10
W1
W1
W1
W1
E. Attachment of WCF to existing structures, tower or pole structures11
W1
W1
W1
W1
29. Collocation
A. New WCF on existing WCF tower
W1
W1
W1
W1
B. New WCF inclusive of antennas on existing WCF tower exceeding height standard
W2
W2
W2
W2
30. Antennas
A. Attachment of antennas to WCF tower or pole structures other than used for cellular phone service
W1
W1
W1
W1
31. Satellite Antennas and Direct to Home Satellite Service
A. DHSS antennas >1 m. in diameter
W1
W1
W1
W1
B. Up to 2 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W1
W1
W1
W1
C. Up to 5 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W2
W2
W2
W2
D. More than 5 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W3
W3
W3
W3
LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-15 09/01/2015
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions NS CS CC GC W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF) in the Right-of-Way
32. New or Collocation of WCF in Right-of-Way
A. Tower Construction using stealth design
W3
W3
W3
W3
B. Tower Construction not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
C. Attachment to existing or new building or structure utilizing stealth design12
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
D. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design12
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
E. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and utilizing stealth design12
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
F. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
G. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity utilizing stealth design12
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
H. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
I. Attachment of WCF to traffic signal light pole
N
N
N
N
[ORD 4702; January 2017]
LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-15 09/01/2015
6
LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-17 01/03/2017
20.10.25. USE RESTRICTIONS
The following Use Restrictions refer to superscripts found in Section 20.10.20.
1. Detached or Attached Dwellings; only 50% of the contiguous area within any NS zone may be developed residentially.
2 No freestanding office structure or group of office structures shall exceed a combined total of 15,000 square feet.
3. No sales or outdoor storage of animals or livestock are allowed with this use.
4. [Repealed ORD 4673; February 2016]
5. Applicable to all uses, excluding marijuana dispensaries and retail marijuana sales. [ORD 4648; Nov, 2014] [ORD 4674; February 2016]
6. Office uses do not require a Conditional Use for extended hours of operation.
7. If property is greater than 500 feet from an existing Residential use in a Residential zone the use is Permitted. If property is within 500 feet from an existing Residential use in a Residential zone the use requires Conditional Use approval.
8. Conditional Use required when abutting a Residential Zone.
9. On a location containing an existing tower supporting one carrier and shall be consistent with other approvals.
10. Provided the buildings or structures are not exclusively used for single-family or multi-family residential purposes.
11. Not permitted on single family dwellings.
12. W3 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Collector, Neighborhood Route, or Local Streets; W2 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Freeways and Arterial Streets. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-18 01/03/2017
20.10.25.13
13. Marijuana dispensary shall:
a. be subject to the provisions of ORS 475B.450; and
b. be allowed to operate only between the hours of 7:00 AM and 10:00 PM. Hours of operation may not be extended through the Conditional Use process as identified in this Code.
[ORD 4648; Nov 2014] [ORD 4697; December 2016]
14. Food Cart Pods are exempt from the Site Development Standards of 20.10.10 but are subject to the standards of 60.11 of the Development Code. [ORD 4662; Sept 2015]
15. Permitted only when abutting a Collector or higher street classification. [ORD 4662; Sept 2015]
16. Retail Marijuana Sales shall:
a. be subject to the provisions of ORS 475B.110-125 and OAR Chapter 845, division 25;
b. be located 1,000 feet from any existing Marijuana Dispensary or Retail Marijuana Sales use, except for instances of colocation within the same premises of Marijuana Dispensary and Retail Marijuana Sales uses when such colocation is permitted by state law; and
c. be allowed to operate only between the hours of 7:00 AM and 10:00 PM. Hours of operation may not be extended through the Conditional Use process as identified in this Code.
[ORD 4674; February 2016]
20.10.30. OTHER NS ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Uses shall be subject to the following (excludes food cart pods, parks and playgrounds):
1. Activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure, except for outside play areas for child care and educational facilities and as allowed in item 2, below.
2. Accessory open air sales / display / storage shall constitute no more than 5% of the gross building floor area of any individual establishment.
3. Excluding food stores, individual establishments shall not exceed 15,000 square feet gross floor area.
LAND USES
Commercial
Chapter 20 LU-19 01/03/2017
20.10.35. OTHER CS ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Uses shall be subject to the following (excludes food cart pods, parks and playgrounds):
1. Activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure, except for outside play areas for child care and educational facilities and as allowed in item 2, below.
2. Accessory open air sales / display / storage shall constitute no more than 5% of the gross building floor area of any individual establishment.
20.10.40. OTHER CC ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Uses shall be subject to the following (excludes food cart pods, parks and playgrounds):
1. Activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure, except for outside play areas for child care and educational facilities, transit centers and as allowed in items 2 and 3 below.
2. Accessory open air sales / display / storage shall be Permitted for horticultural and food merchandise only and shall constitute no more than 5% of the gross building floor area of any individual establishment.
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-20 02/12/2015
20.15. EMPLOYMENT / INDUSTRIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS
20.15.05. Employment and Industrial Areas. The areas of the City that are designated as Employment and Industrial implement the policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and are identified on the City’s Zoning Map. Full urban services are to be provided.
One Employment zone and one Industrial zone establish varied levels of employment uses.
20.15.10. Purpose.
1. Office Industrial (OI)
The Office Industrial District is intended to provide areas of office, light manufacturing, and limited retail and service uses in an "employment activity center" concept.
2. Office Industrial - Nike Campus (OI-NC)
The Office Industrial - Nike Campus District is intended to provide consistent and predictable zoning with Washington County zoning for the Nike World Headquarters campus located in an area south of Walker Road, west of Murray Boulevard, north of Jenkins Road, and east of 158th Avenue. [ORD 4649; Feb 2015]
3. Industrial (IND) The Industrial District is intended to provide sites for manufacturing, distribution, industrial uses, and uses requiring processing, fabrication and storage, including outdoor storage areas, heavy equipment and other similar uses not compatible in an Office Industrial area. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
20.15.15. SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Site Development Standards support implementing development consistent with the corresponding zoning district. All superscript notations refer to applicable regulations or clarifications as noted in footnotes below. [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4649; Feb 2015]
Development Standards Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND A. Minimum Parcel Area (square feet)
1. Minimum
None
None
None B. Residential Density
1. Minimum / Maximum
N/A
N/A
N/A C. Floor Area Ratio
1. Minimum / Maximum
N/A
None5
N/A D. Lot Dimensions
1. Minimum Width
None
None
None
2. Minimum Depth
None
None
None E. Minimum Yard Setbacks1
1. Any Yard Abutting A Residential Zone
75
None
75
2. Front
35
None
35
3. Side1 2
10
None
10
4. Rear2
None
None
None F. Building Height
1. Maximum3
80
80 - 1106
45 G. Public Parks4
Exempt
Exempt
Exempt
1. Reduction to Setback Standards: Under the thresholds outlined in Section 40.30.5., application may be made for zero side yard setbacks.
2. No side or rear yard setbacks required where side or rear property lines abut a railroad right-of-way or spur track.
3. Except as provided by Section 60.50.05. (Accessory Uses and Structures).
4. Public parks, parkways, recreation facilities, trails and related facilities are exempt from these site development requirements.
5. If non-residential or mixed use development is proposed in excess of 0.35 FAR, the applicant shall demonstrate that the transportation system serving the development site has adequate planned capacity to accommodate additional site-generated traffic, consistent with the applicable adopted level of service standard.
6. Buildings within 500 linear feet from the nearest residentially designated property shall have a maximum height of 80 feet. Buildings may be constructed up to 110 feet in height on portions of the subject properties that are 500 feet or more from the nearest residentially designated property.
Chapter 20 LU-21 02/13/2015
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Development Standards Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND Wireless Communication Facilities H. Maximum Height7
1. WCF7
80
80
80
2. WCF in the Right-of-Way7
30
30
30
3. Equipment Shelters8
12
12
12
4. Roof Mounted Antennas
Shall not extend above maximum height of underlying zone or increase the height of any building which is nonconforming due to height. I. Yard Setbacks9
1. Requirements
Shall comply with underlying zoning district requirements
2. Other
Refer to 60.70.35.14.A and B
All Dimensions are in Feet.
7. Inclusive of antenna.
8. At-grade equipment shelters.
9. Applicable to all WCF towers, antenna arrays, and ground and/or roof-mounted equipment shelters.
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-22 01/03/2017
20.15.20. LAND USES
The following Land Uses are Permitted (P), allowed with a Conditional Use (C) approval, or Prohibited (N) as identified in the following table for the Employment and Industrial Zoning Districts. All superscript notations refer to applicable Use Restrictions Section 20.15.25. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Category and Specific Use Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Commercial
1. Animal1
A. Animal Care, Major
N
N
C
B. Animal Care, Minor
P
N
P
2. Care1
A. Hospitals
P
N
C
B. Medical Clinics
P
P24
C
C. Child Care Facilities
P
P24
P
3. Parking as the Principal Use
A. Structures
P
N
C
B. Surface
N
N
C
4. Retail and Service Business
A. Bulk Retail
C3
N
N
B. Eating and Drinking Establishments
P2
P24
C2
C. Equipment and Supply Sales4
P
N
P5
D. Equipment Rental Agencies6
C
N
C
E. Freestanding Retail or Service
Business up to and Including 5,000 sq ft7
P
P24
N
F. Freestanding or Combination of Retail
or Service Business of More than
5,000 but Less than 30,000 sq ft7
C
P24
N
G. Professional Services
P
P24
C
H. Wholesale or Retail Lumber, Building,
and or Landscaping Materials Yard
P
N
P
I. Wholesale Marijuana Sales
P
N
P
J. Marijuana Dispensaries
N
N
N
K. Retail Marijuana Sales
N
N
N
Chapter 20 LU-23 02/10/2016
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Category and Specific Use Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited
5. Storage1
A. Cold Storage Plants
N
N
P
B. Self-Storage Facilities
N
N
C
C. Storage or Sale Yard8
N
P24
P
D. Storage Yard for Building Materials
N
N
P
6. Temporary Living Quarters
C
N
N
7. Vehicles1
A. Auto, Truck and Trailer Rental
N
N
C
B. Automotive Service, Major
N
N
P10
C. Automotive Service, Minor
N
N
P
D. Bulk Fuel Dealerships
N
N
P
E. Heavy Equipment Sales11
N
N
P
F. Trailer, Recreational Vehicle or Boat
Storage
N
P24
P
G. Trailer Sales or Repair
N
N
C
H. Vehicle Storage Yards
N
N
C
8. Food Cart Pods25
P
N
N Industrial
9. Concrete Mixing and Asphalt Batch Plants
N
N
C
10. Fuel Oil Distributors
N
N
P
11. Heliport
C
C
C
12. Mail Order Houses, Wholesale or Retail,
Exclusive of On-Site Sales to the Public1
P
P
P
13. Manufacturing, Fabricating, Assembly, Processing,
Packing, and Storage1
P12 13
P
P13
14. Marijuana Processing
P12
N
P12
15. Motor Freight Terminal
N
N
C
16. Operation Centers14
N
N
P
17. Laboratory1
C
P
P
18. Salvage Yards, Recycling Centers and Solid
Waste Transfer Stations1
N
N
C
19. Warehousing, Wholesale and Distributive Activities1
P12
P
P
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-24 02/10/2016
Category and Specific Use Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Civic
20. Education1
A. Commercial Schools
C
N
N
B. Educational Institutions
C
N
C
C. Job Training and Vocational
Rehabilitation Services
P
N
P
21. Public Buildings and Uses15
P
N
C
22. Railroad
Tracks and
Facilities
A. Freight16
P
N
P
B. Passenger
P
N
P
23. Recreation1
A. Public Parks and Recreational Facilities
P
N
P
B. Private Recreation Facilities17
P
P
P
24. Transit Centers18
P
P
C
25. Utilities
A. Facilities Related to Utility Distribution, such as Substations, Water Towers, Pump Stations, other than Transmission Lines or Power Plants
C
C
C Office
26. Office1
P
P
P19
27. Financial Institutions1
P
P24
C Other
28. Planned Unit Development
C
C
C
[ORD 4662; Sept 2015] [ORD 4674; February 2016]
Chapter 20 LU-25 09/11/2015
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Category and Specific Use Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF)
29. New WCF
A. Tower Construction20
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
B. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design
W2
W2
W2
C. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity21
W1
W1
W1
D. Attachment of a new WCF to buildings or structures and utilize stealth design22
W1
W1
W1
E. Attachment of WCF to existing structures, tower or pole structures 22
W1
W1
W1
30. Collocation
A. New WCF on existing WCF tower
W1
W1
W1
B. New WCF inclusive of antennas on existing WCF tower exceeding height standard23
W2
W2
W2
31. Antennas
A. Attachment of antennas to WCF tower or pole structures other than used for cellular phone service
W1
W1
W1
32. Satellite Antennas and Direct to Home Satellite Service
A. DHSS antennas >1 m. in diameter
W1
W1
W1
B. Up to 2 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W1
W1
W1
C. Up to 5 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W2
W2
W2
D. More than 5 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W3
W3
W3
Chapter 20 LU-26 09/11/2015
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Category and Specific Use Superscript Numbers Refer to Footnote OI OI-NC IND W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited
33. New or Collocation of WCF in Right-of-Way
A. Tower Construction using stealth design
W3
W3
W3
B. Tower Construction not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
C. Attachment to existing or new building or structure utilizing stealth design23
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
D. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design23
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
E. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and utilizing stealth design23
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
F. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
G. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity utilizing stealth design23
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
H. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
I. Attachment of WCF to traffic signal light pole
N
N
N
[ORD 4702; January 2017]
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-25 09/11/2015
26 7
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-28 02/03/2016
20.15.25. USE RESTRICTIONS
The following Use Restrictions refer to superscripts found in Section 20.15.20.
1. Ancillary showrooms and retail area are Permitted if comprising not more than 10% of gross building floor area, and provided that no individual retail use exceeds 2,000 square feet of gross building floor area. Ancillary showrooms and retail area are Conditional if use is between 10% and 20% of gross building floor area and no individual retail business use exceeds 5,000 square feet of gross building floor area.
2. Drive-through uses are Prohibited; walk-ups Permitted.
3. Bulk retail shall not exceed 30,000 square feet and shall not abut an existing residential zone.
4. Industrial and professional equipment and supply stores, including incidental service and repair of the same.
5. Includes incidental service and repair, but excludes retail sales of specific items on display.
6. Exclusive of trucks, vehicles, or heavy equipment.
7 No outdoor storage or sales of animals or livestock are allowed with this use.
8. For contractor’s equipment, house mover, delivery vehicles, trucking terminal, used equipment in operable condition, and transit storage.
9. [Repealed ORD 4673; February 2016]
10. Entirely within enclosed building.
11. Including incidental service and repair.
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-29 06/01/2012
20.15.25.
12. Manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage, wholesale and distribution activities shall meet the following requirements:
a. Activities are entirely enclosed within a building or structure whose appearance is compatible with normal industrial or office building design.
b. Odors, noise, vibrations or other emissions are controlled within the confines of the building or structure.
c. Are not for servicing or use by the general public.
d. Do not entail outdoor storage of raw materials or finished products.
e. Do not entail movement of heavy equipment on and off the site, except truck deliveries.
f. Do not involve bringing live animals or the waste or by product of dead animals to the site.
g. Do not involve outdoor testing of products or processes on the site.
h. Do not involve highly combustible, explosive or hazardous materials or waste.
i. Examples of uses which normally meet all of the above characteristics include but are not limited to: printing, publishing and allied arts, communications equipment, electronic components, measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments manufacturing.
13. Any use having the primary function of storing, utilizing or manufacturing of explosive material is Prohibited.
14. For public agencies and utility uses. If major and minor automotive services are provided, the following limitations shall apply:
a. Fueling, repair, washing, and servicing of vehicles is limited to fleet vehicles parked on site for these uses established after August 23, 2007. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
b. All automotive service activities with the exception of those described in Subsection c, below shall be undertaken in an enclosed building.
c. The following automotive service activities are not required to be conducted within an enclosed building:
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-30 02/12/2015
20.15.25.14.
d. Vehicle fueling from a fixed source;
1. Routine check of fluid level and tire pressure and replacement of minor equipment such as light bulbs and windshield wipers. Should such a check result in the need to replace fluids, e.g., oil, anti-freeze, the vehicle shall be moved into the enclosed building on site for this operation.
2. Emergency repair of disabled vehicles, e.g., tire replacement.
[ORD 4443; August 2007]
15. Excluding services offered on premises to individuals or the general public.
16. Such as switching yards, spur or holding tracks and freight depots, but not within 200 feet of a residential zone.
17. Privately owned facilities, such as fitness clubs, racquetball or handball clubs, tennis courts or swimming pools exclusive of spectator sports facilities.
18. Stations and stops exclusive of terminals or transit storage areas.
19. Unless the Office use is within a multi-story Office building only, or is ancillary to the primary use, Office is Permitted as principal use up to 15% of the total land area of a site.
20. If tower is proposed to be set back less than 50 feet from abutting Residential or Multiple Use zoning districts then a W3 application is required.
21. On parent parcel containing an existing tower supporting one carrier and shall be consistent with other approvals.
22. Provided the buildings or structures are not exclusively used for single-family or multi-family residential purposes.
23. W3 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Collector, Neighborhood Route, or Local Streets; W2 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Freeways and Arterial Streets. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
24. The use is permitted as an ancillary use to serve the employees and/or support the primary permitted use of the site. The ancillary use is intended to provide flexibility for and complement the operation of the primary use of the site. The ancillary use is not intended for the use by the general public. [ORD 4649; Feb 2015]
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-31 02/12/2015
20.15.25
25. Food Cart Pods are exempt from the Site Development Standards of 20.15.10 but are subject to the standards of 60.11 of the Development Code. [ORD 4662; Sept 2015]
[ORD 4595; February 2013]
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-32 06/17/2010
20.15.30. SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the site development requirements listed in Section 20.15.15., development in Industrial zoning districts shall be subject to the following supplemental development requirements:
1. Off-Street Parking and Loading. In addition to the provisions of Section 60.25. (Off-Street Loading) and Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking), the following shall apply to all development in Industrial zoning districts.
A. No parking shall be allowed within the first 20 feet of the front yard setback. Parking shall be permitted within side or rear yard setbacks; provided, however, when the side and/or rear yards abut a residentially developed property or developable property in a Residential zoning district there shall be no parking within the first 20 feet of the setback.
B. In addition to the requirements of Section 60.25., off-street loading shall not be permitted within side or rear yard setbacks abutting a residentially developed property or developable property in a Residential zoning district or within front yard setbacks abutting any residentially developed property or developable property in a Residential zoning district unless the setback is increased to 75 feet and the first 20 feet from the property line is landscaped or screened.
2. Adjacent Residential Zoning District(s). No service roads, spur trackage, hardstands, outside storage areas, etc. shall be permitted within required yards adjacent to Residential zoning district(s).
3. Required Conditions. The following is required for development within the Office Industrial and Industrial zoning districts:
A. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened by a sight-obscuring fence or wall, excluding outdoor seating.
B. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer storage lots shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscaped areas.
LAND USES
Employment / Industrial
Chapter 20 LU-33 06/17/2010
20.15.30.3.
C. All materials, including wastes, shall be stored and all grounds shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create health or fire hazards. All areas for storage of waste shall be fully screened.
4. Performance Standards.
A. Vibration. No vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles, trains and aircraft shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the property line of the use concerned.
B. Odors. The emission of odorous gasses or matter as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property line is prohibited.
C. Heat and Glare. Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat and glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
D. Administration and Enforcement. Prior to the City taking any action on a Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 application or the issuance of an occupancy permit, information sufficient to determine the degree of compliance with the standards in this subsection shall be furnished by the applicant. Such request may include continuous records of operations, for periodic checks to assure maintenance of standards, or for special surveys.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-34 06/17/2010
20.20. MULTIPLE USE LAND USE DISTRICTS
20.20.05. Multiple Use Areas. The areas of the City that are designated as Multiple Use implement the policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and are identified on the City’s Zoning Map. Full urban services are to be provided.
Multiple Use zoning districts establish varied levels of residential and commercial uses, supporting transit and pedestrian oriented development with minimum density and intensity requirements. Multiple Use areas include: the Downtown Beaverton and Washington Square Regional Centers, Town Centers, and Station Communities.
20.20.10. Purpose.
1. RC-TO Downtown Regional Center—Transit Oriented District
The RC-TO District is intended to promote a transit-supportive multiple use land use pattern and to create over time a pedestrian-oriented commercial center within approximately a quarter-mile of light rail and commuter rail transit stations while supporting existing and future businesses in moving toward and achieving the vision of the Regional Center.
2. RC-OT Downtown Regional Center—Old Town District
The RC-OT District encompasses the City of Beaverton's original downtown, and is intended to maintain the mix of uses, scale of development, and appearance that are characteristic of this historically significant area while supporting existing and future businesses in moving toward and achieving the vision of the Regional Center.
3. RC-E Downtown Regional Center—East District
The RC-E District adjacent to Highway 217 and located generally more than a quarter-mile from the nearest light rail station, is intended to support existing and future businesses and accommodate automobile oriented uses and lower intensity uses which are inappropriate in either the RC-TO or RC-OT Districts while still maintaining pedestrian linkages to the transit stations and transit-served land uses.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-35 06/17/2010
20.20.10.
4. OI-WS Washington Square Regional Center—Office Industrial District
The OI-WS District is intended to provide areas for combining light manufacturing, research and development, business support service, office and supportive retail, distribution, and other accessory uses, and in an “employment activity center” concept. Additionally the District is intended to encourage compact, mixed employment uses that are transit supportive and pedestrian oriented in areas within approximately one-half mile of a commuter rail transit station.
5. C-WS Washington Square Regional Center--Commercial District
The C-WS District is intended to provide an area for businesses that require automobile accessibility while encouraging mixed use development that is transit supportive and pedestrian oriented in areas within approximately one-half mile of a commuter rail transit station.
6. TC-MU Town Center—Multiple Use District
The TC-MU District primarily permits office, retail, and service uses. Also Permitted are multiple use developments and residential development with a minimum density requirement. Industrial uses are limited to light manufacturing uses.
7. TC-HDR Town Center—High Density Residential District
Areas designated TC-HDR are high-density residential neighborhoods with a minimum of 24 dwelling units per net acre. Other uses include commercial uses and neighborhood parks. Small free-standing office and limited retail uses are allowed within multiple use developments.
8. SC-MU Station Community—Multiple Use District
The SC-MU District is generally located within one-half mile of light rail station platforms. Primary Permitted uses include office, retail, and service uses. Multiple use and residential developments are also Permitted with no maximum residential density. Manufacturing and industrial uses are limited. Minimum densities and intensities are required.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-36 06/17/2010
20.20.10.
9. SC-HDR Station Community--High Density Residential District
The SC-HDR District is generally located within one-half mile of light rail station platforms. Primary Permitted uses are for high density residential neighborhoods with minimum density requirements depending on proximity to a station platform and no maximum residential density. Other uses include commercial uses and parks that do not rely upon vehicular traffic access. Office and retail uses are only allowed within multiple use developments along with other restrictions.
10. SC-S Station Community—Sunset District
The SC-S District is generally located within one-half mile of the Sunset Transit Center Station and is intended to implement the land use goals of the Peterkort Station Area Plan. A variety of residential and commercial densities and intensities are required.
11. SC-E1 Station Community—Employment Sub Areas 1 District
12. SC-E3 Station Community—Employment Sub Area 3 District
The SC-E1 and SC-E3 Districts are intended to direct and encourage development that is transit supportive and pedestrian oriented in areas within approximately one-half mile of light rail transit stations. The purposes of the regulations that follow are to stimulate development that:
A. generates sufficient intensity (number of employees or transit users) to be supportive of transit services available in the area;
B. contains a complementary mix of land uses; and
C. provides for limited industrial activities that could be incompatible if located in other Station Community zoning districts.
Areas zoned SC-E are characterized by a mix of light industrial, institutional, and office uses with an overall expectation for development to achieve a district-wide intensity of 40 employees per acre.
The sub areas are located so that the most intense development will occur adjacent to a light rail station or along a Major Pedestrian Route and is generally located within one-half mile of a light rail station. Sub-Area 3 generally applies to land that is not adjacent to a LRT station and is currently developed with uses that are generally industrial, institutional, or are currently low intensity campus industrial park in character which could have redevelopment potential.
20.20.15. SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Site Development Standards support implementing development consistent with the corresponding zoning district. All superscript notations refer to applicable regulations or clarifications as noted in footnotes below. [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4706; May 2017]
Development Standards Superscript Refers to Footnotes RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC- E3 A. Parcel Area
1. Minimum
None
None
None
None
7,000
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
2. Maximum
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None B. Residential Density Refer to Sections 20.25.05. and 20.25.15.
1. Minimum for
residential only
project (per acre)
20
12
12
N/A
N/A
24
24
301
24
301
24
301
24
N/A
N/A
2. Maximum for
residential only
projects (per acre)
60
4017
40
N/A
N/A
40
36
None
None2
None
N/A
N/A C. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Refer to Sections 20.25.10. and 20.25.15.
1. Minimum
0.603
0.35
0.30
0.40
0.30
0.50
0.30
0.40
0.40
0.60
0.35
None
2. Minimum with a
PUD or DRBCP
0.45
0.25
0.20
0.30
0.20
0.35
0.20
0.30
0.30
0.0
0.25
0.0
3. Maximum
None
None
1.004
None
None
1.00
0.60
1.205
1.00
1.205
1.00
None
2.00
0.50
4. Maximum with a
PUD or DRBCP
None
None
None
None
None
2.00
1.00
None
None
None
None
None D. Lot Dimensions
1. Minimum Width
None
None
None
None
70
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
2. Minimum Depth
None
None
None
None
100
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
1. 30 units within 400 feet of LRT station platform, 24 beyond 400 feet
2. Within 120 feet of Washington County R5 zoning, the maximum residential density is 12 units per acre [ORD 4547; July 2010]
3. To accommodate smaller lot sizes in the RC-TO zone, refer to Section 20.25.20.A.1.
4. Maximum FAR for multiple use development involving residential use in RC-E zone, refer to Section 20.25.20.A.2.
5. Maximum FAR 1.20 within 400 feet of LRT station platform, 1.00 beyond 400 feet
17. The maximum density is not applicable to a development within RC-OT if the development is within the areas where the maximum height is 40 feet (see footnote 11 of Section 20.20.15 and Figure A) and the proposed development can demonstrate compliance with additional requirements found in Section 60.05.15.10 Design Review Standards or Section 60.05.35.10 Design Review Guidelines if the proposal is subject to a Type 3 Design Review application.
Chapter 20 LU-37 03/22/2019
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Development Standards Superscript Refers to Footnotes RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC- E3 E. Yard Setbacks
1. Front Minimum
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
06
06
0
None
None
2. Front Maximum On
Major Pedestrian Route7
Refer to Footnote Reference 7
3. Front Maximum Not On
Major Pedestrian Route
20
20
20
N/A
N/A
5
10
20
20
10
N/A
N/A
With Ground Floor Residential
Without Ground Floor Residential
10
10
20
10
20
20
20
10
10
20
N/A
N/A
4. Side Minimum
None
None
None
10
10
None
None
None6
None6
None
None
None
5. Side Maximum
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
6. Rear Minimum
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None6
None6
None
None
None
7. Minimum Side or Rear
Yards Abutting Property
Zoned Residential8
20
20
20
759
20
20
20
Abut Res / MU10
Abut Res / MU10
20
Abut Res9
Abut Res9 F. Building Height
1. Minimum
Refer to 60.05.15.7. or 60.05.35.7., as applicable: Building Scale on MPR
2. Maximum
120
7511
40
80
60
5012
60
60
50
10013
60
10013
60
120
100
40
6. Where detached dwellings and duplexes on lots fronting common greens and shared courts are proposed, the following setbacks shall apply: Minimum front yard setback- 3 feet / Minimum side yard setback- 3 feet / Minimum alley width is 24 feet between buildings.
7. Under the conditions outlined in Section 60.05.15.6. of this Code, buildings in multiple use zones located on parcels that front on a designated Major Pedestrian Route shall be exempt from minimum and maximum setbacks. Front yard setbacks for parcels located on Major Pedestrian Routes shall be governed by the Design Review Design Standard specified in Section 60.05.15.6. Any deviation from that standard shall be reviewed through the Design Review Three application process and corresponding Design Review Guideline.
8. Rear yard setback is applicable to only the portion of the rear yard which abuts a residential zone; otherwise the minimum rear yard setback is 0 feet.
9. 75 feet if abutting a residentially developed property, otherwise 20 feet.
10. Side or rear yards abutting Residential or Multiple Use zoning where the Multiple Use zoning designation allows residential development, the minimum setback shall equal the abutting zoning district’s required rear yard setback.
11. 75 feet permitted in areas within a block of SW Canyon Road, SW Farmington Road, SW Hall Boulevard, SW Watson Avenue, and SW Lombard Avenue between SW Canyon Road and SW 2nd Street; 40 feet permitted in other areas of the zoning district.
12. Maximum height is 50 feet. Where residential use is above ground floor commercial, maximum height is 60 feet.
13. 100 feet permitted within 400 feet of LRT station platform, 60 feet permitted beyond 400 ft
Chapter 20 LU-38 07/20/2010
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Development Standards Superscript Refers to Footnotes RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC- E3
Wireless Communication Facilities G. Maximum Height
1. WCF14
80
80
80
80
80
80
80
80
80
80
80
80
2. WCF in the Right-of-Way14
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
3. Equipment Shelter15
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
4. Roof Mounted
Antenna
Shall not extend above maximum height of underlying zone
or increase the height of any building which is nonconforming due to height. H. Yard Setbacks16
1. Requirements
Shall comply with underlying zoning district requirements
2. Other
Refer to 60.70.35.14.A and B
All Dimensions are in Feet.
14. Inclusive of antenna.
15. At-grade equipment shelters.
16. Applicable to all WCF towers, antenna arrays, and ground and/or roof-mounted equipment shelters
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-39 01/03/2017
Figure A:
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-40 03/22/2019
20.20.20. LAND USES
The following Land Uses are Permitted (P), allowed with a Conditional Use (C) approval, or Prohibited (N) as identified in the following table for the Multiple Use zoning districts. All superscript notations refer to applicable Use Restrictions Section 20.20.25. [ORD 4576; January 2012] [ORD 4578; March 2012] [ORD 4706; May 2017]
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC-E1 SC-E3 P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Residential
1. Dwellings
A. Attached
P1
P
P C1
P2
P3
P
P
P4
P4
P66
N
N
B. Detached
P5,6
P6
P6
N
N
P6
P6
P6
P6
N
N5
N5
C. Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
N
N
D. Planned Unit Development
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C66
C
C Commercial
2. Animal
A. Animal Care, Major
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
B. Animal Care, Minor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
3. Care
A. Hospitals
C
P
P
P
C
C
N
P
C
P
N
N
B. Medical Clinics
C
P
P
P
P
P7
P8
P
P8
P
P9 10
P9 10
C. Child Care Facilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P9
P9
D. Residential Care Facilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
N
N
4. Commercial Amusement
P C11
P C11
P C11
N
P C12
C
C
C13
C13
P
N
N
5. Drive-Up Window Facilities14
N10
N10
C
N P16
P
C
C
C
N10
N P C17 18
N10
N10
6. Eating and Drinking Establishments
P
P
P
P19
P
P
P9 13
P9
P10 13
P
P9 10
P9 10
Chapter 20 LU-41 05/19/2017
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC-E1 SC-E3 P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited
7. Financial Institutions
P
P
P
P20
P
P
P
P
P
P
P9 10
P9 10
8. Live / Work Uses
P
P
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
N
N
9. Meeting Facilities
C P21
C P21
C P21
C P21
C P21
C P21
N
C P21
N
P
C P21
C P21
10. Office
P
P
P
P
P
P22
P8 23
P
P8
P
P
P
11. Parking as the Principal Use
C
C
C
C
C
C N24
C
C
C
C
C N24
C N24
12. Rental Business
P
P
P
P
P25
P7 22 26
P26 27
P27
P27
P28 29
P25
N
13. Rental of Equipment Only
N
N
N
P61
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
14. Retail
A. Retail Trade
P26 30 31
P26 30
P26 30 31
P C32
P25
N P22 26 33
P13 26
P9 25 34
P13 25
P25
P9 28
C35
P9 28
B. Bulk Retail
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
15. Service Business / Professional Services
P9 36
P9 36
P9 36
P32
P25
N P22 26 33
P13 26
P8 9
P9
P
P9 10 28
P9 10 28
16. Marijuana Dispensaries
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
17. Retail and Wholesale
Marijuana Sales
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
18. Storage
A. Self-Storage
N
N
N
N
P37
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
B. Storage Yards
N
C38
C38
N
N
N
N
N
C39
N
N
P40
19. Temporary Living Quarters
P41
C41
C41
N
P
C41
C41
P41
C41
C42
C42
C42
20. Vehicles
A. Automotive Service, Major
N
N
C25
N
N
C N43
N
N
N
N
N
N
B. Automotive Service, Minor
P C44
P
P
N
C
C
C25
N P C17
C25
N P C17
N
N
C. Bulk Fuel Dealerships
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
D. Sales or Lease
C45
C45
C45
N
N
C9 22 26
N
P9 28
P9 46
P28 47
N
N
E. Rental
C45
C45
C45
N
N
C9 22 26
N
P9 28
P9 46
P28
P
P
21. Food Cart Pods68
P
P
P
P
P
P
N
P
N
P
N
N
Chapter 20 LU-42 05/19/2017
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC-E1 SC-E3 P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Civic
22. Education
A. Commercial Schools
P
P
P
C
P
P C N33 48
P13
P
P
P
P9
C9
B. Educational Institutions
P
P
P
C P67
P
P
P
P
P
P
P9
C9
23. Places of Worship
P C48
P C48
P C48
N
P C48
P C48
P C48
P C48
P C48
P C48
P9
N
24. Public Buildings, Services and Uses
C
C
C
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
C P49
C P49
25. Railroad Tracks and Facilities
A. Passenger
P50
P50
P50
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
B. Freight
P
P
P
P51
P
N
N
N
N
N
P51
P51
26. Recreation
A. Public Parks, Parkways, Playgrounds, and Related Facilities
C
C
C
P52
P
P
P
P
P
P
P53
P53
B. Recreational Facilities
P11
P11
P11
P13
P
C
C
C54
C54
P
N
N
27. Social Organizations
P48
P48
P48
N
P C48
P C48
P C48
P C48
P C48
P
C
C
28. Transit Centers
C
C
N
P
P
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
29. Utilities
A. Utility Substations and Related Facilities other than Transmission Lines.
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
C
C
C
C
C
B. Transmission Lines
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-43 02/10/2016
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC-E1 SC-E3 P: Permitted C: Conditional N: Prohibited Industrial
30. Manufacturing, Fabricating, Assembly, Processing, and Packing
P C55
P C55
P C55
P56 57
N
P60
N
P28
N
P28
P56 57
P56 57
31. Marijuana Processing
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
32. Warehousing58
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
N
N
P
P59
P59
[ORD 4674; February 2016]
Chapter 20 LU-44 02/10/2016
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC-E3 SC- E3 W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF)
33. New WCF
A. Tower Construction
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
B. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
C. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity62
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
D. Attachment of a new WCF to buildings or structures and utilize stealth design63
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
F. Attachment of WCF to existing structures, tower or pole structures64
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
Chapter 20 LU-43 02/10/2016
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-45 02/10/2016
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC-E3 SC- E3 W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited
34. Collocation
A. New WCF on existing WCF tower
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
B. New WCF inclusive of antennas on existing WCF tower exceeding height standard
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
35. Antennas
A. Attachment of antennas to WCF tower or pole structures other than used for cellular phone service
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
36. Satellite Antennas and Direct to Home Satellite Service
A. DHSS antennas >1 m. in diameter
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
B. Up to 2 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W1
W11
W1
C. Up to 5 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
W2
D. More than 5 antennas >2 m. in diameter
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-46 01/03/2017
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC-E3 SC- E3 W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF) in the Right-of-Way
37.
New or Collocation of WCF in the Right-of-Way
A. Tower Construction using stealth design
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
W3
B. Tower Construction not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
C. Attachment to existing or new building or structure utilizing stealth design65
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W3
D. Attachment to existing or new building or structure not using stealth design65
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
E. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and utilizing stealth design65
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-47 01/30/2017
Category and Specific Use Superscript Refers to Use Restrictions RC- TO RC- OT RC- E OI- WS C- WS TC- MU TC- HDR SC- MU SC- HDR SC- S SC- E1 SC-E3 SC- E3 W1: WCF Type 1 W2: WCF Type 2 W3: WCF Type 3 N: Prohibited
37.
New or Collocation of WCF in the Right-of-Way
F. Attachment of WCF to existing tower or pole structures and not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
G. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity utilizing stealth design65
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
W2 / W3
H. Replacement tower to provide collocation opportunity not utilizing stealth design
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
I. Attachment of WCF to traffic signal light pole
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
[ORD 4595; Feb 2013] [ORD 4648; Nov 2014] [ORD 4662; Sept 2015] [ORD 4674; Feb 2016] [ORD 4702; Jan 2017]
Chapter 20 LU-48 01/03/2017
LAND USES
Multiple Use
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-49 12/02/2015
20.20.25. USE RESTRICTIONS
The following Use Restrictions refer to superscripts found in Section 20.20.20.
1. No new duplexes are permitted in the RC-TO. Duplexes are Conditionally permitted in the RC-E and existing duplexes are Permitted.
2. Permitted above a Permitted non-residential use (second story and above), provided at least 15% of the ground floor of the building consists of leasable commercial floor area, and such commercial space fronts onto a street.
3. Ground floor residential use is not permitted. Residential use is allowed only above a Permitted non-residential use; provided at least 15 percent of the ground floor of the building consists of leasable commercial floor area, and such commercial space fronts onto a street.
4. Two existing attached dwellings; three or more attached dwellings; or replacement of two attached dwellings are Permitted.
5. Detached dwellings in existence as of September 19, 2002 are Permitted. [ORD 4224; September 2002] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. Only Compact Detached Dwellings on lots fronting common greens, shared courts, or public streets; or replacement of a detached dwelling are Permitted. [ORD 4576; January 2012] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. Buildings larger than 50,000 sq ft are subject to approval of a Conditional Use.
8. This use is allowed only in multiple use developments. Office uses shall not exceed 50% of the proposed residential floor area within the multiple use development, and shall be Permitted only when minimum residential densities are met.
9. The maximum building footprint size for a building involving a single use shall be 10,000 square feet. In addition, the maximum square footage for these uses within a multiple use development shall be 25% of the total square footage of the development. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
10. Drive-through uses are Prohibited; walk-ups Permitted.
11. Except for theaters, a building with a gross ground floor area larger than 20,000 square feet is subject to the approval of a Conditional Use.
12. A new use that will not be enclosed in a building shall be a Conditional Use.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-50 12/02/2015
20.20.25.
13. These uses are Permitted only within multiple use developments, and shall have a maximum size of 10,000 square feet, provided that the minimum residential densities are met.
14. Applicable to uses providing this service.
15. Drive-up window facilities beyond 500 feet of a light rail station platform are Conditionally permitted and are Prohibited within 500 feet of a light rail station platform.
16. Eating and drinking establishments drive-up windows Prohibited; walk-ups Permitted.
17. The use is Prohibited within a physical distance of ¼ mile of a light rail transit station platform, Conditional between ¼ mile and ½ mile of a station platform, and Permitted if greater than ½ mile of a station platform.
18. Drive-through facilities are not permitted within 30 feet of a Major Pedestrian Route.
19. Comprising not more than 10% of gross building floor area, and provided that no individual eating or drinking establishment use exceeds 2,000 square feet of gross building floor area. No freestanding retail or eating or drinking establishment uses are allowed.
20. Drive-through uses lawfully established prior to June 17, 2010 are Permitted. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
21. Meeting facilities less than 20,000 sq ft are Permitted; exceeding 20,000 sq ft require Conditional Use approval. Use only accessory to temporary living facilities or office uses, except in the RC-TO zone. Use may be a stand alone use in the RC-TO zone. [ORD 4669; December 2015]
22. No more than 50% of any one property may be developed for a single use type until a commitment has been made to develop a different class of use equivalent to at least 20% of the floor area occupied by the primary use.
23. Small free-standing office uses are allowed within multiple use developments as defined in Chapter 90 of this ordinance, provided they do not exceed more than 50% of the residential floor area provided within the development, and that minimum residential densities are met.
24. Provided parking is in a parking structure; surface parking as the primary use is Prohibited.
25. Activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure and no sales or outdoor storage of animals or livestock are allowed with this use.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-51 06/17/2010
20.20.25.
26. This activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure. Accessory open air sales or display related to the principal use may be permitted, provided that the outdoor space devoted to these uses does not occupy an area greater than the equivalent of 15% of the building gross floor area. No outdoor sales or outdoor storage of animals or livestock are allowed with this use.
27. These uses are Permitted only within multiple use developments, and shall have a maximum size of 5,000 square feet, provided that the minimum residential densities are met.
28. This activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed structure. No accessory open-air sales, display, or storage and no sales or outdoor storage of animals or livestock are allowed with this use.
29. Use shall not be over 5,000 square feet in gross floor area.
30. Retail trade: Permitted uses for building materials, home equipment and improvements, or landscape or nurseries sales shall not occupy more than 15,000 gross square foot of space in an individual building, site or parcel.
31. Automobile parts or equipment as the principle use is Prohibited.
32. Ancillary showrooms and retail are Permitted if comprising not more than 10% of gross building floor area, and provided that no individual retail use exceeds 2,000 square feet of gross building floor area. Retail is Conditional if use is between 10% and 20% of gross building floor area and no individual retail business use exceeds 5,000 square feet of gross building floor area. No freestanding uses are allowed. No sales or outdoor storage of animals or livestock are allowed with this use.
33. Individual uses larger than 50,000 square feet are Prohibited except on those parcels which are less than three net acres in size as formed by a grid of public or private streets.
34. These uses are Permitted only within multiple uses developments, as long as the floor area of this use does not exceed 25% of the total proposed floor area within a multiple use development.
35. Furniture and appliance stores are Prohibited. Hardware and home improvement stores not exceeding 10,000 square feet in gross floor area are Conditionally permitted.
36. Repair other than auto repair.
37. Use Permitted if lawful as of June 17, 2010; otherwise permitted as accessory to a primary Permitted use.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-52 06/17/2010
20.20.25.
38. Only as an accessory use to a Permitted or Conditionally permitted use.
39. Conditionally permitted for fully operable vehicles for sale, lease, or rent within one-quarter mile of the north side of the Tualatin Valley Highway Corridor land use designation between SW Murray Boulevard and SW Lloyd Avenue:
a. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, this activity shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed structure. No accessory open air sales, display, or storage are allowed with this use, except that the prohibition against storage shall not apply to storage yards for fully operable vehicles for sale, lease, or rent.
b. These storage yards may be authorized for a period of time up to and including five (5) years. Upon expiration of an approved time period storage yard use shall cease until a new authorization through a separate Conditional Use permit is approved.
c. Within the approved storage yards open air sales or the display of fully operable vehicles for sale, lease, or rent is prohibited.
d. The following existing site conditions must be present as of January 1, 2003 in the South Tektronix Station Community Plan Area, and more specifically located on the north side of the Tualatin Valley Highway Corridor land use designation between SW Murray Boulevard and SW Lloyd Avenue, in order for lots in this area to be authorized for the development of storage yards for fully operable vehicles for sale, lease, or rent.
i. Are currently being used for the storage of fully operable vehicles for sales, lease, or rent.
ii. Are currently shielded from public view with a sight-obscuring chain link fence.
iii. Currently have established landscaping outside the fence along public right-of-way.
iv. Are currently lighted to prevent vandalism.
v. Are currently surfaced with compacted gravel or paving.
e. Other site improvements, in addition to the following existing site conditions, may be required by the decision-making authority as conditions of approval for a development application.
40. For building or landscaping materials; contractor’s equipment, transit vehicles, and related vehicle or equipment maintenance activities.
41. Motels are Prohibited.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-53 06/01/2012
20.20.25.
42. Limited to Hotels and Extended Stay Hotels.
43. Only mechanical car washes open to the public are a Conditional Use; Other Automotive Service, Major uses are Prohibited.
44. Vehicle gas stations, with or without repair, shall require the approval of a Conditional Use.
45. All uses established after December 9, 1999 shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed structure. Accessory open air sales or display related to Permitted uses in existence on a site at the time this Code was adopted may be expanded on that site.
46. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, this activity shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed structure. No accessory open air sales, display, or storage are allowed with this use, except that the prohibition against storage shall not apply to storage yards for fully operable vehicles for sale, lease, or rent within one-quarter mile of the north side of the Tualatin Valley Highway Corridor land use designation between SW Murray Boulevard and SW Lloyd Avenue.
47. The maximum building footprint size for a building involving a single use shall be 10,000 square feet.
48. Buildings larger than 10,000 square feet are subject to approval of a Conditional Use.
49. Permitted, including utility uses, if established as of February 7, 2002, otherwise Conditionally permitted.
50. Such as transit stops, submitted for development after May 21, 2004.
51. Such as switching yards, spur or holding tracks and freight depots, but not within 200 feet of a residential zone.
52. Exclusive of spectator sports facilities.
53. Limited to 0.5 acres in size, unless located on top of a building or structured parking.
54. For individual uses greater than two gross acres, in addition to the criteria found in Section 40.15.15.3.C. for Conditional Use, the use must be transit supportive. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
55. Manufacturing uses that exceed 10,000 square feet in floor area require Conditional Use approval.
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-54 01/03/2017
20.20.25.
56. Manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution activities shall meet the following requirements:
a. Activities are entirely enclosed within a building or structure whose appearance is compatible with normal industrial or office building design.
b. Odors, noise, vibrations or other emissions are controlled within the confines of the building or structure.
c. Are not for servicing or use by the general public.
d. Do not entail outdoor storage of raw materials, finished products, animals or livestock.
e. Do not entail movement of heavy equipment on and off the site, except truck deliveries.
f. Do not involve bringing live animals or the waste or by product of dead animals to the site.
g. Do not involve outdoor testing of products or processes on the site.
h. Do not involve highly combustible, explosive or hazardous materials or waste.
i. Examples of uses which normally meet all of the above characteristics include but are not limited to: printing, publishing, communications equipment, electronic components, measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments manufacturing.
57. Any use having the primary function of storing, utilizing or manufacturing of explosive material is Prohibited.
58. As an accessory use, not to exceed 25% of the primary use.
59. Use Restriction 58 does not apply to lawfully established warehouse uses existing prior to effective date of this zone.
60. Permitted only within multiple use developments, as long as the floor area of this use does not exceed 50% of the total proposed floor area within a multiple use development.
61. Exclusive of trucks, vehicles, or heavy equipment.
62. On a location containing an existing tower supporting one carrier and shall be consistent with other approvals.
63. Provided the buildings or structures are not exclusively used for single-family or multi-family residential purposes.
64. Not permitted on single family dwellings.
65. W3 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Collector, Neighborhood Route, or Local Streets; W2 when located on streetlights or utility poles in the right-of-way of designated Freeways and Arterial Streets. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-55 09/11/2015
20.20.25.
66. [ORD 4578; March 2012] The requirements identified in Section 20.20.40. apply.
67. [ORD 4600; February 2013] Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services are allowed as a Permitted Use, all other Commercial Schools required Conditional Use approval.
68. Food Cart Pods are exempt from the Site Development Standards of 20.20.10 but are subject to the standards of 60.11 of the Development Code. [ORD 4662; Sept 2015]
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-56 06/01/2012
20.20.30. OTHER TC-MU AND TC-HDR ZONING REQUIREMENTS
1. A Planned Unit Development approval pursuant to Section 40.15.15.4. shall be required for the following: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Phased development projects; or
B. Development of sites greater than five acres.
20.20.35. OTHER SC-E ZONING REQUIREMENTS
1. No service roads, spur trackage, hardstands, outside storage areas, etc. shall be permitted within required yards adjacent to Residential districts or Multiple Use districts where residential uses are allowed. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Other required conditions:
A. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened by a sight-obscuring fence or wall.
B. Storage yards shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscaped areas.
C. All materials, including wastes, shall be stored and all grounds shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create health or fire hazards. All areas for storage of waste shall be fully screened.
20.20.40. OTHER SC-S ZONING REQUIREMENTS
1. [ORD 4578; March 2012] As to any and all property within the SC-S zoning district, approval of a Conditional Use Permit – PUD (Planned Unit Development), pursuant to Section 40.15.15.4. of the Development Code, shall be required prior to, or concurrent with, any land division or other land use approval(s) for the same property or any portion of the same property.
2. [ORD 4578; March 2012] On or before the full development or redevelopment of all property lying within the SC-S zoning district, the following development levels shall be met:
LAND USES
Multiple Use
Chapter 20 LU-57 02/14/2013
20.20.40.2.
A. A minimum of 1899 residential dwelling units, but no more than 5,115 residential dwelling units; and
B. No more than 10,960,500 square feet of non-residential development.
3. [ORD 4578; March 2012] An applicant for a land use approval, other than a Sign Application, for any and all property within the SC-S zoning district shall demonstrate, through the submittal of a land use analysis, that the minimum and maximum development levels identified in Section 20.20.40.2. have been or will continue to be met when all properties within the SC-S zoning district have been divided or developed or both.
4. [ORD 4578; March 2012] An applicant for a land use approval, other than a Sign Application, for any and all property within the SC-S zoning district shall demonstrate that the application complies with the Traffic Impact Analysis required by Section 60.55.20., associated with the effective Conditional Use Permit – PUD (Planned Unit Development) as to all property within the SC-S zoning district. Prior to approval for development of the minimum 1,899 dwelling units required by Section 20.20.40.2. of this Code, the TIA shall account for all vehicle trips associated with the minimum 1,899 dwelling units as existing conditions, whether or not the units have been approved or developed. Subsequent to approval of the minimum amount of dwellings in the district, the TIA shall account for actual existing conditions. In either case, vehicle trips associated with proposed non-residential development within the SC-S zone are additional to the existing conditions. The TIA shall identify appropriate measures to mitigate on-site and off-site deficiencies for all phases of the proposed development and demonstrate how the recommended mitigation is roughly proportional to the identified impacts created by the additional vehicle trips to be generated by the proposed development. [ORD 4599; February 2013]
5. No more than 80 percent of non-residential development approved through a Conditional Use Permit – PUD (Planned Unit Development) application may be constructed prior to construction of the minimum dwelling requirement for the properties located within the SC-S zoning district. Once the minimum dwelling unit requirement for the properties located within the SC-S zoning district is constructed and has received Certificate of Occupancy, construction of the remaining 20 percent non-residential development may resume.
LAND USES
Density
Chapter 20 LU-58 02/14/2013
20.25. DENSITY CALCULATIONS
20.25.05. Minimum Residential Density.
A. New residential development in all Residential, Commercial, and Multiple Use districts which permit residential development must achieve at least the minimum density for the zoning district in which they are located. Projects proposed at less than the minimum density must demonstrate on a site plan or other means, how, in all aspects, future intensification of the site to the minimum density or greater can be achieved without an adjustment or variance. If meeting the minimum density will require the submission and approval of an adjustment or variance application(s) above and beyond application(s) for adding new primary dwellings or land division of property, meeting minimum density shall not be required.
For the purposes of this section, new residential development shall mean intensification of the site by adding new primary dwelling(s) or land division of the property. New residential development is not intended to refer to additions to existing structures, rehabilitation, renovation, remodeling, or other building modifications or reconstruction of existing structures.
Minimum residential density is calculated as follows:
1. Refer to the definition of Acreage, Net. Multiply the net acreage by 0.80.
2. Divide the resulting number in step 1 by the minimum land area required per dwelling for the applicable zoning district to determine the minimum number of dwellings that must be built on the site.
3. If the resulting number in step 2 is not a whole number, the number is rounded to the nearest whole number as follows: If the decimal is equal to or greater than 0.5, then the number is rounded up to the nearest whole number. If the decimal is less than 0.5, then the number is rounded down to the nearest whole number.
LAND USES
Density
Chapter 20 LU-59 02/14/2013
20.25.05.
B. Residential Density Averaging. Within a single land use zone, residential densities may be averaged across a property in order to allow for a variety of housing types, provided that the property is within a single, contiguous ownership, except that within a PUD may be averaged across multiple land use zones provided that the applicant demonstrates that the proposed development is compatible with existing and planned development on neighboring parcels. For the purposes of this standard, properties within a single, contiguous ownership also include those properties separated only by a street. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. South Cooper Mountain Community Plan. Within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan Table 2: Land Use Designations and Capacity Estimates outlines the density capacity expectations for development of land within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan Area. The Land Use Implementation Policies of the Community Plan include policies that outline application of zoning and deviations from the capacity estimates of Table 2. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
20.25.10. Floor Area Ratio
A. Floor Area. Floor Area is dependent upon whether residential development is involved or not. Residential only development is governed by minimum and maximum densities. Mixed Use Development (as defined in Chapter 90) and non-residential development are governed by minimum and maximum Floor Area Ratios. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is the amount of gross floor area in relation to the amount of net site area, expressed in square feet. For Mixed Use Developments, no maximum limitation shall be placed on the number of dwelling units permitted. Multiple use developments with single use residential buildings are governed by residential density and FAR provisions, as calculated by 20.25.10.C, below. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Permitted Density. Except as otherwise approved through the Final Planned Unit Development process, phased development may be proposed so long as each phase complies with the minimum density.
LAND USES
Density
Chapter 20 LU-60 02/14/2013
20.25.10.
C. Method of Calculating Floor Area Intensity. Required minimum FARs shall be calculated on a net acre basis, as defined by Acreage, Net. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
For Multiple Use Developments with single use residential buildings, residential densities and non-residential FARs shall be implemented as follows: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Net buildable acres multiplied by the percentage of proposed residential use,
= land available to residential development,
multiplied by minimum residential density,
= minimum number of dwelling units required.
Net buildable acres multiplied by the percentage of proposed non-residential use,
= land available to non-residential development,
multiplied by the minimum FAR,
= minimum number of non-residential square footage required.
Example of Density and Floor Area Ratio
Estimates for a Multiple Use Development
District
TC-MU
Net Buildable Acres
5 acres
Residential Acreage
1 acre (20%)
Minimum Dwelling Units
24 Units
Retail Acreage
4 acres
Minimum Retail Square Footage
(4 acres * 43,560 sq. ft./acre * 0.5 FAR)
87,120 sq. ft.
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
D. Multiple Buildings. For developments or phases that involve multiple buildings, the FAR may be averaged by totaling the square footage of the buildings divided by the square footage of the net acreage of land within such development or phase.
LAND USES
Density
Chapter 20 LU-61 02/14/2013
20.25.10.
E. Planned Unit Development and Design Review Build-Out Concept Plan. Projects may use the Planned Unit Development (PUD) or the Design Review Build-Out Concept Plan (DRBCP) process to develop a site in phases to achieve the minimum FAR established in this section. Such projects must demonstrate in the submittal plans how future development of the site, to the minimum development standards established in this ordinance or greater, can be achieved at ultimate build out of the PUD or DRBCP. The DRBCP may be used if the only Site Development Requirement being phased, altered, or otherwise varied is the minimum FAR. If any other Site Development Requirement is being phased, altered, or otherwise varied, the PUD process is to be used.
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
20.25.15. Density Allowances.
A. Accommodating Residential and Floor Area Density. Residential and Floor Area density may be accommodated on a site where undevelopable areas cannot practicably allow development. The density allowance may be transferred from undevelopable areas to developable areas. Where higher intensity is proposed greater than the Code allowance, a PUD approval is necessary.
B. Maximum Density. Maximum Residential and Floor Area density is calculated based upon site gross acreage.
LAND USES
Density
Chapter 20 LU-62 06/01/2012
20.25.20. Supplemental Multiple Use Density Standards.
A. Regional Center.
1. To accommodate smaller lot sizes within the RC-TO zone that existed prior to December 9, 1999, the required minimum floor area ratio for multiple use or non-residential developments may be further modified based upon lot dimensions, as follows:
Minimum Site Width
Minimum Site Depth
0-120'
121'-139'
140'-175'
176'+
0-100'
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.25
101'-200'
0.1
0.3
0.45
0.45
201'+
0.1
0.45
0.45
0.60
[ORD 4312; July 2004]
When provisions are made off-site for required parking, the permissible FAR shall be governed by 20.20.15.C regardless of site dimensions.
2. Maximum Floor Area Ratio for multiple use developments involving residential use in the RC-E Zone.
The maximum permitted FAR in the RC-E Zone for a multiple use project involving residential use shall be determined by the mix of uses and ratio thereof in accordance with the following:
% Non-Residential
Floor Area
% Residential Floor Area
<20
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
20
1.7
30
1.6
40
1.55
50
1.5
60
1.4
70
1.3
80
1.2
90
1.1
100
1.0
[ORD 4259; September 2003]
# Represents factor to be multiplied times the maximum permitted FAR for a non-residential, or non-multiple use development to determine permitted FAR.
LAND USES
Density
Chapter 20 LU-63 06/01/2012
20.25.20.A.
3. The minimum residential density in residential only projects shall be restricted based upon lot dimensions, as follows:
Minimum Site Width
Minimum Site Depth
0-100'
101'-139'
140'+
0-150'
0 DU/Acre
12 DU/Acre
**
151'-200'
10 DU/Acre
24 DU/Acre
**
201'+
10 DU/Acre
**
**
** Governed by standards set forth in 20.20.15.B.
When provisions are made off-site for required parking, the permissible FAR shall be governed by 20.20.15.B regardless of site dimensions.
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Town Center.
1. When a Planned Unit Development or Design Review Build-Out Concept Plan is approved, phased development may be proposed, so long as an approved Phasing Plan is submitted as part of a PUD / DRBCP which demonstrates how required densities will be accomplished upon completion of the final phase. This could be accomplished by identifying future building sites, identifying plans for future intensification of existing buildings through the addition of more square footage, or by identifying future redevelopment of parking areas to more intensive land uses. In all cases, the phasing plan should demonstrate that proposed development will not preclude the ability to establish an urban street grid and urban levels of development as the Town Center matures.
2. Existing development, which either exists or is the subject of a vested development application as of September 17, 1999, shall not be deemed nonconforming solely on the basis of failure to meet the minimum FAR or residential density requirements. With redevelopment of the site, an approved phasing plan demonstrating how the development will meet the applicable FAR and residential density requirements upon final buildout must be submitted prior to issuance of necessary land use permits.
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 1 12/02/2016
CHAPTER 30 - NONCONFORMING USES
30.05. Purpose.
1. Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there are lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of uses that were lawful when established, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their perpetuation. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses not permitted elsewhere in the same district except as specifically provided elsewhere in this ordinance. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
2. Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with Permitted uses in the district involved.
30.10. Pending Building Permits and Certain Existing or Approved Nonconforming Uses.
1. In order to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall require any change in the location, plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof, for which there exists a vested right to continue the development notwithstanding the enactment or amendment of this ordinance; for which a required City building permit was granted prior to the enactment or amendment of this ordinance, or was lawfully permitted at the time the required building permit was issued, or for which the required building permit was issued within an area annexed to the City prior to annexation thereof. If a building permit is revoked or for any reason becomes void, all rights granted by this subsection are extinguished and the project shall thereafter be required to conform to all the provisions of this ordinance. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
2. The City Council may, by resolution duly passed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, establish certain classes of development which, notwithstanding the fact that building permits had not been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be treated for the purpose of Section 30.10.1. as if such permit had been issued.
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 2 12/02/2016
30.10
3. A lawful use that would have been allowed pursuant to a master site plan or other development plan approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance by the decision making authority which has become a nonconforming use by this ordinance, or any other lawfully established use which has become nonconforming as a result of amendment of this ordinance, may be allowed, completed, or altered, as the case may be, as a Conditional Use, notwithstanding its nonconforming character, pursuant to the provisions stated below and the provisions and procedures of Section 40.15., except Sections 40.15.15.1.C, .2.C., and .3.C., as now or hereafter constituted. [ORD 4071; November 1999] [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4696; December 2016]
Nonconforming uses are not favored by the City and therefore, the application for a Conditional Use permit pursuant to this section may be denied as inappropriate under the circumstances. In order for it to be granted, the decision making authority, upon review or appeal, shall make special findings of fact, in lieu of those required under Section 40.15.15.1.C., .2.C., and .3.C., herein, to support the following conclusions: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. That the location, size, design and functional characteristics of the nonconforming use are such that it will be reasonably compatible with and not have a significant impact upon the livability of and development of other properties in the surrounding area, nor will it be significantly offensive or disruptive to residents or other persons acting pursuant to a conforming use allowed by this ordinance.
B. That the nonconforming use, while not specifically permitted within the zone in which it is located, is generally consistent with the underlying general zoning classification (i.e., a residential, commercial or industrial use in corresponding Residential, Commercial or Industrial district) and is found not to be totally inconsistent with the comprehensive plan;
C. That the allowance, completion or alteration will result in the City attaining one or more of the objectives set forth in Section 40.20.05. herein and that the benefit of meeting such objective(s) outweigh(s) any detriment of allowing or perpetuating a nonconforming use; and
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 3 12/02/2016
30.10.3
D. That the allowance, completion or alteration does not constitute an expansion or increase in activity over and above that previously approved by a master site plan, site plan or other development plan or of that existing within an established use. [ORD 3124; May 1979] [ORD 4696; December 2016]
30.15. Nonconforming Lots of Record. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. In any district, Permitted Principal Uses and Structures, and accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. Nonconforming lots of record shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this code. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
2. If two or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots in single ownership are of record at the effective date of this ordinance and are made nonconforming as to lot width or area by this ordinance the lots involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance. No portion of said undivided parcel which does not meet the appropriate lot area and width requirements established by this ordinance shall be conveyed, transferred or used in any manner. No division of the parcel shall be made which leaves any lot remaining with the width or area of the lot below the requirements of this ordinance; provided, however, that if a series of two or more lots or portions of lots are in single ownership and can be used or subdivided in such a manner that each comes within 10% of meeting lot area and lot width requirements for the district, each may be used as an individual lot.
3. Except as provided in Section 20.05.15 of this ordinance and notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 1. and 2., above, the use of a lot in any Residential district which has an area deficiency shall be limited to a single family dwelling. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 4 12/02/2016
30.20. Nonconforming Uses. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
1. Except as provided in Section 30.10. where a use of land or of a structure exists that was lawful at the time it was established, but that would not be permitted by this ordinance or subsequent amendments to this ordinance, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or of a structure than it occupied at the time it became nonconforming due to the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, except that any nonconforming use may be extended to parts of a structure that were arranged or designed for such use prior to such adoption or amendment;
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the time it became nonconforming due to the adoption or amendment of this ordinance;
C. If any such nonconforming use of land or of a structure is discontinued for any reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of land shall conform to requirements of this ordinance in the zoning district where such land is located;
D. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with a nonconforming use of land.
2. To show that a use was allowed when established, a property owner may rely on evidence such as land use applications, building, land use or development permits, zoning codes and maps. To show that a use has not been discontinued for more than one year, a property owner may rely on evidence such as utility bills; income tax records; business licenses; listings in telephone, business, or Polk directories; advertisements in dated publications; building, land use, or development permits; insurance policies; leases; and dated aerial photos.
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 5 12/02/2016
30.20
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 1., above, any lawful nonconforming use of land or any structure associated with that use that would be adversely impacted or destroyed as a result of a government agency action, such as where the agency takes property through its exercise of eminent domain, requires dedication of property for public purposes or restricts the use of property by requiring a reservation of property for right-of-way purposes, may be moved to or reconstructed on the same lot and, if necessary, may be extended to an abutting lot in the same ownership, provided that the use or structure does not occupy an area greater than that occupied prior to the move. Such modification of the use or structure shall be subject to Modification of a Nonconforming Use Permit review by the Director. Other required land use applications shall be requested concurrently with the Modification of a Nonconforming Use request. The request for such review shall be made prior to the destruction of the use or structure and if not made by such time the rights granted by this subsection shall be terminated. [ORD 3121; July 1979] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
30.25. Nonconforming Structures. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
1. Except as provided in Section 30.10., if a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may remain so long as it is otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered in a way that will not change or will decrease its nonconformity;
B. Should such nonconforming structure be damaged by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance;
C. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 6 12/02/2016
30.25
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 1., above, any lawful nonconforming structure that would be destroyed as a result of a government agency action such as where the agency takes property through its exercise of eminent domain or requires dedication of property for public purposes, may be moved or reconstructed on the same lot, and if necessary, may be extended to an abutting lot in the same ownership provided that the resulting placement of the structure does not increase the nonconformity of the structure. Such modification of the structure shall be subject to Modification of a Nonconforming Use Permit review by the Director. Other required land use applications shall be applied for concurrently with the Modification of a Nonconforming Use request, The request for such review shall be made prior to the destruction of the use or structure and if not made by such time the rights granted by this subsection shall be terminated. [ORD 3121; July 1979] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Where an existing street setback must be reduced by a public dedication, rendering an existing structure nonconforming, the setback requirements of this ordinance which are no longer met as a result of the dedication shall not apply to the structure. Further encroachment into the setback beyond the reduction caused by the public dedication is not permitted.
30.30. Repairs and Maintenance.
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, normal repairs or replacement on non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing may be performed in a manner not in conflict with the other provisions of this section. However, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
30.35. Uses Under Conditional Use Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses.
A use that was permitted before this ordinance required a Conditional Use Permit shall not be deemed a nonconforming use despite the failure to obtain a Conditional Use Permit, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 30 NU - 7 12/02/2016
30.40. Nonconforming Parking, Loading, Signs or Other Characteristics of Use.
If the characteristics of a use, such as signs, off-street parking, off-street loading, lighting or other matters required by this ordinance in relation to specified uses of land, water areas, structures or premises, are not in accord with the requirements of this ordinance, no change shall be made in such characteristics of use which increases nonconformity with such requirements. Change shall be permitted in the direction of conformity with such requirements. Non-conforming signs may be subject to additional conformance standards as described in Section 60.40 of the Development Code. [ORD 4696; December 2016]
30.45. Determination of Nonconforming Status.
Determination of nonconforming status shall be processed as a Director’s Interpretation. If the owner of a lot, structure or use is denied nonconforming status by the Director, the owner may appeal the Director's decision to the City Council. The appeal shall be heard in the manner set forth in Section 50.65. [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4696; December 2016]
APPLICATIONS
Facilities Review Committee
Chapter 40 AP - 1 08/20/2008
CHAPTER 40 APPLICATIONS
[ORD 4224; September 2002]
40.03. FACILITIES REVIEW COMMITTEE
Consistent with Section 10.95.3. (Facilities Review Committee) of this Code, the Facilities Review Committee shall review the following Type 2 and Type 3 land use applications: all Conditional Use, Design Review Two, Design Review Three, Public Transportation Facility Reviews, Street Vacations, and applicable Land Divisions. Applicable land division applications are Replats, Partitions, Subdivisions, Fee Ownership Partitions, and Fee Ownership Subdivisions. In making a recommendation on an application to the decision making authority, the Facilities Review Committee shall base its recommendation on a determination of whether the application satisfies all the following technical criteria. The applicant for development must establish that the application complies with all relevant standards in conformance with Section 50.25.1.B., and all the following criteria have been met, as applicable: [ORD 4265; October 2003][ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
1. All Conditional Use, Design Review Two, Design Review Three, and applicable Land Division applications:
A. All critical facilities and services related to the proposed development have, or can be improved to have, adequate capacity to serve the proposed development at the time of its completion.
B. Essential facilities and services related to the proposed development are available, or can be made available, with adequate capacity to serve the development prior to its occupancy. In lieu of providing essential facilities and services, a specific plan may be approved if it adequately demonstrates that essential facilities, services, or both will be provided to serve the proposed development within five (5) years of occupancy.
C. The proposed development is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications which shall be already approved or which shall be considered concurrently with the subject application; provided, however, if the approval of the proposed development is contingent upon one or more additional applications, and the same is not approved, then the proposed development must comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses).
APPLICATIONS
Facilities Review Committee
Chapter 40 AP - 2 08/20/2008
40.03.1.
D. The proposed development is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and all improvements, dedications, or both, as required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements), are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposed development.
E. Adequate means are provided or can be provided to ensure continued periodic maintenance and necessary normal replacement of the following private common facilities and areas, as applicable: drainage facilities, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas, and other facilities not subject to maintenance by the City or other public agency.
F. There are safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development.
G. The development’s on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems connect to the surrounding circulation systems in a safe, efficient, and direct manner.
H. Structures and public facilities serving the development site are designed in accordance with adopted City codes and standards and provide adequate fire protection, including, but not limited to, fire flow.
I. Structures and public facilities serving the development site are designed in accordance with adopted City codes and standards and provide adequate protection from crime and accident, as well as protection from hazardous conditions due to inadequate, substandard or ill-designed development.
J. Grading and contouring of the development site is designed to accommodate the proposed use and to mitigate adverse effect(s) on neighboring properties, public right-of-way, surface drainage, water storage facilities, and the public storm drainage system.
APPLICATIONS
Facilities Review Committee
Chapter 40 AP - 3 08/20/2008
40.03.1.
K. Access and facilities for physically handicapped people are incorporated into the development site and building design, with particular attention to providing continuous, uninterrupted access routes.
L. The application includes all required submittal materials as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
APPLICATIONS
Facilities Review Committee
Chapter 40 AP - 4 08/20/2008
2. Public Transportation Facility Improvements or Modifications, including Street Vacations. [ORD 4487; August 2008]
A. The transportation facility, as proposed or modified, conforms to the Transportation System Plan.
B. There are safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the project boundaries.
C. The proposed development is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are in place.
D. Adequate means are provided or proposed to be provided in a satisfactory manner, to ensure continued periodic maintenance and replacement of the following, as applicable: drainage facilities, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas and other facilities.
E. The proposed transportation facility connects to the surrounding circulation systems in a safe, efficient, and direct manner.
F. The proposed transportation facility or modification thereof will provide adequate fire equipment facility access and turnaround area, as well as adequate street lighting for crime and accident prevention as well as protection from hazardous conditions due to inadequate, substandard or ill-designed development.
G. Grading and contouring are the minimum necessary to accommodate the proposed transportation facility, while mitigating adverse effect(s) on neighboring properties, public right-of-way, surface drainage, water storage facilities, and the public storm drainage system.
H. Access and facilities for physically handicapped people are maintained and/or incorporated into the subject transportation facility, with particular attention to providing continuous, uninterrupted access routes.
I. The application includes all required submittal materials as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
APPLICATIONS
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Chapter 40 AP - 5 01/01/2005
40.05. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
40.05.05. Purpose.
The purpose of an Accessory Dwelling Unit application is to provide a mechanism to allow accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units are normal, incidental and subordinate to a detached dwelling. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.05.10. Applicability.
An Accessory Dwelling Unit application may be requested for a property with a detached dwelling as the principal use in any zoning district that allows accessory dwelling units.
40.05.15. Application.
There is a single Accessory Dwelling Unit application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Accessory Dwelling Unit.
A. Threshold. An application for Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. An accessory dwelling unit is proposed to be added to a property.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Accessory Dwelling Unit. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve an Accessory Dwelling Unit application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for an Accessory Dwelling Unit application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
APPLICATIONS
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Chapter 40 AP - 6 01/01/2005
40.05.15.1.C.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance application which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
5. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Regulations) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Regulations) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
6. There is only one detached dwelling on the subject site.
7. The proposed accessory dwelling unit is no more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the primary detached dwelling or 800 square feet, whichever is less.
8. The proposal is not located over any easement.
9. The exterior finish materials of the proposal is the same as the detached dwelling in terms of type, size, placement, and finish.
10. The roof pitch of the proposal matches the roof pitch of the detached dwelling.
11. The trim of the proposal is the same as the detached dwelling in type, size, location, and finish.
12. The windows of the proposal match those on the detached dwelling in terms of proportion (height to width ratio) and orientation (vertical vs. horizontal).
13. The eaves of the proposal project the same distance as the eaves on the detached dwelling.
APPLICATIONS
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Chapter 40 AP - 7 01/01/2005
40.05.15.1.C.
14. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for an Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Accessory Dwelling Unit application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of an Accessory Dwelling Unit application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 8 03/22/2019
40.10. ADJUSTMENT
40.10.05. Purpose.
The purpose of an Adjustment application is to provide a mechanism by which certain regulations in the Development Code may be adjusted if the proposed development continues to meet the intended purpose of such regulations. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.10.10. Applicability.
An Adjustment may be requested only for numerical Site Development Requirements contained in Chapter 20 (Land Uses), the grading standards contained in Chapter 60 (Special Requirements), Section 60.15.10, or the numerical standards identified in Food Cart Pod Regulations contained in 60.11 (Food Cart Pod Regulations). [ORD 4397; August 2006] [ORD 4697; December 2016]
40.10.15. Application.
There are Four (4) Adjustment applications which are as follows: Minor Adjustment, Major Adjustment, Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing, Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
1. Minor Adjustment.
A. Threshold. An application for Minor Adjustment shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. Involves up to and including a 10% adjustment from the numerical Site Development Requirements specified in Chapter 20 (Land Uses). This threshold does not apply where credits have been earned for height increase through Habitat Friendly Development Practices, as described Section 60.12.40.4., .5., .6., and .7. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
2. Involves up to and including a 10% adjustment from the numerical Development Standards for Grading specified in Section 60.15.10. (Land Division Grading Standards) of this Code. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 9 01/15/2009
40.10.15.1.A
3. Involves up to and including a 10% adjustment from the numerical Food Cart Pod standards specified in Section 60.11.10 and 60.11.15 of this Code. [ORD 4662; September 2015]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Minor Adjustment. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Minor Adjustment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Minor Adjustment application.
2. The application complies with all applicable submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. and includes all applicable City application fees.
3. Special conditions or circumstances exist on the site that make it physically difficult or impossible to meet the applicable development standard for an otherwise acceptable proposal.
4. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute financial hardship or inconvenience.
5. Granting the adjustment as part of the overall proposal will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.
6. City designated significant trees and/or historic resources, if present, will be preserved.
7. If more than one adjustment is being requested concurrently, the cumulative effect of the adjustments will result in a proposal which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zoning district.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 10 01/15/2009
40.10.15.1.C.
8. Any adjustment granted shall be the minimum necessary to permit a reasonable use of land, buildings, and structures.
9. The proposal incorporates building, structure, or site design features or some combination thereof that compensate for the requested adjustment.
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more Adjustment, Variance, Planned Unit Development applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
11. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
12. Adequate means are provided or can be provided to ensure continued periodic maintenance and necessary normal replacement of the following private common facilities and areas: drainage ditches, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas and other facilities, not subject to periodic maintenance by the City or other public agency.
13. The proposal does not include any lot area averaging as specified in Section 20.05.50.1.B. or include any lot dimension reductions as specified in Sections 20.05.50.2.A.2. and .4. or 20.05.50.2.B.2. and .4. [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 11 01/15/2009
40.10.15.1.C.
14. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4473; March 2008]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Minor Adjustment shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Minor Adjustment application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Minor Adjustment application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 12 06/01/2012
2. Major Adjustment.
A. Threshold. An application for Major Adjustment shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. Involves an adjustment of more than 10% and up to and including 50% adjustment from the numerical Site Development Requirement specified in Chapter 20 (Land Uses). This threshold does not apply where credits have been earned for height increase through Habitat Friendly Development Practices, as described Section 60.12.40.4., .5., .6., and .7. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
2. Involves an adjustment of more than 10% and up to and including 50% adjustment from the numerical Development Standards for Grading specified in Section 60.15.10. (Land Division Grading Standards) of this Code. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
3. Any change from the numerical requirements contained in Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking). [ORD 4473; March 2008]
4. Involves an adjustment of more than 10% and up to and including 50% adjustment from the numerical Food Cart Pod standards specified in Section 60.11.10 and 60.11.15 of this Code. [ORD 4662; September 2015]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Major Adjustment. The decision making authority will be the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Major Adjustment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Major Adjustment application.
2. The application complies with all applicable submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. and includes all applicable City application fees.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 13 06/01/2012
40.10.15.2.C.
3. Special conditions or circumstances exist on the site that make it difficult or impossible to meet the applicable development standard for an otherwise acceptable proposal.
4. The special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute financial hardship or inconvenience.
5. Granting the adjustment as part of the overall proposal will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.
6. City designated significant trees and/or historic resources, if present, will be preserved.
7. If more than one adjustment is being requested concurrently, the cumulative effect of the adjustments will result in a proposal which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zoning district.
8. Any adjustment granted shall be the minimum necessary to permit a reasonable use of land, buildings, and structures.
9. Either it can be demonstrated that the proposed modification equally or better meets the intent of the standard to be modified or the proposal incorporates building, structure, or site design features or some combination thereof that compensate for the requested adjustment.
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 14 06/01/2012
40.10.15.2.C.
11. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
12. Adequate means are provided or can be provided to ensure continued periodic maintenance and necessary normal replacement of the following private common facilities and areas: drainage ditches, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas and other facilities, not subject to periodic maintenance by the City or other public agency.
13. The proposal does not include any lot area averaging as specified in Section 20.05.50.1.B. or include any lot dimension reductions as specified in Sections 20.05.50.2.A.2. and .4. or 20.05.50.2.B.2. and .4. [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
14. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4473; March 2008]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Major Adjustment shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Major Adjustment application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Major Adjustment application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 15 06/01/2012
40.10.15.2.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 16 03/22/2019
3. Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing. [ORD 4758; March 2019]
A. Threshold. An application for Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. For eligible regulated affordable housing developments, an adjustment up to and including 10% from the numerical Site Development Requirements specified in Chapter 20 (Land Uses). This threshold does not apply to adjustment requests for height where credits have been earned for height increase through Habitat Friendly Development Practices, as described Section 60.12.40.4., .5., .6., and .7
2. For eligible regulated affordable housing development, an adjustment up to and including 10% from the numerical Development Standards for Grading specified in Section 60.15.10. (Land Division Grading Standards) of this Code.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing application.
2. The application complies with all applicable submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. and includes all applicable City application fees.
3. Granting the adjustment as part of the overall proposal will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 17 03/22/2019
40.10.15.3.C.
4. If more than one adjustment and/or variance is being requested concurrently, the cumulative effect of the modifications will result in a proposal which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zoning district.
5. The proposal incorporates building, structure, or site design features or some combination thereof that compensate for the requested adjustment.
6. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more Adjustment, Variance, Planned Unit Development applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
7. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
8. Adequate means are provided or can be provided to ensure continued periodic maintenance and necessary normal replacement of the following private common facilities and areas: drainage ditches, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas and other facilities, not subject to periodic maintenance by the City or other public agency.
9. If the proposal includes lot area averaging as specified in Section 20.05.15.D, the request for the Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing is not for an adjustment to minimum land area standards.
10. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 18 03/22/2019
40.10.15.3.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Minor Adjustment—Affordable Housing shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), verification of regulated affordable housing status, and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Minor Adjustment – Affordable Housing application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 19 03/22/2019
4. Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing [ORD 4758; March 2019]
A. Threshold. An application for Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. For eligible regulated affordable housing developments, an adjustment of more than 10% and up to and including 50% adjustment from the numerical Site Development Requirement specified in Chapter 20 (Land Uses) except for height standards, which shall be limited to a 25% adjustment. Density shall be limited to a 25% adjustment in Residential Zoning Districts. This threshold does not apply to adjustment requests for height where credits have been earned for height increase through Habitat Friendly Development Practices, as described Section 60.12.40.4., .5., .6., and .7.
2. For eligible regulated affordable housing developments, an adjustment of more than 10% and up to and including 50% adjustment from the numerical Development Standards for Grading specified in Section 60.15.10. (Land Division Grading Standards) of this Code.
3. For eligible regulated affordable housing developments, any change from the numerical requirements contained in Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking).
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing. The decision making authority will be the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing application.
2. The application complies with all applicable submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. and includes all applicable City application fees.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 20 03/22/2019
40.10.15.4.C.
3. Granting the adjustment as part of the overall proposal will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.
4. If more than one adjustment and/or variance is being requested concurrently, the cumulative effect of the modifications will result in a proposal which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zoning district.
5. The proposal incorporates building, structure, or site design features or some combination thereof that compensate for the requested adjustment.
6. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
7. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
8. In the case of an adjustment to the numerical requirements contained in Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking), any part of the site of the proposed development shall be connected by a public route that is no longer than one-quarter mile from a bus transit stop that has 20-minute or more frequent peak-hour transit service or connected by a public route that is no longer than one-half mile to a light-rail platform. Alternatively, the application shall provide a parking analysis demonstrating that the actual parking needs of the development can be accommodated onsite. The parking analysis shall include examples from at least two other comparable developments. Additional examples may be required by the City Engineer or designee.
APPLICATIONS
Adjustment
Chapter 40 AP - 21 03/22/2019
40.10.15.4.C.
9. Adequate means are provided or can be provided to ensure continued periodic maintenance and necessary normal replacement of the following private common facilities and areas: drainage ditches, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas and other facilities, not subject to periodic maintenance by the City or other public agency.
10. If the proposal includes lot area averaging as specified in Section 20.05.15.D, the request for the Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing is not for an adjustment to minimum land area standards.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), verification of regulated affordable housing status, and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Major Adjustment – Affordable Housing application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 22 06/01/2012
40.15. CONDITIONAL USE
40.15.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Conditional Use application is to review uses that may be compatible in the underlying zoning district but because of their size, operation, or other characteristics require review on a case-by-case basis. These uses are subject to the regulations in this Section because they may, but do not necessarily, result in significant adverse effects upon the environment, overburden public services, alter the character of the surrounding area or create nuisances. Conditional Uses may be approved, approved with site-specific conditions designed to minimize or mitigate identified adverse impacts, or denied. A Planned Unit Development is a special kind of Conditional Use that permits the modification of the development standards in the underlying zoning district to achieve innovative design, preserve natural resources, reduce energy consumption and/or otherwise address unique site opportunities and constraints. Such approval allows the modification of such design standards without the necessity for separate Adjustment or Variance applications. Within the SC-S (Station Community-Sunset) zoning district, a Planned Unit Development is required to ensure that specific development requirements are satisfied. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [ORD 4473; March 2008] [ORD 4578; March 2012]
40.15.10. Applicability.
The uses listed in Chapter 20 (Land Uses) for each zoning district as a Conditional Use shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
40.15.15. Application.
There are four (4) Conditional Use applications which are as follows: Minor Modification of a Conditional Use, Major Modification of a Conditional Use, New Conditional Use, and Planned Unit Development.
1. Minor Modification of a Conditional Use.
A. Threshold. An application for Minor Modification of a Conditional Use shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 23 07/10/2015
40.15.15.1.A.
1. An increase in the gross floor area of an existing Conditional Use up to and including 25% and not to exceed 3,000 gross square feet of floor area for properties that are not located in a Residential zoning district and are located at a distance of more than 50 feet from a Residential zoning district.
2. An increase in the gross floor area of an existing Conditional Use up to and including 10% and not to exceed 1,000 gross square feet of floor area for properties that are located in a Residential zoning district or within a distance of up to and including 50 feet of a Residential zoning district.
3. A projected or actual increase in vehicular traffic to and from a site approved for an existing Conditional Use of less than 200 vehicle trips per day as determined by using the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual or an evaluation by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed by the State of Oregon for all properties that are not located in a Residential zoning district and are located at a distance of more than 50 feet from a Residential zoning district.
4. A projected or actual increase in vehicular traffic to and from a site approved for an existing Conditional Use of up to and including 100 vehicle trips per day as determined by using the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual or an evaluation by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed by the State of Oregon for all properties that are located in a Residential zoning district or within a distance of up to and including 50 feet of a Residential zoning district.
5. The addition of portable classrooms to an elementary, middle, or high school campus. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Minor Modification of a Conditional Use. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 24 07/10/2015
40.15.15.1.C.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Minor Modification of a Conditional Use application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Minor Modification of a Conditional Use application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The existing use has been approved as a Conditional Use as governed by the regulations in place when the use was established and complies with the applicable conditions of the Conditional Use approval. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
5. The proposal will not remove or modify previously established conditions of approval for the prior Conditional Use consistent with Section 50.95.6. of the Development Code. [ORD 4473; March 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Minor Modification of a Conditional Use shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Minor Modification of a Conditional Use application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 25 03/27/2008
40.15.15.1.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Minor Modification of a Conditional Use application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 26 01/15/2009
40.15.15.
2. Major Modification of a Conditional Use.
A. Threshold. An application for Major Modification of a Conditional Use shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. An increase in the gross floor area of an existing Conditional Use more than 10% or more than 1,000 gross square feet of floor area for all properties that are located in a Residential zoning district or within a distance of up to and including 50 feet of a Residential zoning district.
2. An increase in the gross floor area of an existing Conditional Use by more than 25% or in excess of 3,000 gross square feet of floor area for all properties that are not located in a Residential zoning district and are located at a distance of more than 50 feet from a Residential zoning district.
3. Projected or actual increase in vehicular traffic to and from a site approved for an existing Conditional Use of more than 100 vehicle trips per day as determined by using the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual or an evaluation by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed by the State of Oregon for all properties that are located in a Residential zoning district or are located at a distance of up to and including 50 feet from a Residential zoning district.
4. A projected or actual increase in vehicular traffic to and from a site approved for an existing Conditional Use of more than 200 vehicle trips per day as determined by using the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual or an evaluation by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed by the State of Oregon for all properties that are not located in a Residential zoning district and are located at a distance of more than 50 feet from a Residential zoning district.
[ORD 4365; October 2005] [ORD 4473; March 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 27 06/01/2012
40.15.15.2.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Major Modification of a Conditional Use. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Major Modification of a Conditional Use application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Major Modification of a Conditional Use application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal complies with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
4. The existing use has been approved as a Conditional Use as governed by the regulations in place when the use was established and complies with the applicable conditions of the Conditional Use approval unless the applicant has received or is concurrently requesting one or more conditions be removed or modified as part of the current application. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
5. The location, size, and functional characteristics of the proposal are such that it can be made reasonably compatible with and have a minimal impact on livability and appropriate use and development of properties in the surrounding area of the subject site.
6. The proposal will not modify previously established conditions of approval for the prior Conditional Use consistent with Section 50.95.6. of the Development Code. [ORD 4473; March 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 28 03/27/2008
40.15.15.2.C.
7. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Major Modification of a Conditional Use shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Major Modification of a Conditional Use application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Major Modification of a Conditional Use application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 29 03/27/2008
40.15.15.
3. New Conditional Use.
A. Threshold. An application for a New Conditional Use shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The proposed use is Conditionally permitted in the underlying zoning district and a prior Conditional Use approval for the proposed use is not already in effect. [ORD 4332; January 2005] [ORD 4473; March 2008]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for a New Conditional Use. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a New Conditional Use application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Conditional Use application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal will comply with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
4. The size, dimensions, configuration, and topography of the site and natural and man-made features on the site can reasonably accommodate the proposal.
5. The location, size, and functional characteristics of the proposal are such that it can be made reasonably compatible with and have a minimal impact on livability and appropriate use and development of properties in the surrounding area of the subject site. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 30 03/27/2008
40.15.15.3.C.
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Conditional Use shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Conditional Use application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Conditional Use application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 31 12/02/2016
40.15.15.
4. Planned Unit Development. [ORD 4432; April 2007]
A. Threshold. A Planned Unit Development is an application process which: [ORD 4578; March 2012]
1. May be chosen by the applicant when one or more of the following thresholds apply: [ORD 4578; March 2012]
a. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) may be applied to Commercial, Industrial, Multiple Use, and Residential properties that are 2 acres or greater in size within any City zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
b. When a land division of 2 acres or greater in size within any City zoning district requires collectively more than 3 of the following land use applications or combination thereof: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
(1). Minor Adjustment;
(2). Major Adjustment;
(3). Flexible Setback; or
(4). Variance.
[ORD 4578; March 2012]
2. [ORD 4578; March 2012] Is required prior to, or concurrent with, other development applications when development is proposed on land within the SC-S (Station Community-Sunset) zoning district. Sign Applications excepted. [ORD 4597; February 2013]
3. Is required for proposed residential development of a site that is equal to or greater than 10 acres, including all phases, and located within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan Area. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
4. Is required for developments located within the TC-MU or TC-HDR zone AND: is a phased development project OR is
development of a site that is greater than 5 acres.
[ORD 4697; December 2016]
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 32 05/15/2015
40.15.15.4.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for PUD approval. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a PUD application, the Planning Commission shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a PUD application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal meets the Site Development Requirement for setbacks within the applicable zoning district for the perimeter of the parent parcel unless otherwise provided by Section 60.35.03.
4. The proposal complies with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
5. The size, dimensions, configuration, and topography of the site and natural and man-made features on the site can reasonably accommodate the proposal.
6. The location, size, and functional characteristics of the proposal are such that it can be made reasonably compatible with and have a minimal impact on livability and appropriate development of properties in the surrounding area of the subject site.
7. The width of proposed lots or staggering of building setbacks within detached residential developments vary so as to break up the monotony of long blocks and provide for a variety of home shapes and sizes, while giving the perception of open spaces between homes.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 33 05/15/2015
40.15.15.4.C
8. The lessening of the Site Development Requirements results in significant benefits to the enhancement of site, building, and structural design, preservation of natural features and the surrounding neighborhood as outlined in Section 60.35.15.
9. The proposal provides improved open space that is accessible and usable by persons living nearby. Open space meets the following criteria unless otherwise determined by the Planning Commission through Section 60.35.15.:
a. The dedicated land forms a single parcel of land except where the Planning Commission determines two (2) parcels or more would be in the public interest and complement the overall site design.
b. The shape of the open space is such that the length is not more than three (3) times the width the purpose of which is to provide usable space for a variety of activities except where the Planning Commission determines a greater proportioned length would be in the public interest and complement the overall site design.
c. The dedicated land(s) is located to reasonably serve all lots for the development, for which the dedication is required.
10. [ORD 4578; March 2012] For proposals within the SC-S (Station Community-Sunset) zoning district, the requirements identified in Sections 20.20.40.2. and 20.20.40.3. are satisfied.
11. If the application proposes to develop the PUD over multiple phases, the decision making authority may approve a time schedule of not more than five (5) years for the multiple development phases. If a phased PUD has been approved, development applications for the future phases of the PUD shall be filed within five (5) years unless the PUD has received an extension approval pursuant to Section 50.93. of the Development Code. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 34 05/15/2015
40.15.15.4.C
12. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a PUD shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The PUD application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a PUD application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Phasing. If the application proposes to develop the PUD in a single phase, the decision shall expire two (2) years after the date of decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
Phasing of the development may be permitted with approval of the Planning Commission. A deed restriction for those areas of the parent parcel in which deferred development will occur shall limit the number of future units developed to an amount consistent with the minimum and maximum density or Floor Area Ratio (FAR) permitted for the overall development. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
G. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
H. Expiration of a Decision. The PUD decision shall expire five (5) years after the date of decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
I. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 35 04/18/2007
40.15.15.
5. Modification of a Nonconforming Use. [ORD 4696: Dec 2016]
A. Threshold. An application for a Modification of a Nonconforming Use shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. The proposal includes the modification, movement, or reconstruction of a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure which was adversely impacted or made nonconforming by a governmental agency action.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Modification of a Nonconforming Use. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Modification of a Nonconforming Use application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Modification of a Nonconforming Use application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The structure or use proposed to be modified, moved, or reconstructed is a lawful nonconforming structure or use of land that was made nonconforming by a governmental agency action, as identified in Section 30.25.3 or Section 30.30.2 of the Development Code.
4. The structure or use is adversely impacted or destroyed as a result of a governmental agency action.
5. The reconstructed or relocated use does not occupy an area greater than that occupied prior to the relocation.
APPLICATIONS
Conditional Use
Chapter 40 AP - 36 04/18/2007
6. This Modification of a Nonconforming Use application was made prior to the adverse impact or destruction of the use or structure.
7. The reconstructed or relocated use is on the same property or an abutting property under the same ownership.
8. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Modification of a Nonconforming Use shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Modification of a Nonconforming Use application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Modification of a Nonconforming Use application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 37 06/01/2012
40.20. DESIGN REVIEW [ORD 4332; January 2005]
40.20.05. Purpose.
The purpose of Design Review is to promote Beaverton’s commitment to the community’s appearance, quality pedestrian environment, and aesthetic quality. It is intended that monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious development will be discouraged. Design Review is also intended to conserve the City's natural amenities and visual character by ensuring that proposals are properly related to their sites and to their surroundings by encouraging compatible and complementary development. To achieve this purpose, the Design Review process is divided into two major components; Design Standards and Design Guidelines. Both standards and guidelines implement Design Principles, which are more general statements that guide development of the built environment. The Design Standards are intended to provide a “safe harbor” approach to designing a project. Depending on the design thresholds, designing a project to the standards would result in an administrative review process. However, the applicant may elect to bypass design review under the Design Standards and go straight to Design Review under the Design Guidelines, where review is subject to a public hearing at the applicant's option. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
An applicant for Design Review approval can address design review requirements through a combination of satisfying certain Design Standards, and in instances where it elects not to utilize Design Standards, satisfy applicable Design Guidelines. In such a case, the public hearing and decision will focus on whether or not the project satisfies the requirements of the applicable Design Guidelines only.
Because the Design Standards are a “safe harbor”, there is no penalty for not meeting the Design Standards. Rather, the public hearing process would be required to consider the project by relying solely on the Design Guidelines which correspond to the Design Standards but are intended to allow more flexibility and originality. Design Guidelines are also intended to recognize unique circumstances where corresponding standards are found to be unnecessary or undesirable. Where Design Guidelines apply, the project proponent will simply be required to demonstrate how the project meets these Guidelines at a public hearing. The decision making authority must make findings how the guidelines are met or if they apply to the proposal.
The purpose of Design Review as summarized in this Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 38 05/19/2017
40.20.10. Applicability.
1. The scope of Design Review shall be limited to the exterior of buildings, structures, and other development and to the site on which the buildings, structures, and other development are located. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Considering the thresholds for the Design Review Compliance Letter, Design Review Two, or Design Review Three applications and unless exempted by Section 40.20.10.3. (Design Review) approval shall be required for the following: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. All uses listed as Conditional Uses in the R10, R7, and R5 zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. All uses listed as Permitted and Conditional Uses in the R4, R2, and R1 Residential zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. All uses listed as Permitted and Conditional Uses in all Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts.
D. Site grading.
3. Design Review approval shall not be required for the following:
A. All uses listed as Permitted Uses in the R10, R7 and R5 Residential zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Detached dwellings and related residential accessory structures in any Residential or Commercial zoning district. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
C. Maintenance of a building, structure, or site in a manner that is consistent with previous approvals.
D. Painting of any building in any zoning district.
E. Wireless communication facilities.
F. Food Cart Pods. [ORD 4662; September 2015]
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 39 05/19/2017
40.20.10.
4. Design review approval through one of the procedures noted in Section 40.20.15. will be required for all new development where applicable. The applicable design standards or guidelines will serve as approval criteria depending on the procedure. Existing developments, and proposed additions, demolitions and redevelopments associated with them, will be treated according to the following principles:
A. Development constructed or approved prior to December 15, 2004 is not subject to Design Review standards and guidelines, and is considered fully conforming to the approvals issued at the time the development was approved by the City. Existing developments constructed prior to December 15, 2004, are not considered nonconforming if they do not meet design standards. If existing development is structurally damaged or destroyed by casualty, replacement shall occur as follows:
1. If structural damage or destruction is less than or equal to fifty percent (50%) of the existing gross floor area of the existing development, the area of damage or destruction can be replaced as legally existed on the site before the casualty loss.
2. If structural damage or destruction is more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing gross floor area of the existing development, the area of damage or destruction must meet the provisions of this Code in every regard unless otherwise authorized by the provisions of this Code.
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Proposed new free-standing building(s) within an existing development will be subject to all applicable design standards.
C. Proposed redevelopment of existing structures and project site area is subject to all applicable design standards or guidelines to the extent where redevelopment of existing building or site area is proposed. Only that portion of existing building or site area that is proposed for redevelopment is subject to design review standards or guidelines as determined applicable. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 40 05/19/2017
40.20.10.
5. Design Review approval is required for all applicable new and existing developments. The City recognizes, however, that meeting minimum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) in an early phase of a multi-phased development on a large site may be difficult. The City also recognizes that creating high quality pedestrian environments along public streets is a priority. In recognition of these and other issues, the following options are available.
A. Projects may use a Design Review Build-out Concept Plan (DRBCP), approved through a Type 3 process, to develop a site by demonstrating conceptually full compliance at build-out with the design review standards and/or guidelines established in Section 60.05. Such projects shall demonstrate in a DRBCP how future development of the site, to the minimum applicable floor area ratio (FAR), while meeting the development standards contained in Chapter 20 of the Beaverton Development Code and to the minimum applicable design standards contained in Section 60.05. or greater, can be achieved at ultimate build out of the DRBCP. A DRBCP shall:
1. Include a plan and narrative intended to address feasibility of constructing future phases, consistent with applicable development standards of the Development Code within the total site area where the project is proposed, and may include abutting properties if under same ownership;
2. Not rely on the removal of a structure in an early phase in order to demonstrate compliance in later phases.
3. Compliance with any applicable Design Standards and/or Guidelines shall not be deferred to future phases of a DRBCP.
[ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4706; May 2017]
B. When a development site abuts two (2) or more Arterial Streets that are also designated Major Pedestrian Routes, application of the applicable design standards may be moved from along the Arterial Streets. This alternative is to provide parking lot drive aisles developed as internal private streets, and to locate buildings along the internal private streets, subject to the following:
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 41 05/19/2017
40.20.10.5.B.
1. The internal private streets shall extend from the Arterial Street to another public street, or back to an Arterial Street in such a way that street continuity is maintained along the entire internal street, and with abutting properties.
2. A public access easement shall be required along the internal private streets.
3. Buildings shall occupy a minimum percentage of the frontage of the internal private streets that is equal to the amount of lineal building frontage that would have been required under the standards for the Major Pedestrian Routes, and a minimum of 50% of the internal private streets shall have building frontage on both sides of the street.
4. All applicable design standards contained in Section 60.05., particularly 60.05.15.6. Building location and orientation along streets in Commercial and Multiple Use districts, 60.05.15.7 Building scale along Major Pedestrian Routes, 60.05.20.4 Street frontages and parking areas, 60.05.20.6 Off-Street parking frontages in Multiple Use zones, and 60.05.20.9 Ground floor uses in parking structures shall be met by buildings along the internal private streets. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.20.15. Application.
There are three (3) Design Review applications which are as follows: Design Review Compliance Letter, Design Review Two, and Design Review Three.
1. Design Review Compliance Letter.
A. Threshold. An applicant may utilize the Design Review Compliance Letter process when the application is limited to one or more of the following categories of proposed action:
1. Minor design changes to existing building or site including, but not limited to:
a. Façade changes, except changes in color.
b. Addition, elimination, or change in location of windows.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 42 05/19/2017
40.20.15.1.A.1.
c. Addition, elimination, or change in location of person doors and loading doors.
d. Addition of new and change to existing awnings, canopies, and other mounted structures to an existing façade.
e. Demolition or other reduction in square footage of an existing building. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
f. Modification of up to 15 percent on-site landscaping with no reduction in required landscaping.
g. Modification of off-street parking with no reduction in required parking spaces or increase in paved area.
h. Addition or modification of new fences, retaining walls, or both. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
i. Changing of existing grade.
j. Removal of Landscape Trees [ORD 4659; June 2015]
k. Addition of no more than twenty-five (25) percent landscape features that consist only of natural materials. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
l. Addition or modification of on-site lighting [ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Proposed additions of gross floor area to buildings in residential, commercial, or multiple use zones up to and including building area equal to 25% of the gross square feet of floor area of the existing building, but not to exceed 2,500 gross square feet of floor area.
3. Proposed additions to buildings in industrial zones up to and including building area equal to 15% of the gross square feet of floor area of the existing building, but less than 30,000 gross square feet of floor area.
4. New construction of non-habitable buildings in commercial, industrial, multiple use zones, or for approved Conditional Uses in residential zones, up to and including a gross building area of 1,000 square feet. [ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. Construction of new Community Gardens or additions to
existing Community Gardens. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Design Compliance Letter. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 43 05/19/2017
40.20.15.1.
C. Approval Criteria. [ORD 4365; October 2005] In order to approve a Design Review Compliance Letter application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Design Compliance Review Letter.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal meets all applicable Site Development Requirements of Sections 20.05.15., 20.10.15., 20.15.15., and 20.20.15. of the Development Code unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance application which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. The proposal, which is not an addition to an existing building, is consistent with all applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.15 through 60.05.30 (Design Standards).
6. If applicable, the proposed addition to an existing building, and only that portion of the building containing the proposed addition, complies with the applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.15 through 60.05.30 (Design Standards) as they apply to the following:
a. Building articulation and variety. (Section 60.05.15.1.).
b. Roof forms. (Section 60.05.15.2.).
c. Exterior building materials. (Section 60.05.15.4.).
d. Foundation landscaping requirements. (Section 60.05.25.4.D.).
e. Screening roof-mounted equipment requirements. (Section 60.05.15.5.).
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 44 05/19/2017
40.20.15.1.C.
f. Screening loading areas, solid waste facilities and similar improvements. (Section 60.05.20.2.).
g. Lighting requirements. (Section 60.05.30.).
h. Pedestrian circulation
[ORD 4578; March 2012].40.20.15.1.C.
7. The proposal complies with all applicable provisions in Chapter 60 (Special Regulations).
8. Except for conditions requiring compliance with approved plans, the proposal does not modify any conditions of approval of a previously approved Type 2 or Type 3 application.
9. Proposals for Community Gardens comply with Section 60.05.25.14 of Chapter 60. Community Gardens are exempt from Criteria 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 above. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
10. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4659; June 2015]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Design Compliance Letter shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Design Compliance Letter application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Design Compliance Letter application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 45 05/19/2017
40.20.15.
2. Design Review Two.
A. Threshold. An application for Design Review Two shall be required when an application is subject to applicable design standards and one or more of the following thresholds describe the proposal:
1. New construction of up to and including 50,000 gross square feet of non-residential floor area where the development does not abut any Residential District.
[ORD 4462; January 2008]
2. New construction of up to and including 30,000 gross square feet of non-residential floor area where the development abuts or is located within any Residential District. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
3. New construction of attached residential dwellings excluding duplexes, in any zone where attached dwellings are a Permitted or Conditional Use. [ORD 4410; December 2006]
4. New construction of detached residential dwellings in Multiple Use zoning districts where detached dwellings are a Permitted or Conditional Use. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
5. Building additions in Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zones less than 30,000 gross square feet of floor area that do not qualify for consideration under the Thresholds for Design Review Compliance Letter. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
6. Any change in excess of 15 percent of the square footage of on-site landscaping or pedestrian circulation area with the exception for an increase in landscape art of up to 25
percent. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 46 07/10/2015
40.20.15.2.A.
7. Any new or change to existing on-site vehicular parking, maneuvering, and circulation area which adds paving or parking spaces.
8. New parks in non-residential zoning districts.
9. New construction of non-habitable buildings in commercial, industrial, multiple use zones, or for approved Conditional Uses in residential zones, larger than 1,000 square feet in gross building area. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Design Review Two. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. [ORD 4365; October 2005] In order to approve a Design Review Two application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Design Review Two application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.15. through 60.05.30. (Design Standards).
5. For additions to or modifications of existing development, the proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.15 through 60.05.30 (Design Standards) or can demonstrate that the proposed additions or modifications are moving towards compliance with specific Design Standards if any of the following conditions exist:
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 47 04/01/2010
40.20.15.2.C.
a. A physical obstacle such as topography or natural feature exists and prevents the full implementation of the applicable standard; or
b. The location of existing structural improvements prevent the full implementation of the applicable standard; or
c. The location of the existing structure to be modified is more than 300 feet from a public street.
If the above listed conditions are found to exist and it is not feasible to locate a proposed addition in such a way that the addition abuts a street, then all applicable design standards except the following must be met:
d. If in a Multiple Use District, building location, entrances and orientation along streets, and parking lot limitations along streets (Standards 60.05.15.6 and 60.05.20.8)
e. If in a Multiple Use or Commercial District, ground floor elevation window requirements (Standard 60.05.15.8).
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Design Review Two shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Design Review Two application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a
Pre-Application Conference.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 48 04/01/2010
40.20.15.2.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Design Review Two application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 49 06/01/2012
40.20.15.
3. Design Review Three.
A. Threshold. An application for Design Review Three shall be required when an application is subject to applicable design guidelines and one or more of the following thresholds describe the proposal:
1. New construction of more than 50,000 gross square feet of non-residential floor area where the development does not abut any Residential zoning district. [ORD 4397; August 2006] [ORD 4410; December 2006] [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. New construction or addition of more than 30,000 gross square feet of non-residential floor area where the development abuts or is located within any Residential zoning district. [ORD 4410; December 2006] [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Building additions in Residential, Commercial, or Multiple Use zones more than 30,000 gross square feet of floor area. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
4. Building additions in industrial zones more than 30,000 gross square feet. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
5. Projects proposed utilizing the options described in Section 40.20.10.5.
6. New parks in Residential zoning districts.
7. A project meeting the Design Review Compliance Letter thresholds which does not meet an applicable design standard(s).
8. A project meeting the Design Review Two thresholds which does not meet an applicable design standard.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Design Review Three. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 50 01/10/2008
40.20.15.3.
C. Approval Criteria. [ORD 4365; October 2005] In order to approve a Design Review Three application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Design Review Three application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. For proposals meeting Design Review Three application thresholds numbers 1 through 6, the proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.35 through 60.05.50 (Design Guidelines).
4. For additions to or modifications of existing development, the proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.35 through 60.05.50 (Design Guidelines) or can demonstrate that the additions or modifications are moving towards compliance with specific Design Guidelines if any of the following conditions exist:
a. A physical obstacle such as topography or natural feature exists and prevents the full implementation of the applicable guideline; or
b. The location of existing structural improvements prevent the full implementation of the applicable guideline; or
c. The location of the existing structure to be modified is more than 300 feet from a public street.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 51 06/01/2012
40.20.15.3.C.
5. For DRBCP proposals which involve the phasing of required floor area, the proposed project shall demonstrate how future development of the site, to the minimum development standards established in the Development Code or greater, can be realistically achieved at ultimate build out of the DRBCP. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. For proposals meeting Design Review Three application Threshold numbers 7 or 8, where the applicant has decided to address a combination of standards and guidelines, the proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.15 through 60.05.30 (Design Standards) except for the Design Standard(s) where the proposal is instead subject to the applicable corresponding Design Guideline(s). [ORD 4531; April 2010]
7. For proposals meeting Design Review Three application Threshold numbers 7 or 8, where the applicant has decided to address Design Guidelines only, the proposal is consistent with the applicable provisions of Sections 60.05.35 through 60.05.50 (Design Guidelines). [ORD 4531; April 2010]
8. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Design Review Three shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Design Review Three application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Design Review Three application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
APPLICATIONS
Design Review
Chapter 40 AP - 52 01/01/2005
40.20.15.3.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Director's Interpretation
Chapter 40 AP - 53 01/01/2005
40.25. DIRECTOR’S INTERPRETATION
40.25.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the Director's Interpretation is to address new uses which may come into existence over time that are not addressed specifically in the Code or some of the terms or phrases within the Code which may require further interpretation. The Director's Interpretation is established for resolving Code interpretation issues in advance of, or concurrent with, applying for approval of an application, development, permit, or other action. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.25.10. Applicability.
The Director shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions, and requirements of this Code.
40.25.15. Application.
There is a single Director's Interpretation application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Director's Interpretation.
A. Threshold. An application for Director's Interpretation shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. A request that the Director interpret the Development Code in writing.
2. A request that the Director provide a determination of nonconforming status of a lot, structure, or use in writing.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Director's Interpretation. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Director's Interpretation application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Director's Interpretation application.
APPLICATIONS
Director's Interpretation
Chapter 40 AP - 54 06/01/2012
40.25.15.1.C.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. That the interpretation is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and other provisions within the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. When interpreting that a use not identified in the Development Code is a Permitted, Conditional, or Prohibited Use, that use must be substantially similar to a use currently identified in the subject zoning district or elsewhere in the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Director's Interpretation shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Director's Interpretation application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Director's Interpretation application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
APPLICATIONS
Director's Interpretation
Chapter 40 AP - 55 10/19/2006
40.25.15.1.
G. Expiration of a Decision. A Director’s Interpretation shall not expire unless superseded by a subsequent Director’s Interpretation or a Development Code change.
H. Extension of a Decision. Because a Director’s Interpretation does not expire, extension of a Director’s Interpretation is not necessary. If a prior Director's Interpretation is superseded, the prior Director's Interpretation will no longer be in effect and cannot be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 56 06/01/2012
40.30. FLEXIBLE AND ZERO YARD SETBACKS
40.30.05. Purpose.
The purpose of flexible and zero yard setbacks is to encourage flexibility in building design and layout, while providing for open space, adequate light, air, and safety. It is also recognized that a reduction in the setback standards may create compatibility problems for surrounding properties. The following provisions allow flexible setbacks in a manner which is appropriate given the unique character of the property involved and the surrounding area. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.30.10. Applicability.
Development on a lot of record in Residential, Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts may request approval of the flexible or zero setback provisions of this section.
40.30.15. Application. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
There are five (5) Flexible and Zero Yard Setback applications which are as follows: Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement; Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement; Flexible Setback for a Proposed Land Division; Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Land Division in Residential Districts; and Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Land Division in the Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use Districts.
1. Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement.
A. Threshold. An application for Flexible Setback for an Individual Lot With Endorsement shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Development on individual residentially zoned lots of record proposes to use flexible setbacks and can demonstrate the affected abutting property owners of record endorsement of the request. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 57 06/01/2012
40.30.15.1.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Flexible Setback on Individual Lot With Endorsement application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Flexible Setback on Individual Lot With Endorsement application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The proposal does not violate any recorded Solar Access requirements.
5. The proposal meets the minimum standards specified in Section 20.05.15.G. of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement application to ensure
compliance with the approval criteria.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 58 01/01/2005
40.30.15.1.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 59 06/01/2012
40.30.15.
2. Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement.
A. Threshold. An application for Flexible Setback for an Individual Lot Without Endorsement shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Development on individual residentially zoned lots of record proposes to use flexible setbacks and cannot demonstrate the affected abutting property owners of record endorsement of the request. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Flexible Setback on Individual Lot Without Endorsement application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Flexible Setback on Individual Lot Without Endorsement application.
2. The application complies with all applicable submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. and includes all applicable fees. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
3. The proposal does not violate any recorded Solar Access Permit requirements.
4. The proposal meets the minimum standards specified in Section 20.05.15.G. of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. If an addition to an existing structure, the proposal is compatible in design, scale and building materials with the existing structure. If a new structure, the proposal is compatible with neighboring development with respect to scale, bulk, lot coverage, density, rooflines, and building materials. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 60 03/27/2008
40.30.15.2.C.
6. All critical facilities and services related to the development have or can be improved to have adequate capacity to serve the proposal at the time of its completion.
7. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
8. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
9. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 61 03/27/2008
40.30.15.
3. Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division.
A. Threshold. An application for Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The property is located within a Residential zoning district and this application is accompanied by a land division application for the subject property.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division and shall be considered concurrently with the proposed land division. The decision making authority is the Director. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area regarding topography, vegetation, building character, and site design. In determining compatibility, consideration shall be given to harmony in: scale, bulk, lot coverage, density, rooflines, and building materials. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
4. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 62 03/27/2008
40.30.15.3.C.
5. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
6. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
7. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 63 03/27/2008
40.30.15.
4. Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division.
A. Threshold. An application for Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The property is located within a Residential zoning district and this application is accompanied by a land division application for the subject property.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division and shall be considered concurrently with the proposed land division. The decision making authority is the Director. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Zero Side Yard or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Zero Side Yard or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The side or rear yard setback on all adjacent lots which abut the proposed zero side or rear setback are either zero feet (0’) or ten feet (10’) or more.
4. The zero side or zero rear yard is not abutting a public right-of-way or any access easement.
5. No portion of a structure or architectural feature shall project over a property line related to the zero side or rear yard setback unless a permanent easement allowing such projection has been granted.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 64 03/27/2008
40.30.15.4.C.
6. A four foot (4’) non-exclusive maintenance easement appears on the plat within the adjacent side or rear yard setback of the adjacent lot where it abuts the zero setback.
7. Satisfactory deed restrictions are submitted with the preliminary land division which address maintenance requirements for the zero setback wall.
8. Utility easements are provided, when required by a utility provider, along any side, rear, or both property lines except where the zero setback is designated. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
9. The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area regarding topography, vegetation, building character, and site design. In determining compatibility, consideration shall be given to harmony in: scale, bulk, lot coverage, density, rooflines, and building materials. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications that already have been approved or are considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
11. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
12. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
13. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 65 01/01/2005
40.30.15.4.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP -66 01/01/2005
40.30.15.
5. Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division.
A. Threshold. An application for Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The property is located within a Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district and is accompanied by a land division application for the subject property.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Zero Side Yard Setback for Proposed Non-Residential Land Division in any Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning district and shall be considered concurrently with the proposed land division. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division in the Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning districts application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division application in the Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning districts.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The minimum adjacent side yard setback on all adjacent lots which abut the proposed zero setback parcel are either zero feet (0’) as well or twenty feet (20’) or more.
4. The zero side yard is not abutting a public right-of-way or any access easement.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 67 10/19/2006
40.30.15.5.C.
5. The zero side yard does not abut any Residential district.
6. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
7. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
8. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
9. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
APPLICATIONS
Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks
Chapter 40 AP - 68 01/01/2005
40.30.15.5.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 40 AP - 69 09/11/2015
40.32. FOOD CART PODS
40.32.05. Purpose.
The purpose of food cart pods are to encourage a variety of eating and drinking establishments within specified zoning districts of the City. It is recognized that food cart pods have unique challenges that other businesses may not face due to being an interim use of the property. The following provisions allow food cart pods in a manner which is appropriate and well regulated. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.32.10. Applicability.
Development on a lot of record in zoning districts specified in Chapter 20 may request approval of a Food Cart Pod in accordance with the provisions of this section. Exempted from this application are applications which fall under the threshold requirements for Temporary Mobile Sales, Temporary Non-Mobile Sales, Temporary Structure and Temporary Real Estate Office applications.
40.32.15. Application.
There are two (2) Food Cart Pod applications. A Type 1 Food Cart Pod Modification application which permits minor changes to previously approved Food Cart Pods. A Type 2 Food Cart Pod application for new Food Cart Pods or the addition of carts or structures to an approved Food Cart Pod.
1. Food Cart Pod Modification.
A. Threshold. An application for a Food Cart Pod Modification shall be required when one of the following thresholds applies:
1. Modification to an approved Food Cart Pod site layout or design which does not increase the number of food carts permitted on site.
2. Addition of amenities to an approved Food Cart Pod, such as but not limited to: tents, awnings, structures, seating, and landscaping.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Food Cart Pod Modification. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 40 AP - 70 09/11/2015
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Food Cart Pod Modification application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Food Cart Pod Modification application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal meets the applicable standards specified in Chapter 20 of the Development Code.
5. The proposal meets the standards specified in Section 60.11 of the Development Code.
6. There are safe and efficient pedestrian circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development.
7. No change to the existing grade is proposed.
8. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Food Cart Pod Modification shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Food Cart Pod Modification application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form.
E. Conditions of Approval. All applications for Food Cart Pod Modification shall comply with the following conditions identified below. The decision making authority may impose other conditions on the approval of a Food Cart Pod Modification application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
APPLICATIONS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 40 AP - 71 09/11/2015
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 40 AP - 72 09/11/2015
40.32.15.2
2. Food Cart Pod.
A. Threshold. An application for a Food Cart Pod shall be required when one of the following thresholds applies:
1. Placement of one or more food carts on private property selling food and/or beverages.
2. Addition of one or more food carts to an approved Food Cart Pod which increases the total number of carts permitted on the site.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Food Cart Pod. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Food Cart Pod application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Food Cart Pod application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal meets the applicable standards specified in Chapter 20 of the Development Code.
5. The proposal meets the standards specified in Section 60.11 of the Development Code.
6. There are safe and efficient pedestrian circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development.
APPLICATIONS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 40 AP - 73 09/11/2015
7. The development’s on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems connect to the surrounding circulation system in a safe, efficient, and direct manner.
8. Grading and contouring of the development site is designed to accommodate the proposed use and to mitigate adverse effect(s) on neighboring properties, public right-of-way, surface drainage, water storage facilities, and the public storm drainage system.
9. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Food Cart Pod shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Food Cart Pod application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form.
E. Conditions of Approval. All applications for Food Cart Pods shall comply with the following conditions identified below. The decision making authority may impose other conditions on the approval of a Food Cart Pod application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
[ORD 4662; September 2015]
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 74 12/02/2016
40.35. HISTORIC REVIEW
40.35.05. Purpose.
The purpose of Historic Review is to preserve, enhance, and perpetuate landmarks and districts which represent or reflect elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, and architectural history and to promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for the education, pleasure, housing and public welfare of the City's current and future citizens. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.35.10. Applicability.
1. The scope of Historic Review shall be limited to the exterior alteration, modification, demolition, and moving of a designated historic landmark and the construction of new structures within a designated historic district.
2. Historic Review approval shall not be required for the following:
A. Changes in use.
B. Interior remodeling.
C. Maintenance or repair of the exterior where any change to the original building materials or physical appearance is conducted in a manner that is consistent with previous approvals. Determination of the original building materials or physical appearance can be made by reviewing a historic photograph, original building plans, or other evidence of the original building features.
3. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of City designated historic resources which the City Building Official certifies as required by the City’s Building Code.
4. Construction of a new structure in a Historic District which is under 120
gross square feet and is not attached to a designated historic structure is exempt from Section 40.35.15.4 (New Construction in a Historic District). [ORD 4697; December 2016]
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 75 04/01/2010
40.35.15. Application.
There are four (4) Historic Review applications which are as follows: Alteration of a Landmark, Emergency Demolition of a Landmark, Demolition of a Landmark, and New Construction in a Historic District. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Alteration of a Landmark.
A. Threshold. An application for Alteration of a Landmark shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. Changes to any aspect of the exterior appearance, including, but not limited to, exterior finish materials, architectural detailing, and changes to window and door locations or dimensions. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
2. Moving a landmark to a new location.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Alteration of a Landmark. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve an Alteration of a Landmark application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for an Alteration of a Landmark application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The distinguishing original historic or architectural qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment are being preserved.
4. Any alteration to buildings, structures, and sites are in keeping with the time period of the original construction.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 76 10/19/2006
40.35.15.1.C.
5. Any distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site have been preserved unless said features are a threat to public health and safety or are in violation of building, fire, or access regulations.
6. Deteriorating architectural features will be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible.
7. New material used for replacement will match the material being replaced in terms of composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities.
8. The repair or replacement of missing architectural features is based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence.
9. The design of the proposed addition or alteration does not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment.
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are subject to an adjustment, planned unit development, or variance which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
11. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
12. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 77 10/19/2006
40.35.15.1.
13. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for an Alteration of a Landmark shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or
the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Alteration of a Landmark application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of an Alteration of a Landmark application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 78 01/01/2005
40.35.15.2
2. Emergency Demolition of a Landmark.
A. Threshold. An application for Emergency Demolition of a Landmark shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Demolition of an existing landmark when demolition is required by the Building Official.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Emergency Demolition of a Landmark. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve an Emergency Demolition of a Landmark application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for an Emergency Demolition of a Landmark application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The City of Beaverton Building Official has declared, consistent with the Dangerous Buildings Code, the historic building or structure to be an immediate threat to health and safety.
5. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 79 01/01/2005
40.35.15.2.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for an Emergency Demolition of a Landmark shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Emergency Demolition of a Landmark application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of an Emergency Demolition of a Landmark application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 80 12/02/2016
40.35.15.3
3. Demolition of a Landmark.
A. Threshold. An application for Demolition of a Landmark shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Demolition of an existing landmark.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Demolition of a Landmark. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Demolition of a Landmark application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Demolition of a Landmark application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The economic, social, environmental, and energy consequences of allowing the demolition outweigh the preservation of the historic landmark.
4. The applicant has not rejected the highest bona fide offer for sale and relocation of the building. [ORD 4697; December 2016]
5. If applicable, the historic or architectural significance of the resource is not sufficient to warrant its continued preservation.
6. If applicable, the physical condition of the building is such that it is not practical to improve its condition to meet applicable building codes.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 81 04/01/2010
40.35.15.3.C.
7. If within a Historic District, the loss of the structure will not diminish the overall integrity of the District.
8. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Demolition of a Landmark shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Demolition of a Landmark application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Demolition of a Landmark application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 82 04/01/2010
40.35.15.4
4. New Construction in a Historic District.
A. Threshold. An application for New Construction in a Historic District shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Construction of a new structure of more than 120 gross square feet in size in a historic district, which is not attached to a designated historic structure.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for New Construction in a Historic District. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a New Construction in a Historic District application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a New Construction in a Historic District application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. As it relates to existing surroundings and future allowed uses, their location, size, shape, height, and spatial and visual arrangement, the proposed development is compatible with and does not substantially detract from the historic value of the existing Historic District.
4. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Historic Review
Chapter 40 AP - 83 04/01/2010
40.35.15.4.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a New Construction in a Historic District shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The New Construction in a Historic District application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a New Construction in a Historic District application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 84 08/10/2006
40.40. HOME OCCUPATION
40.40.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the Home Occupation application is to provide recognition of the needs or desires of many people to engage in small scale business ventures at home. It recognizes the potential advantages for reducing commuter travel when people work at home. It is also recognized that such uses, if not carefully regulated, may be incompatible with the purposes of Residential districts. It is the intent of this section that these uses be allowed so long as they are not in violation of the terms of this section and do not alter the residential character of the neighborhood, infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to the peaceful enjoyment of their neighborhood homes, or otherwise be detrimental to the community at large. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
40.40.10. Applicability.
The provisions of this section apply to all home occupations as defined in Chapter 90 of this Code, except for the following situations:
1. Garage, Yard, or Estate sales from the site that occur for no more than three (3) consecutive days on not more than two (2) occasions during a calendar year.
2. Production of produce or other vegetative agricultural products grown on the premises. The temporary or seasonal sale of produce or other vegetative agricultural products grown on the premises is subject to the provisions of Section 40.80. (Temporary Use).
3. Prohibited home occupation uses are:
A. Any use not conducted within a wholly enclosed building.
B. Automotive services, Major.
C. Automotive services, Minor.
D. Junk and Salvage Operations.
E. Storage or sale of fireworks.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 85 12/02/2016
40.40.10.3.
F. Any use that consists of the manufacturing, processing, generation, or storage of materials that constitute a fire, explosion, or health hazard as defined by the Building Code, Fire Code, or both.
40.40.15. Application.
There are two (2) Home Occupation applications which are as follows: Home Occupation One and Home Occupation Two.
1. Home Occupation One.
A. Threshold. An application for Home Occupation One shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. A home occupation is proposed where no outside customers
or employees visit the premises.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Home Occupation One. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Home Occupation One application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Home Occupation One application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. There are no outside volunteers or employees who do not
reside on the premises. [ORD 4697; December 2016]
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 86 12/02/2016
40.40.15.1.C.
5. No clients or customers of the proposed home occupation visit the premises for a reason related to the home occupation. [ORD 4697; December 2016]
6. There will be no exterior alteration to the residence.
[ORD 4697; December 2016]
7. Excluding regular U. S. Postal Service delivery, the home occupation shall not require more than one (1) trip per day for delivery or pick up per day to the residence between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. There shall be no deliveries between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. [ORD 4697; December 2016]
8. The home occupation is being undertaken only by an occupant of the residence.
9. The proposed home occupation is participating in and is consistent with the City’s Business License Program and other agency licenses as appropriate to the proposed use.
10. The on-site operation of the proposed home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling, a conforming accessory structure, or both. No exterior storage of materials or equipment will occur on the premises. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
11. The proposed home occupation will not change the use classification of the dwelling unit or accessory structure, as determined by the City Building Official applying the State Building Code.
12. The proposed home occupation and associated storage of materials and products shall not occupy more than 700 gross square feet of floor area.
13. The subject property will continue to be used and maintained as a residence and will conform to all requirements of this and other City Codes as they pertain to residential property.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 87 12/02/2016
40.40.15.1.C.
14. The home occupation, including deliveries from other businesses, does not include the use of tractor trailers, fork lifts, or similar heavy equipment.
15. There will be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare at or beyond the property line resulting from the operation of the home occupation.
16. There will be no exterior storage of vehicles of any kind used for the business except that one (1) commercially licensed vehicle, which is not larger than a 3/4 ton pick-up, passenger van, or other vehicle of similar size, may be parked outside on the subject property provided such parking complies with all parking restrictions.
17. The proposal will not involve storage or distribution of toxic or flammable materials, spray painting or spray finishing operations, or similar activities that involve toxic or flammable materials which in the judgment of the Fire Marshall pose a health or safety risk to the residence, its occupants or surrounding properties.
18. There is no signage associated with the proposed home occupation aside from a name plate as allowed by Section 60.40.15. of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
19. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Home Occupation One shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Home Occupation One application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Home Occupation One application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 88 12/02/2016
40.40.15.1.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Home Occupation One application shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 89 05/19/2017
40.40.15.
2. Home Occupation Two.
A. Threshold. An application for Home Occupation Two shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. A home occupation is proposed where outside customers or
employees visit the premises..
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Home Occupation Two. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Home Occupation Two application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Home Occupation Two application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed home occupation shall a maximum of one (1)
volunteer or employee who is not a resident on the premises.
4. The proposed home occupation shall have no more than 8
daily customers or clients on the premises.
5. All customer and client visits to the proposed home
occupation shall occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m.
6. If on-site parking is provided, a plan for additional parking may be approved if:
a. Not more than a total of 4 on-site parking spaces for
the combined residential and home occupation uses are proposed.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 90 05/19/2017
40.40.15.2.C.7
b. The parking spaces, driveway, street access,
landscaping, storm water drainage, and screening
comply with this Code and other city standards.
7. Excluding regular U. S. Postal Service delivery, the home occupation shall not require more than two (2) trips per day
for delivery or pick up to the residence between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. There shall be no deliveries or pick ups between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
8. The proposed home occupation is being undertaken by an occupant of the residence.
9. The proposed home occupation is participating in and is consistent with the City’s Business License Program and other agency licenses as appropriate to the proposed use.
10. The on-site operation of the proposed home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling, a conforming accessory structure, or both. No exterior storage of materials or equipment shall occur on the premises.
11. The proposed home occupation will not change the use classification of the dwelling unit or accessory structures as determined by the City Building Official applying the State Building Code.
12. The proposed home occupation and associated storage of materials and products shall not occupy more than 700 gross square feet of floor area.
13. The subject property will continue to be used and maintained as a residence and will conform to all requirements of this and other City Codes as they pertain to residential property.
14. The home occupation, including deliveries from other businesses, shall not include the use of tractor trailers, forklifts, or similar heavy equipment. 40.40.15.2.C.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 91 05/19/2017
40.40.15.2.C.
15. There shall be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare at or beyond the property line resulting from the operation of the home occupation.
16. There shall be no exterior storage of vehicles of any kind used for the business except that one (1) commercially licensed vehicle, which is not larger than a 3/4 ton pick-up, passenger van, or other vehicle of similar size, may be parked outside on the subject property, provided such parking complies with applicable parking restrictions.
17. The proposal will not involve storage or distribution of toxic or flammable materials, spray painting or spray finishing operations, or similar activities that involve toxic or flammable materials which in the judgment of the Fire Marshall pose a health or safety risk to the residence, its occupants or surrounding properties.
18. There is no signage associated with the proposed home occupation aside from a name plate as allowed by Section 60.40.15. of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
19. Exterior remodeling will not alter the residential character of the building.
20. Excluding required residential parking, adequate off-street parking exists to accommodate vehicular traffic for any employee, customer, or both.
21. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are subject to an adjustment, planned unit development, or variance which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
22. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
APPLICATIONS
Home Occupation
Chapter 40 AP - 92 05/19/2017
40.40.15.2.C.
23. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
24. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Home Occupation Two shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Home Occupation Two application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Home Occupation Two application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Home Occupation Two application shall not be extended.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 93 06/01/2012
40.45. LAND DIVISION AND RECONFIGURATION [ORD 4487; August 2008]
40.45.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the Land Division applications is to establish regulations, procedures, and standards for the division or reconfiguration of the boundaries of land within the City of Beaverton. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.45.10. Applicability.
The provisions of this section apply to all subdivisions, partitions, developments involving the dedications of public right-of-way, and the reconfiguration of existing property lines. Code requirements for the vacation of public rights-of-way are in Section 40.75. (Street Vacations).
40.45.15. Application.
There are nine (9) types of applications under this Section, as follows: Property Line Adjustment; Replat One; Replat Two; Preliminary Partition; Preliminary Subdivision; Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition; Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision; Final Land Division; and Expedited Land Division. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Property Line Adjustment.
A. Threshold. An application for Property Line Adjustment shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply [ORD 4405; October 2006]:
1. The changing of a common boundary of two (2) lots of record where the number of lots or parcels does not change; except a proposal meeting the threshold for a Replat One under Section 40.45.15.2., or Replat Two under Section 40.45.15.3., shall be processed as a Replat and not as a Property Line Adjustment. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. More than one Property Line Adjustment application may be processed concurrently, provided the threshold in Section 40.45.15.1.A.1. is met.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 94 06/01/2012
40.45.15.1.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Property Line Adjustment. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Property Line Adjustment application, the decision making authority shall make findings based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Property Line Adjustment.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The Property Line Adjustment does not conflict with any existing City land use approval, public easement, or previous condition of approval applied to the subject property.
4. An additional lot or parcel is not created.
5. The Property Line Adjustment is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses), unless the applicable provisions are modified by means of one or more applications which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the Property Line Adjustment.
6. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Regulations).
7. All critical facilities and services have, or can be improved to have, adequate capacity to serve the reconfigured lots.
8. The proposal will not eliminate pedestrian or vehicle access to the affected properties.
9. The proposal does not create a parcel which will have more than one (1) zoning designation.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 95 06/01/2012
40.45.15.1.C.
10. The application contains all required submittal materials as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
11. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Lot Line Adjustment shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Lot Line Adjustment application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Property Line Adjustment application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. All Property Line Adjustment decisions shall also require that:
1. The Applicant shall provide evidence to the City that a conveyance instrument conforming to the approved Property Line Adjustment has been recorded at Washington County.
2. [ORD 4405; October 2006] The applicant for a Property Line Adjustment shall file a record of survey with the County as required by Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 92. The record of survey shall be subject to review by the City as part of the Property Line Adjustment application, and shall not be subject to further review under Section 40.45.15.8. (Final Land Division). [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 96 08/20/2008
40.45.15.1.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 97 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
2. Replat One. [ORD 4487; August 2008]
A. Threshold. An application for Replat One shall be required when any of the following thresholds apply: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. The reconfiguration of lots, parcels, or tracts within a single existing plat that decreases or consolidates the number of lots, parcels, or tracts in the plat; [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. The creation of a plat for land that has never been part of a previously recorded plat where no new lots or parcels are proposed. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Replat involving only the consolidation of lots and not triggering any of the thresholds in Section 40.45.15.3.A.1. through 40.45.15.3.A.3. The decision making authority is the Director. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Replat One application, the decision making authority shall make findings based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied.
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Replat One. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed Replat does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the Replat process to comply with current Code standards and requirements.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 98 06/01/2012
40.45.15.2.C.
4. Oversized lots or parcels (“oversized lots”) resulting from the Replat shall have a size and shape that facilitates the future potential partitioning or subdividing of such oversized lots in accordance with the requirements of the Development Code. In addition, streets, driveways, and utilities shall be sufficient to serve the proposed lots and future potential development on oversized lots. Easements and rights-of-way shall either exist or be proposed to be created such that future partitioning or subdividing is not precluded or hindered, for either the oversized lot or any affected adjacent lot. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. shall demonstrate that the resulting land division facilitates the following: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
a. Preserves a designated Historic Resource or Significant Natural Resource (Tree, Grove, Riparian Area, Wetland, or similar resource); or,
b. Complies with minimum density requirements of the Development Code, provides appropriate lot size transitions adjacent to differently zoned properties, minimizes grading impacts on adjacent properties, and where a street is proposed, provides a standard street cross section with sidewalks. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. shall not require further Adjustment or Variance approvals for the Land Division. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. If phasing is requested by the applicant, the requested phasing plan meets all applicable City standards and provides for necessary public improvements for each phase as the project develops.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 99 06/01/2012
40.45.15.2.C.
8. The proposal will not eliminate pedestrian, utility service, or vehicle access to the affected properties. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
9. The proposal does not create a parcel or lot which will have more than one (1) zoning designation.
10. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements.
1. An application for a Replat One shall be made by the owner(s) of the subject property or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, where the application is made in conjunction with a Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., the City may consider the application even if fewer than all the owners of the existing legal lot or parcel have applied for the approval. The Replat One application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and the information required by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Replat One application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 100 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
3. Replat Two. [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Threshold. An application for Replat Two shall be required when any of the following thresholds apply:
1. Within an existing plat, new right of way is dedicated to the public or existing right of way is vacated and more than one (1) property is affected by the dedication; provided, however, no public right-of-way shall be vacated without the applicant first obtaining approval under Section 40.75. (Street Vacations);
2. Within an existing plat, a public easement is conveyed, removed, or modified in such a way that it affects more than one (1) property owner (i.e., multiple properties under different ownership);
3. The reconfiguration of lots, parcels, or tracts affecting more than one (1) recorded plat, or where the perimeter boundary of a recorded plat would change as a result of the proposed reconfiguration. [ORD 4498; January 2009]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Replat Two. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Replat Two application, the decision making authority shall make findings based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied.
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Replat Two.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed Replat Two does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the Replat process to comply with current Code standards and requirements.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 101 06/01/2012
40.45.15.3.C.
4. Oversized lots or parcels (“oversized lots”) resulting from the Replat shall have a size and shape that facilitates the future potential partitioning or subdividing of such oversized lots in accordance with the requirements of the Development Code. In addition, streets, driveways, and utilities shall be sufficient to serve the proposed lots and future potential development on oversized lots. Easements and rights-of-way shall either exist or be proposed to be created such that future partitioning or subdividing is not precluded or hindered, for either the oversized lot or any affected adjacent lot.
5. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. shall demonstrate that the resulting land division facilitates the following:
a. Preserves a designated Historic Resource or Significant Natural Resource (Tree, Grove, Riparian Area, Wetland, or similar resource); or,
b. Complies with minimum density requirements of the Development Code, provides appropriate lot size transitions adjacent to differently zoned properties, minimizes grading impacts on adjacent properties, and where a street is proposed, provides a standard street cross section with sidewalks.
6. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. shall not require further Adjustment or Variance approvals for the Land Division.
7. If phasing is requested by the applicant, the requested phasing plan meets all applicable City standards and provides for necessary public improvements for each phase as the project develops.
8. The proposal will not eliminate pedestrian, utility service, or vehicle access to the affected properties.
9. The proposal does not create a parcel or lot which will have more than one (1) zoning designation.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 102 06/01/2012
40.45.15.3.C.
10. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements.
1. An application for a Replat Two shall be made by the owner(s) of the subject property or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, where the application is made in conjunction with a Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., the City may consider the application even if fewer than all the owners of the existing legal lot or parcel have applied for the approval. The Replat Two application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and the information required by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
2. The Director may consider and act upon a request to develop a Replat Two in phases. If the Replat Two is to be phased, the applicant shall propose a phasing program in writing at the time of the Replat Two application submittal. The applicant is responsible for providing a time schedule for the final platting of the various phases. In no case shall the total time period for the final platting of all stages be greater than five (5) years without filing a new application.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Replat Two application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 103 06/01/2012
40.45.15.3.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90. Except where a phasing program is approved under 40.45.15.2.D.2, the filing of a Final Land Division application in accordance with Section 40.45.15.7. shall occur within two (2) years of the date of Replat Two approval. For a phased project, the total time period for the filing of a final plat, shall not exceed five (5) years from the date of the City’s final Replat Two approval decision. After five (5) years, unless otherwise vested, the Replat Two approval shall expire.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 104 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
4. Preliminary Partition.
A. Threshold. An application for Preliminary Partition shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The creation of up to and including three (3) new parcels from at least one (1) lot of record (parent parcel) in one (1) calendar year. [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Preliminary Partition. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Preliminary Partition application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Preliminary Partition. If the parent parcel is subject to a pending Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., further division of the parent parcel shall not proceed until all of the provisions of Section 40.47.15.1.C. have been met. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed partition does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the partition process to comply with current Code standards and requirements.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 105 06/01/2012
40.45.15.4.C.
4. Oversized parcels (oversized lots) resulting from the Partition shall have a size and shape that facilitates the future potential partitioning or subdividing of such oversized lots in accordance with the requirements of the Development Code. In addition, streets, driveways, and utilities shall be sufficient to serve the proposed partition and future potential development on oversized lots. Easements and rights-of-way shall either exist or be proposed to be created such that future partitioning or subdividing is not precluded or hindered, for either the oversized lot or any affected adjacent lot. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. shall demonstrate that the resulting land division facilitates the following: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
a) Preserves a designated Historic Resource or Significant Natural Resource (Tree, Grove, Riparian Area, Wetland, or similar resource); or,
b) Complies with minimum density requirements of the Development Code, provides appropriate lot size transitions adjacent to differently zoned properties, minimizes grading impacts on adjacent properties, and where street improvements are proposed, provides a standard street cross section with sidewalks. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
6. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. do not require further Adjustment or Variance approvals for the Land Division. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. The proposal does not create a parcel which will have more than one (1) zoning designation.
8. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 106 08/20/2008
40.45.15.4.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Preliminary Partition shall be made by the owner of the subject property or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, where the application is made in conjunction with a Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., the City may consider the application even if fewer than all the owners of the existing legal lot or parcel have applied for the approval. The application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by the information required by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference. [ORD 4487; August 2008]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Preliminary Partition application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90. The filing of a Final Land Division application in accordance with Section 40.45.15.7. shall occur within two (2) years of the date of Preliminary Partition approval. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 107 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
5. Preliminary Subdivision.
A. Threshold. An application for Preliminary Subdivision shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The creation of four (4) or more new lots from at least one (1) lot of record in one (1) calendar year. [ORD 4487; August 2008]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Preliminary Subdivision. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Preliminary Subdivision application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Preliminary Subdivision application. If the parent parcel is subject to a pending Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., further division of the parent parcel shall not proceed until all of the provisions of Section 40.47.15.1.C. have been met. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed development does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the subdivision process to comply with current Code standards and requirements.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 108 06/01/2012
40.45.15.5.C.
4. Oversized lots resulting from the subdivision shall have a size and shape which will facilitate the future potential partitioning or subdividing of such oversized lots in accordance with the requirements of the Development Code. In addition, streets, driveways, and utilities shall be sufficient to serve the proposed subdivision and future potential development on oversized lots. Easements and rights-of-way shall either exist or be proposed to be created such that future partitioning or subdividing is not precluded or hindered, for either the oversized lot or any affected adjacent lot. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. If phasing is requested by the applicant, the requested phasing plan meets all applicable City standards and provides for necessary public improvements for each phase as the project develops.
6. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. shall demonstrate that the resulting land division facilitates the following: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
a) Preserves a designated Historic Resource or Significant Natural Resource (Tree, Grove, Riparian Area, Wetland, or similar resource); or,
b) Complies with minimum density requirements of the Development Code, provides appropriate lot size transitions adjacent to differently zoned properties, minimizes grading impacts on adjacent properties, and where a street is proposed provides a standard street cross section with sidewalks. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. Applications that apply the lot area averaging standards of Section 20.05.15.D. do not require further Adjustment or Variance approvals for the Land Division. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
8. The proposal does not create a lot which will have more than one (1) zoning designation. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 109 08/20/2008
40.45.15.5.C.
9. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
D. Submission Requirements.
1. An application for a Preliminary Subdivision shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, where the application is made in conjunction with a Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., the City may consider the application even if fewer than all the owners of the existing legal lot or parcel have applied for the approval. The Preliminary Subdivision application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
2. The Director may consider and act upon a request to develop a subdivision in phases. If the subdivision is to be phased, the applicant shall propose a phasing program in writing at the time of Preliminary Subdivision application submittal. The applicant is responsible for providing a time schedule for the final platting of the various phases. In no case shall the total time period for the final platting of all stages be greater than five (5) years without filing a new Preliminary Subdivision application.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Preliminary Subdivision application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 110 08/20/2008
40.45.15.5.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90. Except where a phasing program is approved under Section 40.45.15.4.C.7., the filing of a Final Land Division application in accordance with Section 40.45.15.7. shall occur within two (2) years of the date of Preliminary Subdivision approval. For a phased project, the total time period for the filing of a final plat, shall not exceed five (5) years from the date of the City’s final Preliminary Subdivision Approval decision. After five (5) years, unless otherwise vested, the preliminary approval shall expire. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 111 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
6. Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition.
A. Threshold. An application for Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The creation of up to and including three (3) new parcels from at least one (1) lot of record in one (1) calendar year in a Commercial, Industrial or Multiple Use zone, where one or more of the proposed parcels does not meet one or more of the setback, lot coverage, floor area ratio, and/or lot dimension standards of Chapter 20 (Land Uses), as applicable; and where modification to the same standard(s) is not requested through another type of application. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4397; August 2006] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition application. If the parent parcel is subject to a pending Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., further division of the parent parcel shall not proceed until all of the provisions of Section 40.47.15.1.C. have been met. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 112 08/20/2008
40.45.15.6.C.
3. The proposed development does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition process to comply with current Code standards and requirements.
4. The parent parcel shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the applicable zoning district unless the setback is subject to an Adjustment, Variance, Flexible Setback, or Zero Side Yard Setback for a proposed Non-Residential Land Division application which shall be considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
5. The proposal does not create a parcel which will have more than one (1) zoning designation.
6. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, where the application is made in conjunction with a Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., the City may consider the application even if fewer than all the owners of the existing legal lot or parcel have applied for the approval. The application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by the information required by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference. [ORD 4487; August 2008]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 113 08/20/2008
40.45.15.6.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90. The filing of a Final Land Division application shall occur within two (2) years of the date of Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition approval. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 114 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
7. Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision.
A. Threshold. An application for Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The creation of four (4) or more new lots from at least one (1) lot of record in one (1) calendar year in a Commercial, Industrial or Multiple Use zones, where one or more of the proposed lots do not meet the setback, lot coverage, floor area ratio, and/or lot dimension standards of Chapter 20 (Land Uses), as applicable, and where modification to the same standard(s) is not requested through another type of application. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4397; August 2006] [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Preliminary Fee Subdivision. If the parent parcel is subject to a pending Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., further division of the parent parcel shall not proceed until all of the provisions of Section 40.47.15.1.C. have been met. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 115 06/01/2012
40.45.15.7.C.
3. The parent parcel shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the applicable zoning district unless the setback is subject to an Adjustment, Variance, Flexible Setback, or Zero Side Yard Setback for a proposed Non-Residential Land Division application which shall be considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
4. The proposed development does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision process to comply with current Code standards and requirements.
5. If phasing is requested by the applicant, the requested phasing plan meets all applicable City standards and provide for necessary public improvements for each phase as the project develops.
6. The proposal does not create a lot which will have more than one (1) zoning designation. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
D. Submission Requirements.
1. An application for a Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, where the application is made in conjunction with a Legal Lot Determination under Section 40.47., the City may consider the application even if fewer than all the owners of the existing legal lot or parcel have applied for the approval. The application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, the information required by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 116 08/20/2008
40.45.15.7.D.
2. The Director may consider and act upon a request to develop a subdivision in phases. If the subdivision is to be phased, the applicant shall propose a phasing program in writing at the time of Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision application submittal. The applicant is responsible for providing a time schedule for the final platting of the various phases. In no case shall the total time period for the final platting of all stages be greater than five (5) years without filing a new Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision application.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90. Except where a phasing program is approved under 40.45.15.6.D.2, the filing of a Final Land Division application in accordance with Section 40.45.15.7. shall occur within two (2) years of the date of Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision approval. For a phased project, the total time period for the filing of a final plat, shall not exceed five (5) years from the date of the City’s final Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision Approval decision. After five (5) years, unless otherwise vested, the preliminary approval shall expire. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 117 06/01/2012
40.45.15.
8. Final Land Division.
A. Threshold. An application for Final Land Division shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. A proposal to finalize a previously approved Preliminary Partition, Preliminary Subdivision, Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition, Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision, Replat Two, or Legal Lot Determination, as applicable. [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Final Land Division, except a Final Land Division shall not be required for a Replat One approval which involves only the consolidation of lots pursuant to Section 40.45.15.2.A.1. The decision making authority is the Director. [ORD 4498; January 2009]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Final Land Division application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Final Land Division.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The application contains all applicable submittal materials as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The Final Land Division substantially conforms to the previously approved and unexpired Preliminary Partition, Preliminary Subdivision, Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition, Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision, or Replat Two. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 118 08/20/2008
40.45.15.8.C.
5. Applications and documents related to the Final Land Division requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Final Land Division shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. Provided, however, that if the preliminary land division approval was on an application signed by fewer than all the owners of the subject property, as allowed in conjunction with Section 40.47. (Legal Lot Determination), the City may similarly approve a final plat application made by fewer than all the owners of the subject property. The Final Land Division application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
F. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
G. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Land Division and Reconfiguration
Chapter 40 AP - 119 08/20/2008
40.45.15.
9. Expedited Land Division.
An application for and any appeal of an expedited land division shall be subject to the provisions in ORS 197.360 through ORS 197.380.

APPLICATIONS
Legal Lot Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 120 07/10/2015
40.47. LEGAL LOT DETERMINATION [ORD 4487; August 2008]
40.47.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the Legal Lot Determination is to determine the legal status of lots and subdivisions that were created prior to the enactment of current subdivision regulations or prior to the City annexing a particular property. This section provides criteria for rendering decisions on the legal status of lots and subdivisions consistent with State Statute. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.47.15. Application.
There is a single Legal Lot Determination application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Legal Lot Determination.
A. Threshold. An application for Legal Lot Determination shall be required when any of the following thresholds apply:
1. The owner of a lot or parcel, or the owner’s authorized representative or contract purchaser, has requested the Legal Lot Determination for one or more contiguous lots or parcels under the same ownership.
2. The owner or contract purchaser of a lot or parcel requests a Legal Lot Determination to validate a unit of land alleged to be improperly created by sale. Under this threshold, fewer than all the owners of a unit of land may apply for a Legal Lot Determination, provided the applicant is the purchaser of an interest in the subject lot or parcel and the purchase occurred prior to January 1, 2007.
3. The Director requires a Legal Lot Determination be made as a prerequisite to, or concurrently with, the filing of a land use application.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Legal Lot Determination. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Legal Lot Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 121 07/10/2015
40.47.15.1.
C. Approval Criteria. In determining if the subject lot or parcel is a Legal Lot, the decision making authority shall make findings based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The application satisfies the threshold requirements for a Legal Lot Determination.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The unit of land conforms to the lot area and dimensional standards of Chapter 20 (Land Use); except where a unit of land was created by sale prior to January 1, 2007 and was not lawfully established, the Director may deem the unit of land a Legal Lot upon finding:
a. The unit of land could have complied with the applicable criteria for creation of a lawful parcel or lot in effect when the unit of land was sold; or
b. The City, or County prior to annexation, approved a permit as defined in ORS 215.402 or 227.160 (2) for the construction or placement of a dwelling or other structure on the unit of land after the sale, and such dwelling has all of the features listed in ORS 215.755(1)(a)-(e). [ORD 4659; June 2015]
4. The application contains all applicable submittal materials as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
5. Applications and documents related to the request requiring further City approval shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Legal Lot Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 122 07/10/2015
40.47.15.1.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Legal Lot Determination shall be made by the owner of the subject property, the owner’s authorized agent, or contract purchaser on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director; provided, however, fewer than all the owners of a unit of land created by sale prior to January 1, 2007, may apply for a Legal Lot Determination. The Legal Lot Determination application shall be accompanied by a sworn statement that the applicant is the purchaser of an interest in the subject lot or parcel and that their interest was represented at the time of their purchase to be that of a discrete lot or parcel but that it appears the discrete lot or parcel may have been improperly created.
E. Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions on the Legal Lot Determination to ensure compliance with applicable Code requirements. For a unit of land created by sale for which the City has made a Legal Lot Determination pursuant to Section 40.47., such unit of land shall not become a lawfully established parcel until the owner of the unit of land records a Final Land Division with Washington County, subject to review by the County Surveyor, and within 90 days after the city makes the Legal Lot Determination. The Final Land Division shall conform to the City’s Legal Lot Determination and conditions thereof.
E. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.

APPLICATIONS
Loading Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 123 06/01/2012
40.50. LOADING DETERMINATION
40.50.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Loading Determination is to establish mechanism to determine or modify the required number of off-street loading spaces, or modify the off-street loading space dimensions in advance of, or concurrent with, applying for approval of an application, development, permit, or other action. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.50.10. Applicability.
A Loading Determination may be requested in writing to establish an off-street loading space total for any use not specifically listed in Section 60.25. (Off-Street Loading), establish an off-street loading space total that differs from the listed requirement in Section 60.25., and modify the off-street loading space dimensions listed in Section 60.25. of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.50.15. Application.
There is a single Loading Determination application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Loading Determination.
A. Threshold. An application for Loading Determination shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. A request that the Director establish, in writing, an off-street loading space total or requirement for any use not listed or substantially similar to a use listed in Section 60.25. (Off-Street Loading) of this Code.
2. A request to modify the total number of off-street loading spaces from the required number listed in Section 60.25. (Off-Street Loading) of this Code.
3. A request to modify the dimensions of a required off-street loading space listed in Section 60.25. (Off-Street Loading) of this Code.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Loading Determination. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Loading Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 124 10/19/2006
40.50.15.1.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Loading Determination application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Loading Determination application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The determination will not create adverse impacts, taking into account the total gross floor area and the hours of operation of the use.
4. There are safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the boundaries of the site and in connecting with the surrounding circulation system.
5. The proposal will be able to reasonably accommodate the off-street loading needs of the structure.
6. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
7. Adequate means are provided or can be provided to ensure continued periodic maintenance and necessary normal replacement of the following private common facilities and areas: drainage ditches, roads and other improved rights-of-way, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage and recycling storage areas and other facilities, not subject to periodic maintenance by the City or other public agency.
8. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
APPLICATIONS
Loading Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 125 10/19/2006
40.50.15.1.C.
9. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Loading Determination shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Loading Determination application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Loading Determination application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Loading Determination application shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 126 06/01/2012
40.55. PARKING DETERMINATION
40.55.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Parking Determination is to establish required number of parking spaces for uses which do not have a parking ratio requirement listed in the Development Code. The Parking Determination application is established for determining the required number of off-street parking spaces in advance of, or concurrent with, applying for approval of an application, development, permit, or other action. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.55.10. Applicability.
A Parking Determination may be requested in writing to establish a required off-street parking ratio or specific number of off-street parking spaces for a use or uses not specifically listed in Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking) of this Code, to share required parking spaces, or to determine the existence of excess required parking. [ORD 4365; October 2005] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.55.15. Application.
There are three (3) Parking Determination applications which are as follows: Parking Requirement Determination, Shared Parking, and Use of Excess Parking.
1. Parking Requirement Determination.
A. Threshold. An application for Parking Requirement Determination shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. A request that the Director establish, in writing, an off-street parking ratio or requirement for a use not listed or substantially similar to a use listed in Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking) of this Code.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Parking Requirement Determination. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 127 06/01/2012
40.55.15.1.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Parking Requirement Determination application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Parking Requirement Determination application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The determination is consistent with Title 4 of Metro’s Regional Transportation Functional Plan. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. The determination will not create adverse impacts, taking into account the total gross floor area, number of employees, potential customer volume, and the hours of operation of the use.
5. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Parking Requirement Determination shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Parking Requirement Determination application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Parking Requirement Determination application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 128 01/01/2005
40.55.15.1.
F. Appeal of Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Parking Requirement Determination application shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 129 05/19/2017
40.55.15.
2. Shared Parking.
A. Threshold. An application for Shared Parking shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. The required off-street parking for two or more uses will share required parking spaces.
2. All or a portion of the required parking will be provided at an off-site location. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Shared Parking. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Shared Parking application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Shared Parking application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The shared off-street parking is located on any property within 500 feet of the property upon which the use requiring the parking is located, except in Multiple Use zoning districts where the location may be at any distance. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
4. The location of the shared parking and the site containing the use shall be connected by a hard surface pedestrian pathway. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
5. If the location of the shared parking and the site containing the use are separated by a street of collector or higher designation, the two locations shall each be within 300 feet of a controlled pedestrian crossing, such as a traffic light, stop-controlled intersection or marked pedestrian crossing
APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 130 05/19/2017
40.55.15.2.C.
such as a striped intersection or pedestrian-activated signal. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
6. If multiple properties are involved, the owners of the properties have each agreed to the shared parking by entering into a shared parking agreement. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. The time of peak parking demand for the various uses located on the subject properties occur at different times of the day.
8. Adequate parking will be available at all times when the various uses are in operation.
9. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
10. There are safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the boundaries of the site.
11. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
12. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Shared Parking shall be made by the owners of the subject properties, or the owners’ authorized agents, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Shared Parking application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 131 05/19/2017
40.55.15.2
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Shared Parking application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Shared Parking application shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 132 01/01/2005
40.55.15
3. Use of Excess Parking.
A. Threshold. An application for Use of Excess Parking shall be necessary when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. A request to declare required off-street parking is in excess of the need for the use on the subject property.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Use of Excess Parking. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Use of Excess Parking application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Use of Excess Parking application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. Excess parking accounts for a minimum of 20% of the required parking for all uses of the site;
5. Excess parking has existed for the previous 180 days;
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for Use of Excess Parking shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Use of Excess Parking application shall be accompanied by the information required by
APPLICATIONS
Parking Determination
Chapter 40 AP - 133 01/01/2005
40.55.15.3.
the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Use of Excess Parking application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Use of Excess Parking application shall not be extended.
APPLICATIONS
Public Transportation Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 134 05/19/2017
40.57. PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITY [ORD 4332; January 2005]
40.57.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the Public Transportation Facility application is to establish a process for review of new construction or significant expansion of major transportation facilities. [ORD 4418, February 2007]
40.57.10. Applicability.
1. This Section applies to the construction of public transportation facilities within public rights-of-way for Collectors, Arterials, Principal Arterials, and Freeways and the areas adjacent to the rights of way where physical changes will occur as a result of such construction. [ORD 4418, February 2007]
40.57.15. Application.
There is a single Public Transportation Facility application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Public Transportation Facility.
A. Threshold. An application for Public Transportation Facility shall be required for construction or modification of Collectors, Arterials, Principal Arterials, and Freeways when one or more of the following thresholds describe the proposal: [ORD 4418, February 2007]
1. A new facility will be constructed where no transportation facility existed previously.
2. The work includes construction activities outside a public right-of-way or easement, including contractor staging areas and stockpiling of materials.
3. The work involves the acquisition of new right-of-way.
4. The work includes the construction of transit shelters.
APPLICATIONS
Public Transportation Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 135 05/19/2017
40.57.15.1.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Public Transportation Facility. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Public Transportation Facility application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Public Transportation Facility application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal meets all applicable design standards for the classification of the subject road as specified by the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings unless the applicable provisions have been modified by the City Engineer by separate process.
5. The alignment of the new or extended transportation facility is consistent with the general location shown in the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element.
6. Any interim improvements have been designed to accommodate future improvement of the facility to ultimate standards.
7. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Public Transportation Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 136 05/19/2017
40.57.15.1.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Public Transportation Facility shall be made by the City Engineer or an authorized agent of a public agency with jurisdiction, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Public Transportation Facility application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Public Transportation Facility application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Sidewalk Design Modification
Chapter 40 AP - 137 02/22/2007
40.58. SIDEWALK DESIGN MODIFICATION
40.58.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the Sidewalk Design Modification application is to provide a mechanism whereby the City’s street design standards relating to the locations and dimensions of sidewalks or required street landscaping can be modified to address existing conditions and constraints as a specific application. For purposes of this section, sidewalk ramps constructed with or without contiguous sidewalk panels leading to and away from the ramp shall be considered sidewalks. This section is implemented by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.58.10. Applicability.
The Sidewalk Design Modification application shall be applicable to all streets in the City.
40.58.15. Application.
There is a single Sidewalk Design Modification application which is subject to the following requirements.
A. Threshold. An application for Sidewalk Design Modification shall be required when one of the following thresholds applies:
1. The sidewalk width, planter strip width, or both minimum standards specified in the Engineering Design Manual are proposed to be modified.
2. The dimensions or locations of street tree wells specified in the Engineering Design Manual are proposed to be modified.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Sidewalk Design Modification. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Sidewalk Design Modification
Chapter 40 AP - 138 02/22/2007
40.58.15.C.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Sidewalk Design Modification application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Sidewalk Design Modification application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. One or more of the following criteria are satisfied:
a. That there exist local topographic conditions, which would result in any of the following:
i. A sidewalk that is located above or below the top surface of a finished curb.
ii. A situation in which construction of the Engineering Design Manual standard street cross-section would require a steep slope or retaining wall that would prevent vehicular access to the adjoining property.
b. That there exist local physical conditions such as:
i. An existing structure prevents the construction of a standard sidewalk.
ii. An existing utility device prevents the construction of a standard sidewalk.
iii. Rock outcroppings prevent the construction of a standard sidewalk without blasting.
c. That there exist environmental conditions such as a Significant Natural Resource Area, Jurisdictional Wetland, Clean Water Services Water Quality Sensitive Area, Clean Water Services required Vegetative Corridor, or Significant Tree Grove.
APPLICATIONS
Sidewalk Design Modification
Chapter 40 AP - 139 02/22/2007
40.58.15.C.3.
d. That additional right of way is required to construct the Engineering Design Manual standard and the adjoining property is not controlled by the applicant.
4. The proposal complies with provisions of Section 60.55.25. (Street and Bicycle and Pedestrian Connection Requirements) and 60.55.30 (Minimum Street Widths).
5. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, have been submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
6. The proposed Sidewalk Design Modification provides safe and efficient pedestrian circulation in the site vicinity.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Sidewalk Design Modification shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Sidewalk Design Modification application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Sidewalk Design Modification application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.

APPLICATIONS
Signs
Chapter 40 AP-140 05/09/2017
40.60. SIGN
40.60.05. Purpose.
The purpose for regulating signs is to promote the neat, clean, orderly, and attractive appearance of the community, balance the need of signs with avoiding potential nuisances to nearby properties and conflicts with other signage, ensure safe construction, location, installation, and maintenance of signage, prevent proliferation of signs and sign clutter, and minimize distractions for motorists on public highways and streets. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.60.10. Applicability.
1. Unless otherwise authorized by this Code, no person shall erect, install, construct, place, alter, change, relocate, suspend, attach or electronically project any sign, without first obtaining a permit from the City. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. Signs exempt from permits and regulation are identified in Section 60.40 of this Code (Sign Regulations). [ORD 4708; May 2017]
40.60.15. Application.
There is a single Sign application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Sign.
A. Threshold. An application for Sign permit shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The erection, installation, construction, placement, alteration, relocation, suspension, attachment of any sign.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for a Sign. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Signs
Chapter 40 AP - 141 06/09/2017
40.60.15.1.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Sign application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Sign application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The proposed sign is in conformance with all requirements specified in Section 60.40. (Sign Regulations) unless the applicable provision has been subject of a Variance approval.
5. The proposed sign is in conformance with the vision clearance standards specified in the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Sign shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Sign application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
APPLICATIONS
Signs
Chapter 40 AP - 142 01/01/2005
40.60.15.1.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Sign application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to imposing other conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose the following conditions when applicable:
1. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition, free from rust, corrosion, peeling paint or other surface deterioration.
2. Any sign structure or supports that are no longer in use shall be removed at the time of the structure or supports cease to be used.
3. Compliance with the conditions of approval shall be met as long as the sign exists on the property.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Sign proposal shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Solar Access
Chapter 40 AP - 143 06/01/2012
40.65. SOLAR ACCESS
40.65.05. Purpose.
The purpose of Solar Access is to protect solar access to solar features on lots designated or used as a detached dwelling under some circumstances. It authorizes owners of such lots to apply for an approval that, if granted, prohibits solar features from being shaded by certain future vegetation on and off the permittee's site. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.65.10. Applicability.
The Solar Access application shall be applicable to detached dwellings in the City’s Standard and Low Density Residential zoning districts.
40.65.15. Application.
There is a single Solar Access application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Solar Access.
A Threshold. An application for Solar Access shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Protection of a solar feature from being shaded is requested.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Solar Access. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Solar Access application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Solar Access application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
APPLICATIONS
Solar Access
Chapter 40 AP - 144 06/01/2012
40.65.15.1.C.
3. Non-exempt vegetation on the applicant's property does not shade the solar feature.
4. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Solar Access shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Solar Access application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Solar Access application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to imposing other conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose the following conditions when applicable:
1. The party to whom the City grants a Solar Access approval shall cause to be recorded: the approval, legal descriptions of the properties affected by the approval, the solar access height limit, and the approved site plan in the office of the Washington County Recorder with the deeds to the properties affected by it, indexed by the names of the owners of the affected properties, and pay the fees for such filing before the approval is effective. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. If not in place at the time of the Solar Access approval, the solar feature shall be installed within one (1) year of the approval after which time, unless installation has occurred, the approval shall expire. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Solar Access
Chapter 40 AP - 145 01/01/2005
40.65.15.1.E.
3. An owner of property restricted by a Solar Access approval shall be responsible for and pay all costs for keeping non-exempt vegetation from exceeding the solar access height limit. However, vegetation identified as exempt on the approved site plan, vegetation an owner shows was planted in the ground on or before the date an application for a Solar Access approval is filed, and solar friendly vegetation are exempt from the Solar Access approval.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Solar Access proposal shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Street Vacation
Chapter 40 AP - 146 01/10/2008
40.70. Repealed [ORD 4302; June 2004]
40.75. STREET VACATION
40.75.05. Purpose.
The purpose of Street Vacation is to recognize that changes to the City’s existing street system are occasionally required. Therefore, the following application has been established to allow limited changes to the City’s existing street system without adversely affecting safe and efficient circulation throughout the City. A Street Vacation is a legislative action which is not subject to the 120 day rule of ORS 227.178. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.75.10. Applicability.
Alteration to the City’s existing streets that involve the vacation of public rights-of-way shall be reviewed by the City Council. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
40.75.15. Application.
There is a single Street Vacation application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Street Vacation.
A. Threshold. An application for Street Vacation shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Abandonment or otherwise vacation of an existing public transportation right-of-way or public easement that is within the City of Beaverton.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Street Vacation. The decision making authority is the City Council.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Street Vacation application, the City Council shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
APPLICATIONS
Street Vacation
Chapter 40 AP - 147 01/10/2008
40.75.15.1.C.
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Street Vacation application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed Street Vacation meets the eligibility provisions of ORS 271.080.
4. The proposed Street Vacation will not adversely impact street connectivity as identified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan.
5. The proposed Street Vacation will not adversely impact police, fire, and emergency service in the area.
6. That the vacation of the street will not hinder accessibility to any above ground or underground public facilities.
7. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Street Vacation shall be made by the owner of property abutting the right-of-way or easement, or the owner’s authorized agent, the City Council, Mayor, or their designee on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Street Vacation application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The City Council may impose conditions on the approval of a Street Vacation application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.45.18.B.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 148 03/15/2019
40.80. TEMPORARY USE
40.80.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Temporary Use application is to recognize that temporary uses serve a useful purpose in the life of the community. Such activity does not mandate application of the requirements relating to permanent activity, but there is the potential of adverse impact on surrounding property created by temporary activity; therefore, specific requirements are necessary. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.80.10. Applicability.
Uses and activities that are determined to be temporary in nature shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Except where the use and activity is expressly exempt under this chapter, a Temporary Use permit is to be obtained prior to commencing the use or activity and the decision making authority may impose conditions as necessary to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. [ORD 4587; August 2012]
Exemptions: [ORD 4587; August 2012] No Temporary Use permit is required for non-mobile temporary use if the use or activity:
a. Is located on property zoned Commercial, Multiple Use, or Industrial where the proposed temporary use or activity is permitted outright by the zone; and
b. Operates for no more than three consecutive days in a week and for no more than six times in any twelve-month period; and
c. Is located outside all required vision clearance areas and the first 20 feet of vehicle aisle space as measured from all site entrances and exits to the public right-of-way; and
d. Has received the property owner’s permission; and
e. Operates only between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; and
f. Occupies an area that is no more than five parking spaces or 800 square feet of surface area, excluding vehicle drive aisles and minimum off-street parking as required in Section 60.30. and areas required for fire access; OR
g. Is a Special Event permitted under Chapter 7 of the City Code.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 149 03/15/2019
40.80.15. Application.
There are five (5) Temporary Use applications which are as follows: Temporary Mobile Sales, Temporary Non-Mobile Sales, Temporary Structure, Temporary Real Estate Office, and Temporary Displaced Parking. [ORD4757; March 2019]
1. Temporary Mobile Sales.
A. Threshold. An application for Temporary Mobile Sales shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The sale of plants, flowers, books, crafts, produce, beverages, food, and other similar items in a single location for a period that is greater than three hours and less than seven (7) hours per day. [ORD 4513; August 2009] [ORD 4701; January 2017]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Temporary Mobile Sales. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Temporary Mobile Sales application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Temporary Mobile Sales application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The proposal is located entirely within private property in a Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district and the applicant has written permission from the property owner to utilize the subject property for the proposal. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 150 03/15/2019
40.80.15.1.C
5. The applicant has written permission from the City if the proposal is located on a public right-of-way within any of the Regional Center or Town Center zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]40.80.15.1.C.
6. The proposal will not pose a threat to the public safety or convenience when the temporary use is proposed to be located on a public right-of-way.
7. The use in which the proposed temporary use is engaged is listed as a Permitted use in the specific Commercial or Multiple Use zoning district and complies with all applicable use restrictions of the zone. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
8. The proposal will not be located within the vision clearance area of an intersection as specified in the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings. [ORD 4365; October 2005]
9. The proposal does not involve use of a permanent building.
10. The proposal shall not obstruct or occupy minimum required parking spaces unless it can be demonstrated that the minimum required parking is not being used by the permanent use located on the subject site pursuant to Section 40.55.15.3. (Excess Parking) of the Development Code. [ORD 4513; August 2009] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
11. Safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation is provided consistent with Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities) of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
12. The proposed hours of operation for the temporary use are allowed in that zoning district and do not require Conditional Use approval. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
13. No more than two other permits for Temporary Use – Mobile Sales have been issued on the same site during the same approval period or portion thereof. [ORD 4513; August 2009] [ORD 4701; January 2017]
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 151 03/15/2019
40.80.15.1.C
14. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.40.80.15.1.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Temporary Mobile Sales shall be made by the owner of the proposed temporary use, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Temporary Mobile Sales application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness).
E. Conditions of Approval. All applications for Temporary Use - Mobile Sales shall comply with the following conditions identified below. The decision making authority may impose other conditions on the approval of a Temporary Mobile Sales application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
1. The Temporary Mobile Sales shall obtain a City Business License.
2. Temporary Mobile Sales involving the sale of food products shall be licensed by the appropriate State and/or local agency.
3. All Temporary Mobile Sales activities shall be conducted at the particular location authorized.
4. The Temporary Mobile Sales shall not have hours of operation exceeding seven (7) hours in a twenty four (24) hour period. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
5. Signage shall be permitted for Temporary Mobile Sales consistent with Section 60.40.15.12. of this Code.
6. During operation, the operator of a Temporary Mobile Sales shall maintain a copy of the City approval and present same for inspection upon request by City personnel.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 152 12/02/2016
40.80.15.1.E.
7. Suitable receptacles for disposal of trash, as defined by the City of Beaverton Code 4.08.030, must be provided and maintained by the permittee on the site of the temporary use in sufficient numbers, as determined by the Director, to accommodate all trash generated by the Temporary Mobile Sales. The permittee shall be responsible for disposal of accumulated trash and for clean-up of trash generated by the Temporary Mobile Sales. [ORD 4697; December 2016]
8. All products for sale, structures, and vehicles associated with the Temporary Mobile Use shall be removed daily at the end of the approved time period. [ORD 4701; January 2017]
9. Tables and chairs available for customer seating shall be limited to area not to exceed eight-feet by eighteen-feet and shall not obstruct or occupy minimum required parking spaces unless it can be demonstrated that the minimum required parking is not being used by the permanent use located on the subject site pursuant to Section 40.55.15.3. (Excess Parking) of this Code. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
10. The Director may impose conditions necessary to ensure that adequate parking exists and that vehicles entering or exiting the site do not create a safety hazard.
11. The Director may impose conditions necessary to safeguard the public health and safety and to minimize potential adverse impact created by the Temporary Mobile Sales on the surrounding property and use.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. The use authorized by the decision making authority shall commence, operate, and conclude within one year of the date of approval. After one year, the permit shall expire unless the permit is renewed pursuant to the provisions for Permit Renewal as stated under Section 50.97. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approvals of Temporary Mobile Sales shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 153 08/17/2012
40.80.15.2
2. Temporary Non-Mobile Sales.
A. Threshold. An application for Temporary Non-Mobile Sales shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The sales of holiday vegetation and fireworks, circuses, carnivals, animal rides and use of private property for promotional product sales or service, except where activity is eligible for exemption under Applicability of Section 40.80.10. [ORD4587; August 2012]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Temporary Non-Mobile Sales. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Temporary Non-Mobile Sales application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Temporary Non-Mobile Sales application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The proposal is located entirely within private property in a Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district and the applicant has written permission from the property owner to utilize the subject property for the proposal. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD4587; August 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 154 08/17/2012
40.80.15.2.C.
5. The use in which the proposed temporary use is engaged is listed as a Permitted use in the specific Commercial or Multiple Use zoning district and complies with all applicable use restrictions of the zone. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
6. The proposal will not be located within the vision clearance area of an intersection as specified under Section 60.55.50.
7. The proposal does not involve use of a permanent building.
8. The proposal shall not obstruct or occupy permanent required parking spaces unless it can be demonstrated that the permanent required parking is not being used by the permanent use located on the subject site pursuant to Section 40.55.15.3. (Excess Parking) of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
9. The site of the proposal has safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation consistent with Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities) of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
10. The proposed hours of operation for the temporary use are allowed in that zoning district and do not require Conditional Use approval. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
11. The site of the proposal has adequate parking facilities to accommodate the anticipated needs consistent with Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking) of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
12. Temporary Non-Mobile Sales has not occurred more than twice on the same site in the same calendar year.
13. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 155 08/22/2009
40.80.15.2.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Temporary Non-Mobile Sales shall be made by the owner of the proposed temporary use, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Temporary Non-Mobile Sales application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness). [ORD 4513; August 2009]
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Temporary Non-Mobile Sales application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to imposing other conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose one or more of the following conditions when appropriate:
1. The Temporary Non-Mobile Sales shall obtain a City Business License.
2. Temporary Non-Mobile Sales involving the sale of food products shall be licensed by the appropriate State and/or local agency.
3. Temporary Non-Mobile Sales involving the sale of fireworks shall be licensed by the appropriate State and/or local agency.
4. All Temporary Non-Mobile Sales activities shall be conducted at the particular authorized location.
5. Signage shall be permitted for Temporary Non-Mobile Sales consistent with Section 60.40.15.12. of this Code.
6. During operation, the operator of a Temporary Mobile Sales shall maintain a copy of the City approval and present same for inspection upon request by City personnel.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 156 08/22/2009
40.80.15.2.E.
7. Suitable receptacles for disposal of trash as defined by the City of Beaverton Code 4.08.085, subsection C, must be provided and maintained by the permittee on the site of the Temporary Non-Mobile Sales in sufficient numbers, as determined by the Director, to accommodate all trash generated by the Temporary Non-Mobile Sales use. The permittee shall be responsible for disposal of accumulated trash and for clean-up of trash generated by the Temporary Non-Mobile Sales.
8. The Director may impose conditions necessary to safeguard the public health and safety and to minimize potential adverse impact created by the Temporary Non-Mobile Sales on the surrounding property and use.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. The use authorized by the decision making authority shall commence, operate, and conclude within 45 days of the date of approval.
H. Extension of a Decision. Approvals of Temporary Non-Mobile Sales shall not be extended.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 157 08/17/2012
40.80.15.3
3. Temporary Structure.
A. Threshold. An application for Temporary Structure shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The placement of a temporary mobile structure while development is taking place.
2. Placement of drop-off station. [ORD4587; August 2012]
3. A temporary wireless communication facility inclusive of needed equipment shelters and on-site improvements to facilitate continuity in service during initial construction, repair, maintenance, or replacement of permanent equipment. [ORD 4248; May 2003]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Temporary Structure. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Temporary Structure application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Temporary Structure application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The proposal will not be located within the vision clearance area of an intersection as specified under Section 60.55.35. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
5. Safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation is provided consistent with Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities) of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 158 06/01/2012
40.80.15.3.C.
6. The site of the proposal has adequate parking facilities to accommodate the anticipated needs of the uses on the site consistent with Section 60.30. (Off-Street Parking) of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
7. The proposal is for an approved development located within the City.
8. The proposal would locate a temporary mobile structure within the boundaries of the subdivision where land is for sale or under development.
9. A construction permit for the permanent development has been issued and has not expired.
10. The Temporary Structure shall be located on the same lot or a lot abutting the activity. If the abutting lot is separately owned, written authorization from the owner must be provided.
11. The Temporary Structure shall not block fire hydrants, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, or other similar infrastructure improvements.
12. No connection of the temporary structure to any water, sanitary or storm sewer utility shall be allowed unless the system(s) are deemed substantially complete by the City.
13. Occupancy for temporary sales trailers or sales offices shall not be allowed until substantial completion of the sanitary sewers is obtained, or portable toilets are available.
14. If the proposal is a drop-off station, the proposal is located in a Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
15. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 159 01/10/2008
40.80.15.3.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Temporary Structure shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Temporary Structure application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Temporary Structure application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to imposing other conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose the following conditions when applicable:
1. The occupant of the Temporary Structure shall obtain a City Business License.
2. Signage shall be permitted for a Temporary Structure consistent with Section 60.40.15.12. of this Code.
3. The Director may impose conditions as are necessary to ensure that adequate parking exists and that vehicles entering or exiting the site do not create a safety hazard.
4. The Director may impose conditions as are necessary to safeguard the public health and safety and to minimize potential adverse impact created by the temporary use on the surrounding property and use.
5. The Director may impose conditions as are necessary which establish a duration of time that the Temporary Structure may be located on the subject site.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. The use authorized by the decision making authority shall commence, operate, and conclude within 2 years of the date of approval unless otherwise specified by the Director.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 160 018/01/2012
40.80.15.4
4. Temporary Real Estate Office.
A. Threshold. An application for Temporary Real Estate Office shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The use of a dwelling as a Temporary Real Estate Office during the development, lease or sale of lots or structures in a residential subdivision, condominium project, or residential Planned Unit Development.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Temporary Real Estate Office. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Temporary Real Estate Office application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Temporary Real Estate Office application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. The applicant, if different from the property owner, has written permission from the property owner to utilize the property for a Temporary Real Estate Office.
5. The Temporary Real Estate Office is located within the boundaries of the residential development.
6. The property used for the Temporary Real Estate Office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 161 018/01/2012
40.80.15.4.C.
7. The property used for the Temporary Real Estate Office shall be within close proximity to an Arterial or Collector or as acceptable to the City Engineer.
8. All streets shall be curbed and paved (with a minimum first lift of asphalt or cement concrete) to the property used for the Temporary Real Estate Office.
9. No connection of the Temporary Real Estate Office to any water, sanitary or storm sewer utility shall be allowed unless the system(s) are deemed substantially complete.
10. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Temporary Real Estate Office shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Temporary Real Estate Office application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Temporary Real Estate Office application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to imposing other conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose the following conditions when applicable:
1. The Temporary Real Estate Office shall obtain a City Business License.
2. All Temporary Real Estate Office activities shall be conducted at the particular location authorized.
3. Signage shall be permitted for a Temporary Real Estate Office consistent with Section 60.40.15.12. of this Code.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 162 08/01/2012
40.80.15.4.E.
4. The Director may impose conditions as are necessary to ensure that adequate parking exists and that vehicles entering or exiting the site do not create a safety hazard.
5. The Director may impose conditions as are necessary to safeguard the public health and safety and to minimize potential adverse impact created by the Temporary Real Estate Office on the surrounding property and use.
6. The Director may impose conditions as are necessary which establish a duration of time that the Temporary Real Estate Office may be located on the subject site.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. The use authorized by the decision making authority shall commence, operate, and conclude within 2 years of the date of approval unless otherwise specified by the Director.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
[ORD4587; August 2012]

APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 163 03/15/2019
5. Temporary Displaced Parking. [ORD4757; March 2019]
A. Threshold. An application for Temporary Displaced Parking shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The placement of temporarily displaced parking due to development activity on private property.
2. The placement of temporary construction worker parking due to development activity on private property.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Temporary Displaced Parking. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Temporary Displaced Parking application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Temporary Displaced Parking application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal does not utilize on-street parking to provide temporary displaced parking.
5. The proposed displaced parking is located in an area that has a gravel or impervious surface.
6. The proposed displaced parking will not increase the quantity, or decrease the quality, of the surface water runoff from the subject site.
7. The proposed displaced parking will not pose a threat to the public safety or convenience.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 164 03/15/2019
40.80.15.5.C
8. The proposal for displaced parking is associated with an approved development application or proposed concurrently with a land use application submittal.
9. The need for the proposed displaced parking is caused by an inability to accommodate parking on the development site due to development activity.
10. The proposed displaced parking will not be located within the vision clearance area of an intersection as specified in the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings.
11. The proposed displaced parking will not occupy or obstruct minimum required parking spaces for another use or site. The following tools may be used to show that minimum parking for another use or site will be maintained:
a. An approved Excess Parking determination application through Section 40.55.15.3 of the Development Code, demonstrating that not all of the minimum required parking is being used by the permanent use located on the subject site.
b. Information that demonstrates different peak parking demand hours for the uses reliant on the required parking. The proposal shall include sufficient parking to accommodate overlapping periods of use for the duration of the Temporary Displaced Parking use.
12. Safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation is provided consistent with Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities) of the Development Code.
13. The proposed displaced parking is located within ¼ mile of the development activity site or is combined with a transportation access plan that includes private shuttle or one-seat-ride transit access with a maximum service headway of 20 minutes during peak hours and no more than a two (2) mile radius from the use dependent on the parking.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 165 03/15/2019
40.80.15.5.C
14. The proposal includes a plan for permitting, monitoring, and enforcing the proper use of the displaced parking.
15. The number of parking spaces provided meets the minimum required parking for the use(s) being displaced and is no greater than the number of spaces being displaced.
16. Any displaced ADA parking spaces must be replaced at a one-to-one ratio and meet ADA access requirements.
17. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for Temporary Displaced Parking shall be made by the owner of the development creating the need for the displaced parking, the owner’s authorized agent, or the owner of the property where the Temporary Displaced Parking will be located, on a form provided by the Director that shall be filed with the Director. The Temporary Displaced Parking application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness).
E. Conditions of Approval. All applications for Temporary Use Displaced Parking shall comply with the conditions stated below. The decision making authority may impose additional conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
1. The Temporary Displaced Parking use shall cease with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the project that displaced required parking or within one (1) year, whichever is sooner.
2. Temporary Displaced Parking activities shall be conducted at the particular location(s) authorized and are not transferable to additional or alternative location(s).
3. The permittee of the Temporary Displaced Parking use shall make a copy of the City approval available for inspection upon request by the City.
APPLICATIONS
Temporary Use
Chapter 40 AP - 166 03/15/2019
40.80.15.5.E
4. Signage shall be permitted for Temporary Displaced Parking consistent with Section 60.40.15.6.
[ORD4757; March 2019]
APPLICATIONS
Text Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 167 12/02/2016
40.85. TEXT AMENDMENT
40.85.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Text Amendment application is to provide a mechanism for legislative amendments to the Development Code. It is recognized that such amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs, and desires, to fulfill regional obligations, and to address changes in the law. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.85.10. Applicability.
The Text Amendment application shall apply to any change to Development Code text or diagrams.
40.85.15. Application.
There is a single Text Amendment application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Text Amendment.
A. Threshold. An application for Text Amendment shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. Any change to the Development Code, excluding changes to the zoning map.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 4 procedure, as described in Section 50.50. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Text Amendment. The decision making authority shall be the City Council. [ORD 4532; April 2010] [ORD 4697; December 2016]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Text Amendment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Text Amendment application.
APPLICATIONS
Text Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 168 04/01/2010
40.85.15.1.C.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposed text amendment is consistent with the provisions of the Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan.
4. The proposed text amendment is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
5. The proposed text amendment is consistent with other provisions within the City’s Development Code.
6. The proposed amendment is consistent with all applicable City ordinance requirements and regulations.
7. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for Text Amendment to the City’s Development Code shall be initiated by the City Council, Mayor, the Director, or any interested person on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Text Amendment application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.75.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 169 08/10/2006
40.90. TREE PLAN [ORD 4348; May 2005]
40.90.05. Purpose.
Healthy trees and urban forests provide a variety of natural resource and community benefits for the City of Beaverton. Primary among those benefits is the aesthetic contribution to the increasingly urban landscape. Tree resource protection focuses on the aesthetic benefits of the resource. The purpose of a Tree Plan application is to provide a mechanism to regulate pruning, removal, replacement, and mitigation for removal of Protected Trees (Significant Individual Trees, Historic Trees, trees within Significant Groves and Significant Natural Resource Areas (SNRAs)), and Community Trees thus helping to preserve and enhance the sustainability of the City’s urban forest. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein and implements the SNRA, Significant Grove, Significant Individual Tree, and Historic Tree designations as noted or mapped in Comprehensive Plan Volume III.
40.90.10. Applicability.
Different types of resources require different levels of protection. No Tree Plan is required for the following actions:
1. Removal of up to four (4) Community Trees, or up to 10% of the number of Community Trees on the site, whichever is greater, within a one (1) calendar year period. Properties one-half acre or less in size developed with a detached dwelling may remove any number of Community Trees.
2. Removal and pruning of any hazardous, dead, or diseased tree when the tree is identified as such by a certified arborist or by the City Arborist and the removal is required by the City.
3. In the event of an emergency requiring tree removal or pruning prior to the City Arborist’s determination, if evidence justifies the emergency removal after the fact, then no tree plan is required for removal.
4. Minor pruning, as defined in Chapter 90.
5. Pruning of trees consistent with the Vision Clearance requirements of the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
6. Pruning of trees by the utility provider for above ground utility power lines following acceptable arboricultural standards and practices.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 170 07/10/2015
40.90.10.
7. Pruning of trees to maintain the minimum 8 foot clearance above a sidewalk.
8. Removal or pruning of the following nuisance tree species anywhere in the city: Lombardy Poplar (Populus nigra), and birch (Betula sp.). Where Lombardy Poplar or birch trees are part of an approved landscape plan, Design Review approval is required for the removal of the Landscape Trees. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
9. Removal and pruning of the following nuisance tree species in Significant Groves and SNRAs: Norway maple (Acer platanoides), Tree-of-Heaven (Ailanthus altissima), Golden Chain Tree (Laburnum watereri), and English or Common Hawthorn (Crataegus monogyna). [ORD 4584; June 2012]
10. Removal of a tree or nonnative vegetation listed as a Nuisance or Prohibited Plant on Metro’s Native Plant List or in Clean Water Services’ Design and Construction Standards.
11. Within SNRAs and Significant Groves, planting of native vegetation listed on the Metro’s Native Plant List or in Clean Water Services’ Design and Construction Standards when planted with non-mechanized hand held equipment.
12. Removal of any tree associated with a public street and sidewalk improvement project that meet A. or B. and C: [ORD 4659; June 2015]
A. Improvements within an existing public vehicular right-of-way; or
B. Improvements to a public vehicular right-of-way in order to meet functional classification standards, such as widening or half-street improvements; and
C. The proposed improvements do not exceed the minimum width standards of the Engineering Design Manual.
13. Trails within SNRAs and Significant Groves meeting all of the following:
A. Construction must take place between May 1 and October 30 with hand held equipment;
B. Trail widths must not exceed 30 inches and trail grade must not exceed 20 percent;
C. Trail construction must leave no scars greater than three inches in diameter on live parts of native plants; and
D. Trails must be placed outside the top of bank of any stream, river, or pond, and
E. Trails must be 100% pervious.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 171 08/10/2006
40.90.10.
14. Street Trees are covered by the Beaverton Municipal Code and Section 60.15.15.6.
15. Landscape Trees are covered by Section 40.20. (Design Review) and Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation).
16. Enhancement activities conducted by a public agency for the sole purpose of improving the ecological health of forest and water resources.
17. Removal of a tree(s) by the City of Beaverton or Clean Water Services that is within five (5) feet of a section of existing sanitary or storm sewer line that is in need of emergency repair and/or maintenance within a SNRA when no reasonable alternative exists. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
40.90.15. Application.
There are four (4) Tree Plan applications which are as follows: Tree Plan One, Tree Plan Two, Tree Plan Three, and Commercial Timber Harvest.
1. Tree Plan One.
A. Threshold. An application for Tree Plan One shall be required when none of the actions listed in Section 40.90.10. apply and one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. Major pruning of Protected Trees once within a one year period.
2. Mechanized removal of non-native or invasive vegetation and clearing and grubbing of vegetation within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services.
3. Mechanized re-planting of trees and shrubs, or both, or restoration planting within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 172 05/19/2005
40.90.15.1.A.
4. Trails greater than 30 inches in width, or trail grade exceeding 20 percent, trail surfaces less than 100% pervious surface, or any combination thereof within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services that do not result in tree removal.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Tree Plan One. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Tree Plan One application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Tree Plan One application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. If applicable, pruning is necessary to improve tree health or to eliminate conflicts with vehicles or structures which includes, but is not limited to, underground utilities and street improvements.
5. If applicable, the removal of vegetation or clearing and grubbing is necessary to accommodate physical development in the area in which the removal is proposed.
6. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 173 05/19/2005
40.90.15.1.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Tree Plan One shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Tree Plan One application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Tree Plan One application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose other conditions of approval to ensure that the proposed tree work meets all requirements listed in Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation).
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Tree Plan One proposal shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 174 06/01/2012
40.90.15.
2. Tree Plan Two
A. Threshold. An application for Tree Plan Two shall be required when none of the actions listed in Section 40.90.10. apply, none of the thresholds listed in Section 40.90.15.1. apply, and one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. Removal of five (5) or more Community Trees, or more than 10% of the number of Community Trees on the site, whichever is greater, within a one (1) calendar year period, except as allowed in Section 40.90.10.1. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Multiple Use zoning district: Removal of up to and including 85% of the total DBH of non-exempt surveyed tree(s) found on the project site within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Commercial, Residential, or Industrial zoning district: Removal of up to and including 75% of the total DBH of non-exempt surveyed tree(s) found on the project site within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. Removal of a Significant Individual Tree(s).
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Tree Plan Two. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Tree Plan Two application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Tree Plan Two application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 175 06/01/2012
40.90.15.2.C.
3. If applicable, removal of any tree is necessary to observe good forestry practices according to recognized American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300-1995 standards and International Society of Arborists (ISA) standards on the subject.
4. If applicable, removal of any tree is necessary to accommodate physical development where no reasonable alternative exists.
5. If applicable, removal of any tree is necessary because it has become a nuisance by virtue of damage to property or improvements, either public or private, on the subject site or adjacent sites.
6. If applicable, removal is necessary to accomplish public purposes, such as installation of public utilities, street widening, and similar needs, where no reasonable alternative exists without significantly increasing public costs or reducing safety.
7. If applicable, removal of any tree is necessary to enhance the health of the tree, grove, SNRA, or adjacent trees, or to eliminate conflicts with structures or vehicles. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
8. If applicable, removal of a tree(s) within a SNRA or Significant Grove will not result in a reversal of the original determination that the SNRA or Significant Grove is significant based on criteria used in making the original significance determination.
9. If applicable, removal of a tree(s) within a SNRA or Significant Grove will not result in the remaining trees posing a safety hazard due to the effects of windthrow.
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation) and Section 60.67. (Significant Natural Resources).
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 176 06/01/2012
40.90.15.2.C.
11. Grading and contouring of the site is designed to accommodate the proposed use and to mitigate adverse effects on neighboring properties, public right-of-way, surface drainage, water storage facilities, and the public storm drainage system. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
12. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
13. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4462; January 2008]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Tree Plan Two shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Tree Plan Two application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Tree Plan Two application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose other conditions of approval to ensure that the proposed tree work meets all requirements listed in Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation).
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.65.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Tree Plan Two proposal shall not be extended.

APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 177 06/01/2012
40.90.15.
3. Tree Plan Three
A. Threshold. An application for Tree Plan Three shall be required when none of the actions listed in Section 40.90.10. or none of the thresholds listed in Section 40.90.15.1. or Section 40.90.15.2. apply and one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. Multiple Use zoning districts: Removal of greater than 85% of the total DBH of Non-Exempt Surveyed Tree(s) found on the project site within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services. ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Residential, Commercial, and Industrial zoning districts: Removal of greater than 75% of the total DBH of Non-Exempt Surveyed Tree(s) found on the project site within SNRAs, Significant Groves, or Sensitive Areas as defined by Clean Water Services. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Removal of individual Historic Trees.
4. Commercial timber harvest of trees which fail to meet the approval criterion specified in Section 40.90.15.4.C.4.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Tree Plan Three. The decision making authority shall be the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Tree Plan Three application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Tree Plan Three application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 178 05/19/2005
40.90.15.3.C.
3. If applicable, removal of a diseased tree or a tree is necessary because the tree has been weakened by age, storm, fire, or other condition.
4. If applicable, removal is necessary to enhance the health of the grove or adjacent tree(s) to reduce maintenance, or to eliminate conflicts with structures or vehicles.
5. If applicable, removal is necessary to observe good forestry practices according to recognized American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300-1995 standards and International Society of Arborists (ISA) standards on the subject.
6. If applicable, removal is the minimum necessary to accommodate physical development because no reasonable alternative exists for the development at another location on the site and variances to setback provisions of the Development Code will not allow the tree(s) to be saved or will cause other undesirable circumstances on the site or adjacent properties.
7. If applicable, removal is necessary because a tree has become a nuisance by virtue of damage to personal property or improvements, either public or private, on the subject site or on an adjacent site.
8. If applicable, removal is necessary to accomplish a public purpose, such as installation of public utilities, street widening, and similar needs where no reasonable alternative exists without significantly increasing public costs or reducing safety.
9. If applicable, removal of a tree(s) within a SNRA or Significant Grove will not result in the remaining trees posing a safety hazard due to the effects of windthrow.
10. If applicable, removal of tree or trees within a Significant Grove will not reduce the size of the grove to a point where the remaining trees may pose a safety hazard due to the effects of windthrow.
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 179 10/19/2006
40.90.15.3.C.
11. If applicable, removal of a tree within a Historic Grove will not substantially reduce the significance of the grove in terms of its original designation on the list of Historic Groves.
12. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation) and Section 60.67. (Significant Natural Resources).
13. Grading and contouring of the site is designed to accommodate the proposed use and to mitigate adverse effect(s) on neighboring properties, public right-of-way, surface drainage, water storage facilities, and the public storm drainage system.
14. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
15. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Tree Plan Three shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Tree Plan Three application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference, and by a report from a qualified professional.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Tree Plan Three application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. In addition to the approval criteria, the decision making authority may also impose other conditions of approval to ensure that the proposed tree work meets all requirements listed in Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation).
APPLICATIONS
Tree Plan
Chapter 40 AP - 180 05/15/2015
40.90.15.3.
F. Compliance with Approval. All conditions imposed on an approved Tree Plan Three shall be implemented prior to the removal, pruning, or planting of tree unless otherwise noted in the approval. Compliance with the conditions of approval shall be met as long as the trees exist unless otherwise specified or until modified through a City approval process.
G. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
H. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
I. Extension of a Decision. Previous approval of Tree Plan Three proposal shall not be extended.
APPLICATIONS
THPRD Annexation Waiver
Chapter 40 AP - 181 05/15/2015
40.93. TUALATIN HILLS PARK AND RECREATION DISTRICT ANNEXATION WAIVER [ORD 4388; May 2006]
40.93.05. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the application of a Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation annexation waiver, which allows a waiver from the requirement to annex property into the Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District as a condition of approval of any development as specified in Section 60.33 of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.93.10. Applicability.
A THPRD annexation waiver may only be requested by the property owner(s) for any development proposed outside of THPRD boundaries who wish to provide their own park and recreation facilities and services rather than annex the site to THPRD.
40.93.15. Application.
There is a single THPRD annexation waiver application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. THPRD Annexation Waiver.
A. Threshold. An application for a THPRD annexation waiver shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The property proposed for development is not in the Tualatin Hills Park and Recreation District (THPRD) and the applicant wishes to provide park and recreation facilities and services for the development rather than annex the site to THPRD.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for a THPRD annexation waiver.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a THPRD annexation waiver application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
APPLICATIONS
THPRD Annexation Waiver
Chapter 40 AP - 182 05/15/2015
40.93.15.1.C.
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a THPRD annexation waiver application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. Detailed plans and documentation demonstrating compliance with Section 60.33.15. Park facilities shall be deemed similar if provided for the projected number of future residents and/or employees of the proposed development at cost, quality and services levels equal to or greater than the minimum set for the core park system in the THPRD Comprehensive Master Plan. Improvements within provided park facilities shall be deemed similar if at least two of the following are provided: a tennis court, a basketball court, a swimming pool, or a children’s play structure; and at least one of the following is also provided: a baseball/softball field, a soccer field, or a community/recreation center. Recreation services shall be deemed similar if provided for future residents or employees of the proposed development at cost, quality and service levels equal to or greater than the minimum set for such services in the THPRD Comprehensive Master Plan and is consistent with applicable provisions within an adopted Community Plan. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
4. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a THPRD annexation waiver shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
APPLICATIONS
THPRD Annexation Waiver
Chapter 40 AP - 183 05/15/2015
40.93.15.1.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a THPRD annexation waiver application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.

APPLICATIONS
Variance
Chapter 40 AP - 184 12/02/2016
40.95. VARIANCE
40.95.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Variance application is to provide for the consideration of varying from the applicable provisions of the Development Code where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances, the literal interpretation of these provisions would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship without a corresponding public benefit. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
40.95.10. Applicability.
A Variance application may only be requested for those proposals that request a variance of more than fifty percent (50%) from the numerical Site Development Requirements contained in Chapter 20 (Land Uses), Section 60.11 (Food Cart Pod Regulations), or any numerical requirements contained in Section 60.40. (Sign Regulations) and Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities), excluding Section 60.55.30. [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4697; December 2016]
40.95.15. Application.
There is a single Variance application which is subject to the following requirements.
1. Variance.
A. Threshold. An application for Variance shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. A change of more than fifty percent (50%) to the numerical standards specified in the Site Development Requirements contained in Chapter 20 (Land Uses). This threshold does not apply where credits have been earned for height increase through Habitat Friendly Development Practices, as described in Sections 60.12.40.4., .5., .6., and .7.
2. Any change from the numerical requirements contained in Section 60.40. (Sign Regulations).
3. Excluding Section 60.55.30., any change from the numerical requirements contained in Section 60.55. (Transportation Facilities).
APPLICATIONS
Variance
Chapter 40 AP - 185 09/11/2015
40.95.15.1.C
4. A change of more than fifty percent (50%) from the numerical Food Cart Pod standards specified in Section 60.11.10 and 60.11.15 of this Code. [ORD 4662; September 2015]
[ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Variance. The decision making authority shall be the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Variance application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied: [ORD 4473; March 2008]
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Variance application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district.
4. Strict interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of the Development Code. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute financial hardship or inconvenience.
APPLICATIONS
Variance
Chapter 40 AP - 186 09/11/2015
40.95.15.1.C.
6. If more than one (1) variance is being requested, the cumulative effect of the variances result in a project which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zone.
7. Any variance granted shall be the minimum variance that will make possible a reasonable use of land, building, and structures.
8. For a proposal for a variance from sign regulations, no variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that there are special circumstances involving size, shape, topography, location or surroundings attached to the property referred to in the application, which do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district, and that the granting of the variance will not result in material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity and not be detrimental to the public safety and welfare. Variances shall not be granted merely for the convenience of the applicant or for the convenience of regional or national businesses which wish to use a standard sign.
9. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal.
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
11. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
12. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
APPLICATIONS
Variance
Chapter 40 AP - 187 09/11/2015
40.95.15.1.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Variance shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Variance application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Variance application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. When considering a Variance application to the numerical sign regulations in Section 60.40. (Sign Regulations), the decision making authority shall review all of the existing or proposed signs for the development. The decision making authority may also impose other conditions of approval to require:
1. Removal or alteration of conforming or nonconforming signs to achieve compliance with the standards contained in Section 60.40. (Sign Regulations).
2. Removal or alteration of conforming or nonconforming signs in order to establish a consistent sign design throughout the development.
3. Sign permit applications for signs erected without permits or removal of such illegal signs.
G. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
H. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
I. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 188 01/03/2017
40.96. WIRELESS FACILITY [ORD 4332; January 2005]
40.96.05. Purpose.
The purpose of the wireless facility application is to ensure the review and implementation of the regulations for the construction and use of wireless communication facilities in the City of Beaverton. The section is consistent with FCC Declaratory Rulings and current federal laws, and is intended to minimize potential adverse visual, aesthetic, and safety impacts of wireless communication facilities on residential neighborhoods, and on the community as a whole by establishing review standards for the use, placement, and design of wireless communication facilities. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [ORD 4595; February 2013]
40.96.10. Applicability.
The development, installation, and modification of wireless facilities listed in Chapter 20 (Land Uses) for each zoning district shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
40.96.15. Application.
There are three (3) Wireless Facility applications which are as follows: Wireless Facility One, Wireless Facility Two, and Wireless Facility Three.
1. Wireless Facility One.
A. Threshold. An application for Wireless Facility One shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. In any zoning district, replacement of transmission equipment (antennas) or a collocation of a new wireless communication facility on an existing tower that does not constitute a “substantial increase” in size of the tower and is an “eligible facilities request” as defined in Chapter 90 (Definitions).
2. In any zoning district, attachment of a new wireless communication facility to existing or new buildings or structures that are not exclusively used for single-family residential or multi-family residential purposes, and that utilize stealth design.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 189 01/03/2017
40.96.15.1.A.
3. In any zoning district, attachment of wireless communications facilities to existing structures, tower structures or pole structures that constitute an “eligible facilities request” as defined in Chapter 90 (Definitions) under federal law. Not permitted on single-family dwellings.
4. In industrial, multiple use, or commercial zoning districts, direct-to-home satellite service having antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter.
5. In industrial, multiple use, or commercial zoning districts, installation of up to and including two (2) ground or building roof-mounted satellite antennas greater than two meters in size.
6. In any zoning district, installation of one (1) replacement tower on a location containing an existing tower supporting one (1) carrier for the purpose of providing collocation opportunity consistent with previous land use approvals.
7. In any zoning district, attachment of antennas to tower structures or pole structures other than those used for cellular phone service, street lights or traffic signals.
8. In any zoning district, installation of new ground or roof equipment to an existing wireless communication facility or base station.
[ORD 4595; February 2013]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Wireless Facility One. The decision making authority is the Director.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Wireless Facility One application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Wireless Facility One application.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 190 01/03/2017
40.96.15.1.C.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
4. The proposal meets all applicable Site Development Requirements of Sections 20.05., 20.10., 20.15., and 20.20. of the Development Code unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance application which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. The proposal complies with all applicable provisions in Chapter 60 (Special Regulations).
6. The proposal is an “eligible facilities request” that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. [ORD 4595; February 2013]
7. The proposal does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the WCF process to comply with federal, state and local laws. [ORD 4595; February 2013]
8. The proposal is not on or within any right-of-way. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
9. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 191 01/03/2017
40.96.15.1.D
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Wireless Facility One shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Wireless Facility One application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, by Section 60.70.50 (Required Studies and Information) and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.40.96.15.1.E
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Wireless Facility One application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.60.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 192 01/03/2017
40.96.15.2
2. Wireless Facility Two.
A. Threshold. An application for Wireless Facility Two shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. In all industrial zoning districts, construction of a new wireless communication facility tower. proposed to be set back at least fifty (50) feet from abutting residential or multiple use zoning districts.
2. In residential zoning districts, direct-to-homes satellite service having antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter.
3. In industrial zoning districts, attachment of a wireless communication facility to an existing or new building or structure, other than an existing tower or base station, not utilizing stealth design.
4. In industrial, multiple use, or commercial zoning districts, installation of three (3) and up to five (5) ground or building roof-mounted satellite antennas greater than two (2) meters in size.
5. In any zoning district, the collocation of a new wireless communication facility on an existing tower which the size of the tower constitutes as a “substantial increase” as defined in Chapter 90 of this Code
6. In any zoning district, installation of wireless communication facilities on streetlights or utility poles within the right-of-way of designated Freeways and Arterial streets. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 2 procedure, as described in Section 50.40. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Wireless Facility Two. The decision making authority is the Director.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 193 01/03/2017
40.96.15.2.C
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Wireless Facility Two application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Wireless Facility Two application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The size, dimensions, configuration, and topography of the site and natural and man-made features on the site can reasonably accommodate the proposal.
4. The proposal will not obstruct any existing or approved vehicular, pedestrian, or bicycle connection identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
5. That the development has been designed to, where possible, incorporate and preserve existing trees and vegetation of significant size and species.
6. That grading of the site shall take place with particular attention to minimizing the possible adverse effect of grading on the natural vegetation and physical appearance of the site.
7. That the quality, location, size and aesthetic design of walls, fences, berms, hedges, screen planting and landscape areas have minimal adverse effect on existing or approved abutting land uses.
8. All critical facilities and services related to the development have, or can be improved to have, adequate capacity to serve the proposal at the time of its completion.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 194 01/03/2017
40.96.15.2.C.
9. The proposal is consistent with all applicable Site Development Requirements of Sections 20.05., 20.10., 20.15., and 20.20. of the Development Code unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
11. The proposal does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals through the WCF process to comply with federal laws. [ORD 4595; February 2013
12. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
13. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Wireless Facility Two shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Wireless Facility Two application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, by Section 60.70.50 (Required Studies and Information) and by Section 50.25 (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 195 01/03/2017
40.96.15.2.E
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Wireless Facility Two application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 196 01/03/2017
40.96.15.3
3. Wireless Facility Three.
A. Threshold. An application for Wireless Facility Three shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. In all zoning districts, except industrial, construction of a wireless communication facility tower.
2. In Industrial zoning districts, construction of a wireless communication facility tower proposed to be set back less than fifty (50) feet from abutting residential, or multiple use zoning districts.
3. In any zoning districts except Industrial, attachment of a new wireless communication facility to an existing or new building or structure that does not utilize stealth design.
4. In industrial, multiple use, or commercial zoning districts, more than five (5) satellite antennas greater than two (2) meters in diameter on one (1) lot.
5. In any zoning district, installation of wireless communication facilities on streetlights or utility poles within or adjacent to the right-of-way of designated Collector Streets, Neighborhood Route Streets or Local Streets. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Wireless Facility Three. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Wireless Facility Three application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Wireless Facility Three application.
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 197 01/03/2017
40.96.15.3.C.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. In relationship to the existing surroundings and future allowed uses, the location, size, shape, height, spatial and visual arrangement of the use and structure is compatible.
4. The size, dimensions, configuration, and topography of the site and natural and man-made features on the site can reasonably accommodate the proposal.
5. The proposal will not obstruct any existing or approved vehicular, pedestrian, or bicycle connection identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
6. That the development has been designed to, where possible, incorporate and preserve existing trees and vegetation of significant size and species.
7. That grading of the site shall take place with particular attention to minimizing the possible adverse effect of grading on the natural vegetation and physical appearance of the site.
8. That the quality, location, size and aesthetic design of walls, fences, berms, hedges, screen planting and landscape areas have minimal adverse effect on existing or approved abutting land uses.
9. All critical facilities and services related to the development have, or can be improved to have, adequate capacity to serve the proposal at the time of its completion.
10. The proposal is consistent with all applicable Site Development Requirements of Sections 20.05., 20.10., 20.15., and 20.20. of the Development Code unless the applicable provisions are subject to an Adjustment, Planned Unit Development, or Variance which shall be already approved or considered concurrently with the subject proposal. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Wireless Facility
Chapter 40 AP - 198 01/03/2017
40.96.15.3.C.
11. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) and that all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 60 (Special Requirements) are provided or can be provided in rough proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
12. The proposal does not conflict with any existing City approval, except the City may modify prior approvals though the WCF process to comply with federal, laws. [ORD 4595; February 2013]
13. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
14. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Wireless Facility Three shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, on a form provided by the Director and shall be filed with the Director. The Wireless Facility Three application shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, by Section 60.70.50 (Required Studies and Information) and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness) and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Conditions of Approval. The decision making authority may impose conditions on the approval of a Wireless Facility Three application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria.
F. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
G. Expiration of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.90.
H. Extension of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.93.

APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 199 01/01/2005
40.97. ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
40.97.05. Purpose.
The purpose of a Zoning Map Amendment application is to provide for the consideration of legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to the zoning map. Legislative amendments to the zoning map are amendments of generally large size, diversity of ownership or of interest to a large geographic area. Quasi-judicial amendments to the zoning map are amendments that are generally small in size, single ownership or affect only a relatively small geographic area. Annexation related amendments to the zoning map are those amendments, whether legislative or quasi-judicial, which are associated with land being annexed into the City. It is recognized that such amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs, and desires. This Section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein.
40.97.10. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to a change of the zoning designation for parcels of land within the City.
40.97.15. Application.
There are four (4) Zoning Map Amendment applications which are as follows: Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment, Legislative Zoning Map Amendment, Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment and Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment. The Director shall determine if a zone change is quasi-judicial or legislative. For annexation related zone change applications, the Director shall determine if the applications are discretionary or non-discretionary.
1. Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment.
A. Threshold. An application for Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The change of zoning designation for a specific property or limited number of specific properties.
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 200 06/01/2012
40.97.15.1.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal conforms with applicable policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
[ORD 4462; January 2008]
4. All critical facilities and services are available or can be made available to an adequate capacity to serve the site and uses allowed by the proposed zoning designation.
5. Essential facilities and services are available or can be made available to serve the site and uses allowed by the proposed zoning designation.
6. The proposal is or can be made to be consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses).
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 201 06/01/2012
40.97.15.1.C.
7. The proposal shall include a Traffic Impact Analysis that meets the requirements of Section 60.55.20. The analysis shall demonstrate that development allowed under the proposed zoning can meet the requirements of Sections 60.55.10.1, 60.55.10.2, 60.55.10.3, and 60.55.10.7. The analysis shall identify the traffic impacts from the range of uses allowed under the proposed zoning and demonstrate that these impacts can be reasonably mitigated at the time of development. [ORD 4302; May 2004]
8. As an alternative to Section 40.97.15.1.C.7, the applicant may provide evidence that the potential traffic impacts from development under the proposed zoning are no greater than potential impacts from development under existing zoning. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
9. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
10. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4404; October 2006]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment to the City’s zoning map shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or the owner’s authorized agent, the City Council, Mayor, or their designee on a form provided by the Director. All Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment applications shall be filed with the Director and shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness), and any other information identified through a Pre-Application Conference.
E. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.

APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 202 12/02/2012
40.97.15.
2. Legislative Zoning Map Amendment.
A. Threshold. An application for Legislative Zoning Map Amendment shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The change of zoning designation for a large number of properties.
B. Procedure Type. The Type 4 procedure, as described in Section 50.50. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Legislative Zoning Map Amendment. The decision making authority is the City Council. [ORD 4697; December 2016]
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Legislative Zoning Map Amendment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Legislative Zoning Map Amendment application.
2. The proposal conforms with applicable policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
3. All critical facilities and services are available or can be made available to an adequate capacity to serve the site and uses allowed by the proposed zoning designation.
4. Essential facilities and services are available or can be made available to serve the site and uses allowed by the proposed zoning designation.
5. The proposal is or can be made to be consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses).
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 203 06/01/2012
40.97.15.2.C.
6. The proposal contains all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code.
7. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
[ORD 4659; June 2015]
D. Submission Requirements. An application for Legislative Zoning Map Amendment to the City’s zoning map may only be initiated by the City Council, Mayor, or their designee. All Legislative Zoning Map Amendment applications shall be filed with the Director and shall be accompanied by the information required by the application form, and by Section 50.25. (Application Completeness).
E. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.75.
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 204 03/22/2019
40.97.15.
3. Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment.
A. Threshold. An application for Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment shall be required when one or more of the following thresholds apply:
1. The change of zoning to a City zoning designation as a result of annexation of land into the City.
2. Table 1 in Section 1.5.2. in the Comprehensive Plan provides a list of corresponding county - city zoning designations and is specific as to the City zoning designation to be applied to the parcel being annexed. In cases where zoning of an annexed parcel is determined by reference to this table, the decision as to which zone shall be applied does not allow for discretion. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 1 procedure, as described in Section 50.35. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment to the City’s zoning map. The decision making authority is the City Council.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. The proposal includes all applicable application submittal requirements as specified in Section 50.25.1. of the Development Code. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 205 03/22/2019
40.97.15.3.C.
4. The proposed zoning designation is consistent with the corresponding County zoning as specified within Table 1 in Section 1.5.2. within the city’s Comprehensive Plan. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
5. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, have been submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment may be initiated by the City pursuant to Section 10.40. after:
1. The adoption of a resolution by the City Council directing initiation of an annexation process for the subject property;
2. The submittal of a valid annexation petition; or
3. The submittal of an executed annexation agreement. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4462; January 2008]
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 206 03/22/2019
40.97.15.
4. Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment.
A. Threshold. An application for Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment shall be required when the following threshold applies:
1. The change of zoning to a City zoning designation as a result of annexation of land into the City consistent with 10.40.3.B. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
B. Procedure Type. The Type 3 procedure, as described in Section 50.45. of this Code, shall apply to an application for Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment to the City’s zoning map. The decision making authority is the Planning Commission.
C. Approval Criteria. In order to approve a Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment application.
2. All City application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision making authority have been submitted.
3. In applying the most appropriate zoning, the decision-making authority shall use the relevant criteria below. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
a. If the property is or properties are subject to a Beaverton-approved Community Plan, Neighborhood Plan, or Concept Plan wherein the zoning is specified, the decision-making authority shall apply the specified zoning district or districts.
b. If the Washington County designation is Institutional, the decision-making authority shall at
APPLICATIONS
Zoning Map Amendment
Chapter 40 AP - 207 03/22/2019
40.97.15.4.C.
its discretion consider one or more of the following criteria in applying a Beaverton zoning district:
i. Existing or planned use of the property.
ii. Zoning allowed in the most appropriate Beaverton Comprehensive Plan designation.
ii. Zoning on adjacent properties.
iv. Uses on adjacent properties.
c. If neither Section 40.97.15.C.3. a. nor b. apply, the decision-making authority shall consider the following criteria:
i. City zoning districts allowed by the City Comprehensive Plan designation to be applied to the property or properties.
ii. How closely the proposed City zone corresponds to the County designation in allowed uses; minimum and/or maximum density; and/or floor-area ratio minimum and/or maximums.
iii. Other relevant County and City zone/designation purpose statements or site development standards as determined by the decision-making body.
4. Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further City approval, shall be submitted to the City in the proper sequence.
D. Submission Requirements. An application for a Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment shall be made by the submittal of a valid annexation petition or an executed annexation agreement. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
E. Appeal of a Decision. Refer to Section 50.70.
PROCEDURES
Initiation of an Application
Chapter 50 PR - 1 01/15/2009
CHAPTER 50 PROCEDURES
[ORD 4702; January 2017]
50.05. Initiation of an Application.
1. An application subject to a Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 procedure may be filed by:
A. The owner or the contract purchaser of the subject property, or any person authorized in writing to act as agent of the owner or contract purchaser.
B. The City Council, Mayor, or Director, as to property owned by the City, including public right of way and easements, or which the City intends to acquire.
C. Public agencies that own the property or have passed a resolution declaring that they intend to exercise their statutory authority to condemn the property.
2. A Text Amendment application subject to a Type 4 procedure may be filed by an interested person, City Council, Mayor, or Director.
3. A Zoning Map Amendment application subject to a Type 1 or Type 3 procedure may be filed by the owner or the contract purchaser of the subject property, City Council, Mayor, or Director. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
4. A Zoning Map Amendment application subject to a Type 4 procedure may be filed only by the City Council, Mayor, or Director. [ORD 4498; January 2009]
PROCEDURES
Withdrawal of an Application
Chapter 50 PR - 2 06/01/2012
50.10. Withdrawal of an Application.
1. An applicant may withdraw an application before the application is deemed complete.
2. An applicant may withdraw an application previously deemed complete at any time prior to adoption of a final City decision if the Director determines that:
A. The owners or contract purchasers or the interest holders in the property consent in writing to withdraw the application.
B. No violation of this Code has been identified on the subject property and processing of the application would not correct the identified violation.
3. The Director may withdraw any City initiated application at any time.
4. If an application is withdrawn after public notice has been mailed, the Director shall send written notice stating the application has been withdrawn to all persons to whom notice of the application or hearing has been sent. This provision shall not apply to legislative applications that require Citywide mailed notice.
5. Once an application has been withdrawn, the application fees shall be refunded by the following formula:
A. Application withdrawn prior to completeness review: 85%. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Application withdrawn prior to publication or distribution of public notice: 50%.
C. Application withdrawn after publication or distribution of public notice: 0%.
6. For withdrawal of appeals, refer to Section 50.89. of this Code.
PROCEDURES
Classification of Applications
Chapter 50 PR - 3 02/12/2015
50.15. Classification of Applications.
1. An application shall be subject to the procedure type specified in the Code, if any. If the Code does not specify a procedure type for a given application and another procedure is not required by law, the Director shall determine the appropriate procedure based on the following guidelines. Where two or more procedure types could be applied to a particular application, the selected procedure will be the type providing the broadest notice and opportunity to participate.
A. A Type 1 procedure typically involves an application that is subject to non-discretionary criteria or criteria that require the exercise of professional judgment only about technical issues.
B. A Type 2 procedure typically involves an application that is subject to criteria that require the exercise of limited discretion about non-technical issues and about which there may be limited public interest.
C. A Type 3 procedure typically involves an application that is subject to criteria that require the exercise of substantial discretion and about which there may be broad public interest, although the application applies to a limited number of land owners and properties.
D. A Type 4 procedure typically involves the adoption, implementation or amendment of policy or law by ordinance. The subject of a Type 4 procedure generally applies to a relatively large geographic area containing many property owners.
2. An application identified as a Type 3 application which is submitted for any parcel of land located in the area of the City south of Walker Road, west of Murray Boulevard, north of Jenkins Road, and east of 158th Avenue shall be processed as a Type 2 application subject to Section 50.40 of this Code. The exception to this provision is that any Variance application shall continue to be processed as a Type 3 application subject to Section 50.45 of this Code. This provision shall take precedence over any conflicting application type designation contained in Chapter 40 of this Code. [ORD 4649; Feb 2015]
PROCEDURES
Classification of Applications
Chapter 50 PR - 4 06/01/2012
50.15.
3. When an applicant submits more than one complete application for a given proposal, where each application addresses a separate set of code requirements and the applications are subject to different procedure types, all of the applications are subject to the procedure type of the application which requires the broadest notice and opportunity to participate. For example, a Type 2 application will be consolidated with a Type 3 application for the same proposal on the same site, in which case, the Type 2 application will be reviewed by the decision making authority of the Type 3 application. The decision making authority’s action on the Type 2 application will be based on the approval criteria governing the Type 2 application. An appeal of the decision will be processed according to the provisions of Section 50.70. of this Code.
In the event that the completed applications involve applications where the decision making authority is a combination of the Director and Planning Commission, the decision making authority will be the Planning Commission. [ORD 4532; April 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Notwithstanding any other provision and at no cost to the applicant, the Director may choose to combine multiple applications for the same development as a way to increase the efficiency of development review. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
4. Notwithstanding the Director’s determination of procedure type, Type 1, 2, or 3 but not Type 4, an applicant may choose to have an application at the time of submittal be subject to a procedure type requiring broader notice and opportunity to participate provided the applicant pays the appropriate fee for the selected procedure type and the Director determines that statutory timelines for reaching a final decision can be satisfied.
5. Notwithstanding any other provision, and, at no additional cost to the applicant, the Director may choose to process a Type 2 application under the Type 3 procedure in order to provide greater notice and opportunity to participate than would otherwise be required, or in order to comply with the time requirements for reviewing development applications pursuant to ORS 227.178. The decision making authority’s action on the Type 2 application will be based on the approval criteria governing the Type 2 application.
PROCEDURES
Pre-Application Conference
Chapter 50 PR - 5 01/03/2017
50.20. Pre-Application Conference.
1. With the exception of City initiated or Wireless Facility applications, a pre-application conference shall be required for all proposals which require Type 2, Type 3, or Type 4 applications. An applicant may choose to forgo the required pre-application conference for a Type 2 application upon completion of a form for that purpose provided by the Director. A pre-application conference is optional for an applicant for proposals which require only Type 1 applications. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
2. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to acquaint the City and outside agencies and service providers with a potential application, and to acquaint the applicant with the requirements of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and other relevant criteria and procedures. Any comments or commitments made by any member of City Staff during this pre-application conference are only preliminary in nature. It is not intended to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues, and the conference does not bind or preclude the City from enforcing all applicable regulations or from applying regulations in a manner differently than may have been indicated in the pre-application conference. Formal land use comments cannot be made by staff until after a land use application is submitted and adjacent and/or nearby property owners and reviewing agencies have had an opportunity to respond. [ORD 4702; January 2017]
3. The City will schedule and conduct the pre-application conference within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt of a request for a pre-application conference. Notwithstanding application completeness requirements, if a required pre-application conference is not conducted within the twenty-one day time period due to no fault of the applicant, the applicant may elect to proceed with an application without a pre-application conference.
4. To initiate the pre-application conference, an applicant shall submit a completed form provided by the Director for that purpose, the relevant fee, and copies of all information required by the relevant Section of the Code or specified in writing by the Director.
The Director shall coordinate the involvement of City staff responsible for planning, development review, roads, drainage, and other subjects, as appropriate, in the pre-application review process. The Director shall also invite outside agencies and service providers, as appropriate, to participate in the pre-application conference.
PROCEDURES
Pre-Application Conference
Chapter 50 PR - 6 01/03/2017
50.20.5
5. Within approximately fourteen (14) calendar days after a pre-application conference, the Director shall mail to the applicant, or the applicant’s agent, a written summary of the conference. The Director shall mail a copy of the summary to any other person who requests one and pays the City’s mailing and photocopying costs. The purpose of the written summary is to provide a preliminary assessment of a proposal and is not to be construed as a final recommendation or decision by the City or by any other outside agency or service provider on the merits of the proposal. The pre-application conference written summary shall:
A. Summarize the contemplated use and relevant characteristics of the proposal.
B. Identify necessary application submittal requirements.
C. Identify the relevant approval criteria and development regulations, with a disclaimer that the approval criteria and development regulations in effect at the time an application is received will control and that such approval criteria and development regulations may change.
D. Identify specific additional information that is needed to respond to the relevant criteria and development regulations or is recommended to respond to other issues.
E. Identify applicable application fees, with a disclaimer that fees are subject to change and that the fees in effect at the time a complete application is received will control.
F. Identify information that may be relevant to the proposal and that may be in the possession of the City or other agencies of which the City is aware, such as:
1. Comprehensive Plan map designation and zoning on and adjacent to the property, which is the subject of the pre-application conference.
2. Physical development limitations, such as steep or unstable slopes, wetlands, water bodies, or sensitive resource areas that exist on and in the vicinity of the subject property.
PROCEDURES
Pre-Application Conference
Chapter 50 PR - 7 01/03/2017
50.20.5.6
3. Other applications of which the City is aware that have been approved or are pending for the property and in the vicinity of the property that may affect or be affected by a proposal.
6. If a complete application relating to a proposed development action that was the subject of a pre-application conference has not been submitted within one year of the conference, the applicant shall schedule a current pre-application conference.
PROCEDURES
Application Completeness
Chapter 50 PR - 8 10/18/2006
50.25. Application Completeness.
1. A complete application is one which contains the information required by the Director to address the relevant criteria, development requirements, and procedures of this Code. Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment and Discretionary Annexation Zoning Map Amendment applications processed by the City shall be determined to be complete upon submittal of a valid annexation petition or executed annexation agreement. All other complete application shall consist of the requisite number of copies of the following: [ORD 4265; October 2003]
A. A completed original application form provided by the Director and application checklist provided by the Director, signed by:
1. The applicant.
2. If the applicant is not the owner, the owner of the property, or the authorized agent of the property owner. If an authorized agent, a written statement made by the owner of the property shall be submitted stating that the agent is authorized to sign on the owner’s behalf.
3. If the applicant is exercising its statutory authority to condemn property, the representative of the public agency accompanied by written documentation of such condemnation or intent to condemn the property.
4. Property owner signatures are not required for City initiated Type 4 Text Amendment applications and City initiated Type 1, Type 3, and Type 4 Zoning Map Amendments. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
PROCEDURES
Application Completeness
Chapter 50 PR - 9 06/01/2012
50.25.1
B. A written statement, supported by substantial evidence, that identifies the criteria and development regulations considered relevant to the application, states the facts alleged to show that the application complies with applicable criteria and development regulations, and explains why the application should be approved based on the criteria and development regulations and facts set forth in the application. In addition to addressing applicable criteria and development regulations relevant to the application type, the written statement shall address all the applicable technical criteria specified in Section 40.03. (Facilities Review Committee) of the Code. [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4404; October 2006] [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. The Director may require an applicant to submit information in addition to that required on the form to aid in deciding whether an application satisfies applicable criteria and development regulations. The Director shall attempt to identify additional necessary information in the pre-application conference.
D. The information required by Section 50.30.4. regarding Neighborhood Meeting requirements, if applicable.
E. For a Type 2, Type 3, or Type 4 application, a copy of the pre-application conference summary.
F. Documentation from Clean Water Services stating that water quality will not be adversely affected by the proposal.
G. The applicable fee in effect at the date of submittal.
2. To enable the Director to determine whether an application is complete, an applicant shall submit the requisite number of copies, as determined by the Director.
3. The Director may defer collection of application fees during review of the application for completeness; provided, an application shall not be deemed complete until the City has received all required fees.
PROCEDURES
Application Completeness
Chapter 50 PR - 10 08/20/2008
50.25.
4. The Director shall advise the applicant in writing whether an application is complete by sending a completeness notice by first class mail within thirty (30) calendar days after the City receives an application. To comply with this completeness notice requirement, the completeness notice must be postmarked by the thirtieth day.
A. If an application is incomplete, the completeness notice shall list what information is missing.
B. The completeness notice shall include a form, designed to be returned to the Director by the applicant indicating whether or not the applicant intends to amend or supplement the application, and instructing the applicant to mail, facsimile, or
deliver the form or written equivalent to the Director so that the Director receives it before the thirty (30) calendar day completeness review period expires.
5. Incompleteness shall be based solely on failure to pay required fees, failure to address the relevant criteria or development regulations, or failure to supply required information and shall not be based on differences of opinion as to quality or accuracy. Determination that an application is complete indicates only that the application is ready for review on its merits, not that the City will make a favorable decision on the application.
6. The Director may waive application requirements that in the Director’s opinion are not necessary to show an application complies with relevant criteria and development regulations and may modify application requirements based on the nature of the proposed application, development, site, or other factors. The City shall specifically identify any such waiver in the pre-application conference written summary or other written correspondence.
PROCEDURES
Application Completeness
Chapter 50 PR - 11 01/15/2009
50.25.
7. The application will be deemed complete for the purpose of this section upon receipt by the Community Development Department of:
a. All the missing information;
b. Some of the missing information and written notice from the applicant that no other information will be provided; or
c. Written notice from the applicant that none of the missing information will be provided.
[ORD 4282; February 2004]
8. Pursuant to ORS 227.178, the City will reach a final decision on an application within 120 calendar days from the date that the application was determined to be complete or deemed complete unless the applicant agrees to extend the 120 calendar day time line pursuant to subsection 9 or unless State law provides otherwise. [ORD 4282; February 2004] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
9. The 120 calendar day time line specified in Section 50.25.8. may be extended at the written request of the applicant. The total of all extensions may not to exceed 240 calendar days from the date the application was deemed complete. [ORD 4282; February 2004]
10. The applicant may amend the application up to and including fourteen (14) calendar days after the application has been deemed complete. Amendments to an application submitted more than fourteen (14) calendar days after the application is deemed complete may be determined by the Director to be so substantial that the application should be treated as having been refiled. In such a case, the Director shall provide the applicant with the following options: provide the City with a waiver of the 120-day timeframe set forth in ORS 227.178 of a minimum of fourteen (14) calendar days from the date the amendment was submitted; treat the application as having been refiled as of the date the amendment was submitted; or, decide the application on the basis of the applicant’s materials without the amendment.
11. For any application which has been on file with the City for more than 180 calendar days and the applicant has not met the obligations of Section 50.25.7., the application will be deemed withdrawn. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
PROCEDURES
Neighborhood Review Meeting
Chapter 50 PR - 12 06/01/2012
50.30. Neighborhood Review Meeting.
1. The purpose of the Neighborhood Review Meeting is to allow neighbors, representatives from the Neighborhood Association Committee (hereinafter referred to as NAC), and interested persons an opportunity to become familiar with the proposal and to identify any associated issues. The Neighborhood Review Meeting is intended to assist in producing applications that are responsive to neighborhood concerns, and to reduce the likelihood of delays and appeals. The City expects an applicant to take into consideration the reasonable concerns and recommendations of the neighborhood when preparing an application. The City expects the neighbors and NAC to work with the applicant to provide reasonable concerns and recommendations.
2. Prior to submittal of an application subject to a Type 3 procedure, the applicant shall provide an opportunity to meet with neighboring property owners, residents and businesses (hereinafter collectively referred to as “neighbors”) as well as representatives from the NAC within whose boundaries the site is located or within the notice radius to review the proposal. The applicant shall not be required to hold more than one Neighborhood Review Meeting provided such meeting is held within six months prior to submitting an application for one specific site. This requirement does not apply to applications required by Design Review Three threshold number 7 (Section 40.20.15.3.A.7.) or applications for Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.15.1.), Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.15.4.). [ORD 4332; January 2005] [ORD 4483; June 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Procedures.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the applicant shall select the meeting time and place according to the preference indicated by the relevant NAC. Preference should be given to a regularly scheduled meeting time of the NAC in which the project is located. The starting time selected shall be limited to a weekday evening after 6:00 p.m. or a weekend at any reasonable time and shall not occur on a National holiday. The meeting shall be held at a location open to the public and in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act within the boundaries of the NAC or at a similar location within the City of Beaverton.
PROCEDURES
Neighborhood Review Meeting
Chapter 50 PR - 13 10/20/2005
50.30.3.A.
A sign at least 22” x 28” in size with minimum 2” lettering shall be placed at the main entrance of the building where the meeting will take place at least one hour prior to the meeting. Such sign will announce the meeting, that the meeting is open to the public, and that interested persons are invited to attend. This sign shall be removed upon conclusion of the meeting by the applicant.
B. The applicant shall send by regular mail a written notice announcing the Neighborhood Review Meeting to: the Director, property owners within 500 feet of the property involved in the anticipated application and to representatives of all NACs whose boundaries are within 500 feet of the subject property. The notice shall include the date, time and location of the meeting and briefly discuss the nature and location of the proposal. The notice shall be mailed not less than 20 calendar days prior to the meeting date. The Director shall maintain on file in the Community Development Department, current addresses of NAC Officers and/or representatives and related NAC information, including regularly scheduled or monthly meeting dates, times and locations.
The mailing list shall be based on the most recent property tax assessment rolls of the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation. At the request of the applicant, and upon payment of the applicable fee, the City will provide the required mailing list.
C. Not less than 20 calendar days prior to the Neighborhood Review Meeting, the applicant shall post a notice on the property which is subject of the proposed application. The notice shall be posted within 50 feet of an adjoining public right-of-way in a manner that can be read from the right-of-way. The notice shall state that the site may be subject to a proposed development and shall set forth the name of the applicant and a telephone number where the applicant can be reached for additional information. The site shall remain posted until the conclusion of the Neighborhood Review Meeting. The applicant may purchase a second sign from the City or create a sign to post at the Neighborhood Review Meeting location. [ORD 4312; July 2004]
Standard signs are available from the City upon payment of a fee. The City will not be responsible for posting of any signs.
PROCEDURES
Neighborhood Review Meeting
Chapter 50 PR - 14 01/10/2008
50.30.3.
D. At the Neighborhood Review Meeting, the applicant shall describe the proposed application to persons in attendance. The attendees may identify any issues that they believe should be addressed in the proposed application and recommend that those issues be submitted for City consideration and analysis.
[ORD 4462; January 2008]
E. At the Neighborhood Review Meeting, the applicant shall take notes of the discussion on the proposed application. After the meeting and before submitting an application to the City, the applicant shall send a copy of the meeting notes to the Chairperson of the NAC in which the project is to be located by certified mail.
4. To comply with this section, an applicant shall submit the following information with the application:
A. A copy of the notice sent to surrounding property owners and the NAC Representatives as described in Section 50.30.3.B.
B. A copy of the mailing list used to send out meeting notices as described in Section 50.30.3.B.
C. A written statement containing the information posted on the property as described in Section 50.30.3.C.
D. An affidavit of mailing and posting notices as described in Sections 50.30.3.A through C.
E. Copies of written materials and 8.5” x 11” size plans presented at the Neighborhood Review Meeting.
F. Notes of the meeting, including the meeting date, time, and location, the name and address of those attending, and a summary of oral and written comments received.
G. A certified mail receipt indicating mailing of the meeting notes to the Chairperson of the NAC.
PROCEDURES
Neighborhood Review Meeting
Chapter 50 PR - 15 01/10/2008
50.30.4.
H. If responses to the meeting notice were not received by the applicant and no one attended the Neighborhood Review Meeting or persons in attendance made no comments, the applicant shall submit evidence as indicated above, with the notes reflecting the absence of comment, attendance, or both.
5. Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the Neighborhood Review Meeting proceedings.
PROCEDURES
Type 1
Chapter 50 PR - 16 02/14/2013
50.35. Type 1.
1. Except for Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, the decision making authority for all Type 1 applications shall be the Director. For Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, the decision making authority shall be the City Council.
2. Except for Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, the decision making authority shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application subject to a Type 1 procedure within approximately twenty eight (28) calendar days after the date the application was deemed or determined to be complete. In the case of a Type 1 application for a site that is identified on the Local Wetland Inventory (LWI), the decision shall be made within forty (40) calendar days. In either case, an applicant may request in writing a continuance of the time for decision by the Director, not to exceed a total of 180 calendar days from the date the application was deemed or determined to be complete. The decision making authority shall issue a decision prior to the conclusion of the continuance of time. The decision making authority may consider new evidence the applicant introduces with or after such request for continuance. [ORD 4312; July 2004]
3. The written notice of decision for Type 1 applications, except for Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, shall be mailed to the applicant and include the following information:
A. A brief summary of the proposal and the application which is the subject of the decision, the decision and any conditions of approval.
B. A description of the site reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location including site address, if available, map and tax lot number, site zoning, and name of the NAC in which the proposal is located.
C. A statement of the facts upon which the decision making authority relied to determine whether the application satisfied or failed to satisfy each applicable approval criterion.
D. The decision to approve or deny the application, and, if approved, any conditions of approval necessary to ensure compliance with the applicable criteria.
PROCEDURES
Type 1
Chapter 50 PR - 17 02/14/2013
50.35.3.
E. A statement that the decision is final, unless appealed as provided in Section 50.60. within twelve (12) calendar days after the date of the notice or may be modified pursuant to Section 50.95. The notice shall state in boldface type the date and time by which an appeal must be filed. The statement shall describe the requirements for filing an appeal of the decision.
F. A statement that the complete case file, including findings, conclusions and conditions of approval, if any, is available for review. The notice shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact about reviewing the case file.
4. If an applicant does not intend to appeal the decision, the applicant may complete a form stating such intention. Upon submittal of said form to the City, the decision shall be final and no further appeal period shall be necessary.
5. In the case of Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, if the Council intends to adopt an ordinance to change a zoning designation, the City Attorney shall prepare same. Ordinances shall thereafter be adopted pursuant to the City Charter. The City Council shall adopt or approve written findings which demonstrate that the approval complies with applicable approval criteria.
6. In the case of Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, the written notice of decision shall be mailed to the property owner and include the following: [ORD 4759; March 2019]
A. A statement that no discretion was exercised in the assignment of the zoning district designation and that the assigned zoning district designation is consistent with Table 1, Section 1.5.2 of the Comprehensive Plan. It shall also state that this section constitutes a methodology adopted pursuant to the Washington County - Beaverton Urban Planning Area Agreement (UPAA) in which it is stated that the City shall initiate zoning changes to annexed property that correspond as closely as possible to zoning already adopted by Washington County. [ORD 4759; March 2019]
PROCEDURES
Type 1
Chapter 50 PR - 18 02/14/2013
50.35.6
B. A statement that the decision is final but may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. [ORD 4265; October 2003]
C. A statement that the complete case file is available for review. The statement shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact for information about the case.
7. The Director’s determination that a Final Land Division substantially conforms or does not substantially conform to the previously approved and unexpired Preliminary Partition, Preliminary Subdivision, Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition, Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision, or Replat is not a land use or limited land use decision. However, notice of such a determination shall include the following:
A. A statement that the decision is final but may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction.
B. A statement that the complete case file is available for review. The statement shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact for information about the case.
[ORD 4487; August 2008]
8. In the case of Wireless Communication Facilities, a final decision under the Wireless Facility One shall be issued no later than 90 days from when the application is deemed complete, including any resolution(s) from any appeal(s). [ORD 4595; February 2013]
PROCEDURES
Type 2
Chapter 50 PR - 19 08/10/2006
50.40. Type 2.
1. The decision making authority for a Type 2 application shall be the Director.
2. Approximately seven (7) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete, the Director shall mail a written notice to:
A. The applicant and the property owner.
B. The Chair of the NAC in which the subject property is located and the Chair of any other NAC’s whose boundaries are within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
C. Owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of any property line that is the subject of the application. The most recent property tax assessment roll of the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation shall be used for determining the property owner of record. The failure of a property owner to receive notice does not invalidate the decision.
3. The written notice of the pending application shall include the following information:
A. The case file number for the application.
B. A description of the site reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location including map and tax lot number, and if available, site address, site zoning, and name of the NAC in which the proposal is located.
C. A map showing the subject property in relation to other properties.
D. A summary of the application.
E. A listing of the applicable approval criteria by Development Code section number.
PROCEDURES
Type 2
Chapter 50 PR - 20 10/19/2006
50.40.3.
F. When and where information about the application may be examined and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact about the application.
G. A statement that a meeting of the Facilities Review Committee will occur on a specified date with the applicant to discuss technical issues associated with the application and the date of such meeting.
H. A statement that interested parties can submit written comments, but, to be considered, the City must receive those comments no later than the comment closing date, which is a specific date established by the Director and which is approximately twenty eight (28) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be or deemed complete. The comment closing date shall be listed in boldface type.
I. A statement that the decision shall be made after the comment closing date.
4. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete and in no case less than twenty (20) calendar days before the decision making authority’s decision, the Director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Beaverton a summary of the application, the comment closing date on the application, the date of the Facilities Review Committee meeting with the applicant, and the date on which a decision will be made on the application. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
5. Not more than ten (10) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete, the applicant shall post on the site at least one (1) notice signboard provided by the Director for that purpose. The signboard shall be posted in a conspicuous place visible to the public on or in the vicinity of the property subject to the application. The signboard shall state with minimum two (2)-inch high letters the case file number and the telephone number where City staff can be contacted for more information.
6. Subject to the limitations set forth in Section 50.25.10., the applicant may amend the application during a period of time of up to and including fourteen (14) days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete.
PROCEDURES
Type 2
Chapter 50 PR - 21 10/19/2006
50.40.
7. Approximately twenty eight (28) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete, the Director shall convene the Facilities Review Committee to review the application with the applicant. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
8. Within approximately thirty five (35) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete, the applicant shall submit to the Director an affidavit certifying where and when the notices referred to in Section 50.40.5. were posted.
9. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days after the Facilities Review Committee meeting, the Facilities Review Committee shall forward a written report to the Director. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
10. Within approximately fourteen (14) calendar days after the Facilities Review Committee meeting, the Director shall issue a written decision on the application to the applicant, the property owner, the NAC in which the subject property is located, and interested parties that submitted written comments prior to or on the comment closing date; provided, [ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4404; October 2006]
A. The decision making authority shall consider the application, the applicant’s supplement to or amendment of the application, if any, and the timely and relevant comments on the application. The decision making authority may consider comments and responses received from the applicant, the public, or both after the comment closing period on the proposal; and
B. An applicant may request in writing a continuance of time, not to exceed a total of 240 calendar days from the date the application was determined to be or deemed complete. The decision making authority shall issue a decision prior to the conclusion of the continuance of time. [ORD 4365; October 2005]
PROCEDURES
Type 2
Chapter 50 PR - 22 01/01/2005
50.40.
11. A decision shall include:
A. A brief summary of the proposal and the application which is the subject of the decision, the decision, and any conditions of approval.
B. A description of the site reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location including site address, and if available, map and tax lot number, site zoning, and the NAC in which the proposal is located.
C. A statement of the facts upon which the decision making authority relied to determine whether the application satisfied or failed to satisfy each applicable approval criterion and assurance of compliance with the approval criteria.
D. The decision to approve or deny the application and, if approved, any conditions of approval necessary to ensure compliance with applicable criteria.
E. A statement that the decision is final, unless appealed as provided in Section 50.65. within twelve (12) calendar days after the date of the decision or may be modified pursuant to Section 50.95. The notice shall state in boldface type the date and time by which an appeal must be filed. The statement shall describe the requirements for filing an appeal of the decision.
F. A statement that the complete case file, including findings, conclusions and conditions of approval, if any, is available for review. The notice shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact about reviewing the case file.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 23 04/01/2010
50.45. Type 3.
1. Except for Street Vacation application, the decision making authority for all Type 3 applications shall be the Planning Commission. For Street Vacation application, the decision making authority shall be the City Council. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
2. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days after the application has been deemed complete, the Director shall mail a written notice to:
A. The applicant and the property owner.
B. The NAC Chair in which the subject property is located and to any other NAC Chair whose boundaries are within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
C. Owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the property that is the subject of the application. The most recent property tax assessment rolls of the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation shall be used for determining the property owner of record. The failure of a property owner to receive notice does not invalidate the decision.
D. [ORD 4462; January 2008] Washington County Department of Land Use and Transportation.
3. The written notice of the pending application shall include the following information:
A. The case file number for the application.
B. A description of the site reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location including map and tax lot number, and if available, site address, site zoning, and name of the NAC in which the proposal is located.
C. A map depicting the subject property in relation to other properties.
D. The nature of the application and the proposed use. In the case of a zone change, the nature of the uses which could be authorized.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 24 7/10/2015
50.45.3.
E. A listing of the applicable approval criteria by Development Code section number.
F. When and where information about the application may be examined and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact about the application.
G. A statement that a meeting of the Facilities Review Committee will occur on a specified date with the applicant to discuss technical issues associated with the application and the date of such meeting.
H. The date, time and location of the hearing before the decision making authority, and a statement that the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the adopted rules of procedure.
I. A statement that the decision will be made after the hearing closes.
J. A statement that failure to raise an issue in a hearing, by testifying in person or by letter, or failure to provide statements or evidence with sufficient specificity to afford the decision making authority an opportunity to respond to such issue, precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue.
K. A statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven (7) calendar days before the hearing, and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost.
L. A statement that a copy of the pre-application conference comments, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 25 7/10/2015
50.45.
4. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete and in no case less than twenty (20) calendar days before the decision making authority’s initial hearing, the Director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Beaverton a summary of the application, a date by which public comment on the application should be submitted to the Director, if applicable, the date of the Facilities Review Committee meeting with the applicant, and the place, date, and time of the decision making authority’s hearing on the application under review. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
5. In addition to the provisions of Sections 50.45.2, 50.45.4, and 50.45.8, the following noticing timelines shall apply for the following applications:
A. If the proposal is a Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment application (Section 40.97.15.1.), the Director shall send the notice outlined in Section 50.45.3. by certified mail to the owner of property as shown on the current records of the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation which are subject to the proposed zone change at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing.
B. For any Zoning Map Amendment application which includes all or part of a mobile home or manufactured dwelling park, as defined in ORS 446.003, the Director shall mail the notice outlined in Section 50.45.3. to each existing mailing address for tenants of the mobile home or manufactured dwelling park at least twenty (20) days but not more than forty (40) calendar days before the date of the initial hearing on the application. The applicant for such a zone change shall pay the costs of such notice, which shall be in addition to fees otherwise applicable to the application.
6. In addition to the noticing procedural requirements contained in Sections 50.45.2. through 50.45.4., a Street Vacation proposal shall be subject to the following procedures:
A. The newspaper notice of the proposed ordinance for street vacation described in Section 50.45.4. shall be published for at least two consecutive weeks prior to the public hearing.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 26 7/10/2015
50.45.6.
B. A copy of the hearing notice described in Section 50.45.3. shall be made available in City Hall and the City Library.
C. At least fifteen (15) calendar days before the hearing for the street vacation, the applicant shall post a signboard, provided by the City at cost, at each terminus of the proposed street vacation. The sign shall contain the legend with minimum two inch (2”) high letters "NOTICE OF STREET VACATION", the case number, the telephone number where City staff can be contacted for more information, and a statement that includes the date, time and place of the hearing of the City Council before whom the public may testify. The applicant is responsible for assuring that the sign is posted for a continuous period of at least fifteen (15) days.
7. In addition to the noticing procedural requirements contained in Sections 50.45.2 through 50.45.4, an application for the demolition of a historic building or structure shall be subject to the following procedures:
A. The applicant has advertised such building for sale and/or removal from the site, with such advertisement to run once per week over two consecutive weeks, no less than seven days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Beaverton.
B. The applicant has posted a sign on the property for a continuous period of at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the hearing. The sign shall be provided by the City and be posted in a prominent and conspicuous place within ten feet of a public street abutting the premises on which the building is located, and shall contain the legend "THIS HISTORIC BUILDING TO BE DEMOLISHED", together with a statement that includes the date, time and place of the hearing of the decision making authority before whom the public may testify. The applicant is responsible for assuring that the sign is posted for a continuous period of at least thirty (30) days.
D. If after 30 calendar days no party interested in purchasing or moving the property has come forward to the property owner, the City, or both, the decision making authority shall hold a hearing.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 27 7/10/2015
50.45.7.
E. None of the preceding procedures listed in Section 50.45.7.A. through .D. shall apply to the demolition of a historic building or structure if the Building Official has ordered the removal or demolition of such building because the Building Official has determined the building or structure to be dangerous to life, health or property.
8. Not less than twenty (20) calendar days before the decision making authority’s hearing, the applicant shall post at least one (1) signboard provided by the Director for that purpose. The signboard shall be posted in a conspicuous place visible to the public on or in the vicinity of the property subject to the application. The signboard shall state with minimum two (2)-inch high letters the case number; the telephone number where City staff can be contacted for more information. In the case of Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendments and Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendments processed by the City, no site posting shall be required. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
9. All documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be submitted to the City and made available to the public at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant which is submitted later than seven (7) days prior to the hearing shall be received, provided however, upon request of any interested person, the decision making authority shall continue the hearing to a date and time certain which is not less than seven (7) days later and permit persons to present and rebut new evidence, argument or testimony in response to the documents and evidence submitted by the applicant later than seven days prior to the hearing.
10. Within approximately twenty eight (28) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete, the Director shall convene the Facilities Review Committee to review applicable technical aspects of the application with the applicant, if the application is subject to Facilities Review Committee review. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
11. Within approximately thirty five (35) calendar days after the application has been determined to be or deemed complete, the applicant shall submit to the Director an affidavit certifying where and when the notices were posted.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 28 04/01/2010
50.45.
12. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days after the Facilities Review Committee meeting, the Facilities Review Committee shall forward a written report to the Director. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
13. Approximately twenty-one (21) calendar days after the Facilities Review Committee meeting, the decision making authority’s initial hearing on the application shall take place. [ORD 4404; October 2006]
14. At least seven (7) calendar days before the date of the initial hearing on the application, the Director shall make available to the public a copy of the staff report for review and inspection, and shall provide a copy of the staff report and recommendation to the decision making authority and to the applicant and property owner. The Director shall provide a copy of the staff report to the public at reasonable cost upon request.
15. Hearings before the Planning Commission shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 50.55. through 50.58. of this Code. Hearing before the City Council shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 50.85. through 50.88. of this Code. Hearings shall be recorded on audio only or audio and video tape. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
16. At the conclusion of the hearing on each application, the decision making authority shall take one of the following actions:
A. Continue the hearing to a date, time, and location certain, which shall be announced by the Chair. Notice of date, time and location certain of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published, or posted, unless the hearing is continued without announcing a date, time, and location certain, in which case notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.
B. Deny the application, approve the application, or approve the application with conditions.
1. If the decision making authority takes action pursuant to Section 50.45.16.B., the decision making authority shall announce a brief summary of the basis for the decision, and that a land use order will be issued as provided in Section 50.45.17.; provided, the proceedings may be continued for the purpose of considering such land use order without taking new testimony or evidence.
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 29 01/10/2008
50.45.16.B.
2. Provisions for holding a record open or continuing a hearing set forth in ORS 197.763 (6) shall apply under this Ordinance in a manner consistent with state law.
C. In the case of Street Vacation, Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment, Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment applications, if the Council intends to adopt an ordinance to vacate a street or change a zoning designation, the City Attorney shall prepare same. An ordinance shall thereafter be adopted pursuant to the City Charter. The City Council shall adopt or approve written findings which demonstrate that the approval complies with applicable approval criteria.
17. After the public record closes, a written decision in the form of a land use order shall be prepared regarding the application. The land use order shall include:
A. A listing of the applicable approval criteria by Development Code section number.
B. A statement or summary of the facts upon which the decision making authority relies to find the application does or does not comply with each applicable approval criterion and to justify any conditions of approval. The decision making authority may adopt or incorporate a staff report or written findings prepared by any party to the proceeding into the land use order to satisfy this requirement.
C. A statement of conclusions based on the facts and findings.
D. A decision to deny or to approve the application and, if approved, any conditions of approval necessary to ensure compliance with applicable criteria.
18. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days from the date that the decision making authority adopts a land use order, the Director shall cause the order to be signed, dated, and mailed to the applicant and the property owner. The land use order shall be accompanied by a written notice which shall include the following information: [ORD 4462; January 2008]
PROCEDURES
Type 3
Chapter 50 PR - 30 01/10/2008
50.45.18.
A. Except for a Street Vacation application, a statement that the decision is final but may be appealed as provided in Section 50.70. within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the signed notice is dated and mailed. The appeal closing date, which is ten (10) days after the date the signed notice is dated and mailed, shall be set forth in boldface type. The statement shall generally describe the requirements for filing an appeal.
B. In the case of a Street Vacation application, a statement that the decision is final, but may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeal as provided in ORS 197.805 through ORS 197.860.
C. A statement that the complete case file is available for review. The statement shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact for information about the case.
19. [ORD 4462; January 2008] At the same time the land use order is mailed to the applicant and property owner, a written notice containing the same information listed in Section 50.45.18.A. through .C. shall be mailed to the NAC Chair in which the subject property is located and other persons who appeared orally or in writing before the public record closed on the subject matter. In addition to the information listed in Section 50.45.18.A. through .C., the written notice will provide a Web page address on which the land use order may be viewed and downloaded.
A. Except for a Street Vacation application, a statement that the decision is final but may be appealed as provided in Section 50.70. within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the signed notice is dated and mailed. The appeal closing date, which is ten (10) days after the date the signed notice is dated and mailed, shall be set forth in boldface type. The statement shall generally describe the requirements for filing an appeal.
B. In the case of a Street Vacation application, a statement that the decision is final, but may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeal as provided in ORS 197.805 through ORS 197.860.
C. A statement that the complete case file is available for review. The statement shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact for information about the case.
PROCEDURES
Type 4
Chapter 50 PR - 31 06/01/2012
50.50. Type 4.
1. The initial decision making authority for Type 4 applications shall be the Planning Commission. The Commission’s decision on a Type 4 application shall be a written recommendation, which is forwarded to the City Council. The City Council shall make the final decision on Type 4 applications as set forth in this Section. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
2. [ORD 4462; January 2008] No less than thirty-five (35) calendar days before the date of the initial hearing of the decision making authority on an ordinance that proposes to legislatively change the zoning map or to amend the text of the Development Code, the Director shall mail notice of the hearing to: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. All NAC Chairs in whose area there is property that in the Director’s opinion could be affected by the proposed ordinance, if adopted.
B. The Chair of the Beaverton Committee for Citizen Involvement.
C. Washington County Department of Land Use and Transportation.
3. Not more than forty (40) nor less than twenty (20) calendar days before the date of the initial hearing of the decision making authority on an ordinance that proposes to legislatively change the zoning map or to amend the text of the Development Code, the Director shall mail notice of the hearing to:
A. The applicant if other than the City.
[ORD 4462; January 2008]
B. Owners of property within the City for which the proposed ordinance, if adopted, may in the Director’s opinion affect the permissible uses of land.
PROCEDURES
Type 4
Chapter 50 PR - 32 01/01/2005
50.50.3.B.
1. The most recent property tax assessment roll of the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation shall be used for determining the property owner of record. The failure of a property owner to receive notice does not invalidate the decision.
2. If a person owns more than one property that could be affected by the proposed ordinance if adopted, the Director may mail that person only one notice of the hearing.
4. The notice of the initial hearing in a Type 4 procedure shall include at least the following information:
A. If required by ORS 227.186, a statement in bold type across the top of the first page of the notice that reads as follows: “This is to notify you that the City shall consider a proposed land use regulation that may affect the permissible uses of your land.” [ORD 4312; July 2004]
B. The date, time, and location of the hearing.
C. The nature and purpose of the hearing.
D. The case file number, title, or both of the proposed ordinance to be considered at the hearing.
E. A listing of the applicable approval criteria by Development Code and Comprehensive Plan section numbers.
F. A statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven (7) calendar days before the hearing, and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost, and the name and telephone number of a City representative to contact about the ordinance.
G. A statement that failure to raise an issue in a hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision making authority an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue.
PROCEDURES
Type 4
Chapter 50 PR - 33 01/01/2005
50.50.4.
H. Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings.
I. If applicable, a statement that the ordinance is a result of an order of the Land Conservation and Development Commission or Metro.
5. At least ten (10) calendar days before the Planning Commission’s initial hearing in a Type 4 procedure, the Director shall:
A. Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Beaverton a summary of the hearing notice, including the date, time, and location of the hearing and the number and nature of the ordinance to be considered.
B. Make copies of the hearing notice available in at least City Hall and the City Library.
6. At least seven (7) calendar days before the initial hearing in a Type 4 procedure, the Director shall publish a written staff report and recommendation regarding the ordinance and shall make available to the public a copy of the staff report for review and inspection. The Director shall provide a copy of the staff report at reasonable charge to members of the public upon request.
7. Initial hearings shall be conducted in manner specified in Sections 50.55. through 50.58. of this Code. Hearings shall be recorded on audio or audio and video tape.
8. At the conclusion of the hearing on a Type 4 procedure, the following options are available to the decision making authority: [ORD 4265; October 2003]
A. Continue the hearing to a date, time, and location certain, which shall be announced by the Chair. Notice of date, time, and location certain of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published or posted, unless the hearing is not continued to a date, time, and location certain in which case notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.
PROCEDURES
Type 4
Chapter 50 PR - 34 01/10/2008
50.50.8.
B. Hold open the public record for the receipt of additional evidence, argument, or both to a date and time certain which is not less than seven (7) calendar days after the hearing. The decision making authority shall state where additional written evidence and testimony may be sent, and shall announce any limits on the nature of the evidence that will be received while the hearing record remains open.
C. Recommend that the City Council reject or adopt the ordinance with or without certain changes, conditions, or both, together with a written justification for the recommendation; provided, the hearing may be continued to a date, time, and location certain for the purpose of considering such a written recommendation without receiving new evidence or argument.
9. After the public record closes, a written decision in the form of a land use order shall be prepared regarding the application.
10. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days from the date that the decision making authority adopts a land use order, the Director shall mail a written notice to the persons who appeared orally or in writing before the decision making authority prior to the closing of the public record (“persons of record”). The land use order shall be accompanied by a written notice which shall include the following information: [ORD 4462; January 2008]
A. A statement indicating the Web page address on which the land use order may be viewed and downloaded.
B. A statement that the recommendation may be appealed as provided in Section 50.75. within ten (10) calendar days after the date the signed notice is dated and mailed. The appeal closing date, which is ten (10) days after the date the signed notice is dated and mailed, shall be listed in boldface type. The statement shall generally describe the requirements for filing an appeal.
C. A statement that the complete case file is available for review. The statement shall list when and where the case file is available and the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact for information about the case.
PROCEDURES
Type 4
Chapter 50 PR - 35 04/01/2010
50.50.
11. Not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the decision making authority issues its land use order and not less than ten (10) calendar days before the date of City Council consideration of the decision making authority’s recommendation if the decision making authority’s land use order was not appealed, the Director shall mail notice to the persons of record. The notice shall contain at least the following information:
A. The date, time, and location of the City Council meeting.
B. The nature and purpose of the City Council meeting.
C. The case file number, title, or both of the land use order to be considered at the City Council meeting.
D. A statement that a copy of the land use order is available for inspection at no cost at least (7) days prior to Council consideration, and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost, and the telephone number of a City representative to contact about the ordinance.
12. Consideration by the City Council of the Planning Commission’s recommendation on a land use order shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the Council, except as otherwise required by statute. The process for filing an appeal to City Council from the decision making authority’s land use order is set forth in Section 50.75. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
13. In the absence of an appeal from the Planning Commission’s recommendation, at the conclusion of the City Council consideration of the decision making authority’s land use order in a Type 4 procedure, the Council shall take one of the following actions:
A. Continue the matter to a date, time, and location certain. Notice of the date, time, and location certain of the continued matter is not required to be mailed, published or posted, unless the matter is not continued to a date, time, and location certain, in which case notice of the continued matter shall be given.
B. Remand the matter back to the Planning Commission.
PROCEDURES
Type 4
Chapter 50 PR - 36 04/01/2010
50.50.13.
C. Approve the proposal, with or without certain changes. If Council approval indicates an intention to adopt one or more ordinances to amend the zone map, text, or both, then the City Attorney shall prepare the ordinance with findings. Ordinances shall thereafter be adopted pursuant to the City Charter. The City Council shall adopt or approve written findings which demonstrate that adoption will comply with applicable approval criteria.
D. Reject the proposed ordinance.
E. The City Council shall adopt or approve written findings which demonstrate that adoption of the proposed ordinance will or will not comply with applicable approval criteria.
[ORD 4532; April 2010]
14. After the adoption or rejection of an ordinance, the Director shall mail or otherwise submit notice to the Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) on DLCD forms provided for such notice in conformance with ORS 197.615. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
15. Not more than seven (7) calendar days after the date of the adoption or rejection of an ordinance, the Director shall mail or otherwise submit notice to persons who testified orally or in writing to the Planning Commission or City Council while the public record was open regarding the proposed ordinance. The notice shall include at least the following information:
A. A brief summary of the ordinance.
B. The date of the decision on the ordinance.
C. The place where and the time when the ordinance and related findings may be reviewed.
D. A summary of the requirements for appealing the City decision on the ordinance under ORS 197.830 to 197.845.
[ORD 4532; April 2010]
PROCEDURES
Expedited Land Division
Chapter 50 PR - 37 04/01/2010
50.53. Expedited Land Division.
An application for and any appeal of an expedited land division shall be subject to the process provisions in ORS 197.360 through ORS 197.380.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of Planning Commission Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 38 01/01/2005
50.55. Conduct of Planning Commission Hearing.
1. At the beginning of a hearing an announcement shall be made to those in attendance that:
A. Lists the applicable approval criteria by Development Code section number and Comprehensive Plan section number.
B. Testimony, arguments and evidence must be directed toward the applicable criteria or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code which the person believes to apply to the application.
C. Failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence with sufficient specificity to afford the decision making authority and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.
D. Failure of the applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed conditions of approval with sufficient specificity to allow the City to respond to the issue precludes an action for damages in circuit court.
E. The decision making authority must be impartial and that members of the decision making authority shall not have any bias or personal or business interest in the outcome of the application. Prior to the receipt of any testimony, members of the decision making authority must announce any ex parte contacts. The decision making authority shall afford parties an opportunity to challenge any member thereof based on bias, conflicts of interest, or ex parte contacts.
F. States that if any member of the decision making authority has visited the site, they should describe generally what was observed.
G. Summarizes the procedure of the hearing.
2. After the announcements described in Section 50.55.1., the Chair shall call for presentation of the staff report. Staff shall describe the proposal and provide a recommendation.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of Planning Commission Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 39 01/01/2005
50.55.
3. After the presentation of the staff report, the Chair shall call for the applicant's testimony.
4. After the applicant’s testimony, the Chair shall call for other evidence or testimony in the following sequence unless the decision making authority consents to amend the sequence of testimony:
A. First, evidence or testimony in support of the application.
B. Second, evidence or testimony in opposition to the application.
C. Finally, evidence or testimony that is neither in support nor in opposition to the application.
5. The Chair shall call for rebuttal by the applicant. Rebuttal testimony shall be limited to the scope of the issues raised by evidence and arguments submitted into the record by persons in opposition to the application. Should the applicant submit new evidence in aid of rebuttal, the Chair shall allow any person to respond to such new evidence, and provide for final rebuttal by the applicant.
6. The Chair shall offer staff an opportunity to make final comments and answer questions.
7. Provisions for holding a record open or continuing a hearing set forth in ORS 197.763 (6) shall apply under this Code in a manner consistent with state law.
PROCEDURES
Time Limits on Testimony
Chapter 50 PR - 40 06/01/2012
50.57. Time Limits on Planning Commission Hearing Testimony.
1. The purpose of time limits on testimony is to provide all interested persons with an adequate opportunity to present and respond to testimony while at the same time ensuring that hearings conducted by the Planning Commission are conducted in an efficient and expeditious manner. Time limits on testimony shall not be placed on staff presentations. The following time limits on testimony shall be observed during a hearing conducted by the decision making authority unless the decision making authority consents to adjust the time limits in a particular instance:
A. Up to and including 20 minutes for the applicant's presentation.
B. Up to and including 10 minutes for a representative of a recognized NAC, government or government agency, or other organized group recognized by the Planning Commission. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. Up to and including 5 minutes each for other persons.
D. Up to and including 5 minutes for rebuttal.
[ORD 4532; April 2010]
2. The time limits set forth in Section 50.57.1. shall not include time taken by questions from or response to questions of the decision making authority.
PROCEDURES
Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence
Chapter 50 PR - 41 04/01/2010
50.58. Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence before the Planning Commission.
1. Any person may present evidence at hearing before the decision making authority on a Type 3 or Type 4 proposal.
2. Any person may submit exhibits or written comments prior to the hearing. All submittals which are more than two (2) letter sized pages must include no fewer than ten (10) complete copies of the materials being submitted. Written comments or exhibits submitted prior to the hearing to be submitted by staff at the hearing must be received by the Director no later than 4:30 p.m. on the day of the scheduled hearing.
3. In order to be made part of the record, written comments or exhibits submitted at the hearing must be filed with the recording secretary and offered to the decision making authority as part of the record. No fewer than ten (10) copies of written comments or exhibits must be provided if those materials are submitted at the hearing.
4. Exhibits or written comments that are merely referred to in testimony but which are not offered to the decision making authority as part of the record in accordance with this Section shall not become part of the record of the proceedings.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 1 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 42 04/01/2010
50.60. Appeal of a Type 1 Decision.
1. The decision making authority’s decision on a Type 1 application may be appealed only by the applicant. The appeal must be on an Appeal Form provided by the Director and must be received by the Community Development Department within twelve (12) calendar days after signed written notice of the decision was dated and mailed. [ORD 4312; July 2004]
2. Within seven (7) calendar days after an appeal has been filed, the Director shall determine whether it contains at least the following information:
A. The case file number designated by the City,
B. The name and signature of the applicant as appellant.
C. Specification of evidence or written testimony provided with the application to which the decision under appeal is contrary.
D. The specific approval criteria, condition, or both being appealed, the reasons why a finding, condition, or both is in error as a matter of fact, law or both, and the evidence relied on to prove the error.
E. The appeal fee, as established by resolution of the City Council.
3. Failure to comply with the requirements of Sections 50.60.1 and 50.60.2 is jurisdictional and deprives the appellant of an opportunity for the appellate decision making authority to hear an appeal.
4. The appellate decision making authority on appeal of Type 1 decisions shall be the Planning Commission. The appeal hearing shall be de novo, which means new evidence and argument can be introduced in writing, orally, or both. The hearing of the appeal shall be conducted in the manner specified in Sections 50.80. through 50.83. The decision of the appellate decision making authority for appeals of Type 1 decisions shall be the final decision and shall not be subject to further appealed to the City Council. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
5. For appeals of Type 1 decisions filed under Section 50.60., the Director shall mail written notice of an appeal hearing to the appellant not less than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the appeal hearing, but need not post or publish the notice in a newspaper.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 1 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 43 04/01/2010
50.60.
6. Not less than seven (7) calendar days before the date of the appeal hearing, the Director shall prepare and make available to the public, for review and inspection, a copy of the staff report regarding the appeal and shall provide a copy of the staff report and recommendation to the appellate decision making authority and to the appellant. The Director shall provide a copy of the staff report to the public at reasonable cost upon request.
7. Appeal hearings before the Planning Commission shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 50.80. through 50.83. of this Code. Appeal hearings shall be recorded on audio only or audio and video tape. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
8. At the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the appellate decision making authority shall take one of the following actions:
A. Continue the hearing to a date, time, and location certain, which shall be announced by the Chair. Notice of the date, time, and location certain of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published, or posted, unless the hearing is continued without announcing a date, time, and location certain, in which case notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.
B. Reverse or affirm the decision under appeal, with or without conditions or changes.
1. If the decision making authority takes action pursuant to Section 50.60.8.B., the decision making authority shall announce a brief summary of the basis for the decision, and that a land use order will be issued as provided in Section 50.60.9.; provided, the proceedings may be continued for the purpose of considering such land use order without taking new testimony or evidence.
2. Provisions for holding a record open or continuing a hearing set forth in ORS 197.763 (6) shall apply under this Ordinance in a manner consistent with state law.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 1 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 44 01/01/2005
50.60.
9. After the public record on the appeal closes, a written decision in the form of a land use order regarding the application shall be prepared and contain the following:
A. A statement of the facts that the appellate decision making authority has relied on which demonstrate the decision under appeal is reversed or affirmed based on the criteria relevant to the appeal.
B. A statement of conclusions based on the findings.
C. If the appellate decision making authority changes conditions of approval, changes denial to approval, changes denial to approval subject to conditions, or changes approval to denial, the order shall include findings explaining the basis for such change and condition.
10. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days from the date that the appellate decision making authority adopts a land use order, the Director shall cause the order to be signed, dated, and mailed to the appellant and other persons who appeared orally or in writing before the public record closed.
11. A decision on an appeal is final on the date the signed land use order is dated and mailed.
12. Only one appeal of a Type 1 decision is permitted before the City. Therefore, the notice of a Type 1 decision on appeal shall indicate the decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals as provided in ORS 197.805 through ORS 197.860.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 1 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 45 01/01/2005
50.60.
13. If a decision of the appellate decision making authority is remanded to the City by the State of Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), the appellate decision making authority shall either:
A. Hold a hearing on the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision without opening the record for additional evidence. Notice of the hearing on remand shall be given to all persons who testified either orally or in writing before the appellate decision making authority at the hearing that led to the decision remanded by LUBA. The notice shall set forth issues on remand that will be considered by the appellate decision making authority. Testimony shall be allowed at the hearing before the appellate decision making authority, except that testimony shall be limited to the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the appellate decision making authority based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appellate decision making authority shall render a written decision; or
B. Hold a hearing on the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision and open the record for additional evidence. Notice of the hearing on remand shall be given in the same manner in which the original hearing notice was provided. The notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony will be limited to the criteria or the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the appellate decision making authority based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, the notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appellate decision making authority shall render a written decision. A decision of the appellate decision making authority on remand may be appealed to LUBA.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 2 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 46 01/01/2005
50.65. Appeal of a Type 2 Decision.
1. The decision making authority’s decision on a Type 2 application may be appealed only by the applicant or by any other person who submitted written evidence prior to the decision of the Director. The appeal must be on an Appeal Form provide by the Director and must be received within twelve (12) calendar days after written notice of the decision was dated and mailed. [ORD 4312; July 2004]
2. Within seven (7) calendar days after an appeal has been filed, the Director shall determine whether an appeal contains at least the following information:
A. The case file number designated by the City.
B. The name and signature of each appellant.
C. Reference to the written evidence provided to the decision making authority by the appellant that is contrary to the decision.
D. If multiple people sign and file a single appeal, the appeal shall include verifiable evidence that each appellant provided written testimony to the decision making authority and that the decision being appealed was contrary to such testimony. The appeal shall designate one person as the contact representative for all pre-appeal hearing contact with the City. All contact with the City regarding the appeal, including notice, shall be through this contact representative.
E. The specific approval criteria, condition, or both being appealed, the reasons why a finding, condition, or both is in error as a matter of fact, law or both, and the evidence relied on to allege the error.
F. The appeal fee, as established by resolution of the City Council.
3. Failure to comply with the requirements of Sections 50.65.1 and 50.65.2 is jurisdictional and deprives the appellant of an opportunity for the appellate decision making authority to hear an appeal.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 2 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 47 04/01/2010
50.65.
4. Except for the appeals of Director's Interpretation (Section 40.25.), the appellate decision making authority on appeal of Type 2 decisions shall be the Planning Commission. The appeal hearing for Type 2 decisions shall be de novo, which means new evidence and argument can be introduced in writing, orally, or both. The hearing of the appeal shall be conducted in the manner specified in Sections 50.80. through 50.83. The decision of the appellate decision making authority for appeal of Type 2 decisions shall be the final decision and shall not be subject to further appeal to the City Council. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
5. The appellate decision making authority for Director's Interpretation (Section 40.25.) shall be the City Council. The appeal hearing for Director's Interpretation shall be de novo, which means new evidence and argument can be introduced in writing, orally, or both. The hearing of the appeal shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 50.85. through 50.88. except as otherwise required by statute.
6. For appeals of Type 2 decisions filed under Section 50.65., the Director shall mail written notice of an appeal hearing to parties listed in Section 50.65.1. not less than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the appeal hearing, but need not post or publish the notice in a newspaper.
7. Not less than seven (7) calendar days before the date of the appeal hearing, the Director shall prepare and make available to the public, for review and inspection, a copy of the staff report and shall provide a copy of the staff report to the appellate decision making authority and to the appellant. The Director shall provide a copy of the staff report to members of the public at reasonable cost upon request.
8. Appeal hearings before the Planning Commission shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 50.80. through 50.83. of this Code. Appeal hearings shall be recorded on audio only or audio and video tape.
9. At the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the appellate decision making authority shall take one of the following actions:
A. Continue the hearing to a date, time, and location certain, which shall be announced by the Chair. Notice of the date, time, and location certain of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published, or posted, unless the hearing is continued without announcing a date, time, and location certain, in which case notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 2 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 48 01/01/2005
50.65.9.
B. Reverse or affirm the decision under appeal, with or without conditions or changes.
1. If the decision making authority takes action pursuant to Section 50.65.9.B., the decision making authority shall announce a brief summary of the basis for the decision, and that a land use order will be issued as provided in Section 50.65.10.; provided, the proceedings may be continued for the purpose of considering such land use order without taking new testimony or evidence.
2. Provisions for holding a record open or continuing a hearing set forth in ORS 197.763 (6) shall apply under this Ordinance in a manner consistent with state law.
10. After the public record on the appeal closes, a written decision in the form of a land use order regarding the application shall be prepared and contain, at a minimum, the following:
A. A statement of the facts that the appellate decision making authority has relied on which demonstrate the decision under appeal is reversed or affirmed based on the criteria relevant to the appeal.
B. A statement of conclusions based on the findings.
C. If the appellate decision making authority changes conditions of approval, changes denial to approval, changes denial to approval subject to conditions, or changes approval to denial, the order shall include findings explaining the basis for such change and condition.
11. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days from the date that the appellate decision making authority adopts a land use order, the Director shall cause the order to be signed, dated, and mailed to the appellant and other persons who appeared orally or in writing before the public record closed.
12. A decision on an appeal is final on the date the signed land use order is dated and mailed.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 2 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 49 01/01/2005
50.65.
13. Only one appeal of a Type 2 decision is permitted before the City. Therefore the notice of a Type 2 decision on appeal shall indicate the decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals as provided in ORS 197.805 through ORS 197.860.
14. If a decision of the appellate decision making authority is remanded to the City by the State of Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), the appellate decision making authority shall either:
A. Hold a hearing on the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision without opening the record for additional evidence. Notice thereof shall be given to all persons who testified either orally or in writing before the appellate decision making authority at the hearing that led to the decision remanded by LUBA. The notice shall set forth issues on remand that will be considered by the appellate decision making authority. Testimony shall be allowed at the hearing before the appellate decision making authority, except that testimony shall be limited to the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the appellate decision making authority based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appellate decision making authority shall render a written decision; or
B. Hold a hearing on the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision and open the record for additional evidence. Notice of the hearing on remand shall be given in the same manner in which the appeal hearing notice was provided. The notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony will be limited to the criteria or the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the appellate decision making authority based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, the notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appellate decision making authority shall render a written decision.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 3 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 50 01/01/2005
50.70. Appeal of a Type 3 Decision.
1. The decision making authority’s decision on a Type 3 application may be appealed only by the applicant or any other person who participated by providing either oral or written evidence on the record leading to the decision by the decision making authority. The appeal must be on an Appeal Form provided by the Director and must be received within ten (10) calendar days after the signed written land use order of the decision making authority was dated and mailed. [ORD 4312; July 2004]
2. Within seven (7) calendar days after an appeal has been filed, the Director shall determine whether an appeal contains at least the following information:
A. The case file number designated by the City.
B. The name and signature of each appellant.
C. Reference to the oral or written evidence provided to the decision making authority by the appellant that is contrary to the decision.
D. If multiple people sign and file a single appeal, the appeal shall include verifiable evidence that each appellant provided written testimony to the decision making authority and that the decision being appealed was contrary to such testimony. The appeal shall designate one person as the contact representative for all pre-appeal hearing contact with the City. All contact with the City regarding the appeal, including notice, shall be through this contact representative.
E. The specific approval criteria, condition, or both being appealed, the reasons why a finding, condition, or both is in error as a matter of fact, law or both, and the evidence relied on to allege the error.
F. The appeal fee, as established by resolution of the City Council.
3. Failure to comply with the requirements of Sections 50.70.1 and 50.70.2 is jurisdictional and deprives the City Council of authority to consider the appellant’s submittal and the appellant of an opportunity for the appellate decision making authority to hear an appeal.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 3 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 51 01/01/2005
50.70.
4. The appellate decision making authority on appeal of Type 3 decisions shall be the City Council. The appeal hearing shall be de novo, which means new evidence and argument can be introduced in writing, orally, or both.
5. The record shall consist of the following:
A. All staff reports and memoranda prepared regarding the proposal that were presented to the decision making authority.
B. All written testimony and all exhibits, maps, documents or other written materials presented to and not rejected by the decision making authority during the proceedings on the proposal.
C. The land use order of the decision making authority.
D. The minutes of the decision making authority proceedings regarding the proposal.
E. The appellant may request, and the City Council may allow, the appeal hearing be conducted on the record established at the decision making authority public hearing. If such a request is made and granted, a transcript of the decision making authority proceedings is required. The appellant shall remit a fee to cover the cost of the transcript of the decision making authority’s proceedings within five days after the Planning Director estimates the cost of the transcript. Within ten days of notice of completion of the transcript, the appellant shall remit the balance due on the cost of the transcript. In the event that the Council denies the request for an on the record appeal hearing, and holds a de novo hearing, the transcript fee may be refunded. If the transcription estimate exceeds the transcription cost, the balance shall be refunded to the appellant.
6. The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 50.85. through 50.88. except as otherwise required by statute.
7. For appeals of Type 3 decisions filed under Section 50.70., the City shall mail written notice of an appeal hearing to parties described in Section 50.45.2. not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the appeal hearing, but need not post or publish the notice in a newspaper.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 3 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 52 01/01/2005
50.70.
8. Not less than seven (7) calendar days before the date of the appeal hearing, the Director shall prepare and make available to the public, for review and inspection, a copy of the staff report and shall provide a copy of the staff report to the appellate decision making authority and to the appellant. The Director shall provide a copy of the staff report to members of the public at reasonable cost upon request.
9. At the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the appellate decision making authority shall take one of the following actions:
A. Continue the hearing to a date, time, and location certain, which shall be announced by the Chair. Notice of the date, time, and location certain of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published, or posted, unless the hearing is continued without announcing a date, time, and location certain, in which case notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.
B. Reverse or affirm the decision under appeal, with or without conditions or changes.
1. If the decision making authority takes action pursuant to Section 50.70.9.B., the decision making authority shall announce a brief summary of the basis for the decision, and that a land use order will be issued as provided in Section 50.70.10.; provided, the proceedings may be continued for the purpose of considering such land use order without taking new testimony or evidence.
2. Provisions for holding a record open or continuing a hearing set forth in ORS 197.763 (6) shall apply under this Ordinance in a manner consistent with state law.
C. Remand the decision to the decision making authority for further proceedings consistent with the decision on appeal provided that the appellate decision making authority first determines whether the remand would conflict with the City’s obligation under ORS 227.178 to issue a timely final decision. If the decision is to remand, the purpose of the remand, including any specific procedures or subjects to be addressed shall be directed to the decision making authority.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 3 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 53 04/01/2010
50.70.
10. After the public record on the appeal closes, a written decision in the form of a land use order regarding the application shall be prepared and contain the following:
A. A statement of the facts that the appellate decision making authority finds show the decision under appeal is reversed or affirmed based on the criteria relevant to the appeal.
B. A statement of conclusions based on the findings.
C. If the appellate decision making authority changes conditions of approval, changes denial to approval, changes denial to approval subject to conditions, or changes approval to denial, the order shall include findings explaining the basis for such change and condition.
11. Within approximately ten (10) calendar days from the date that the appellate decision making authority votes on the motion regarding the appeal, the Director shall cause a land use order to be signed, dated, and mailed to the appellant and other persons who appeared orally or in writing before the Planning Commission City Council, or all while the public record on the appeal was open. [ORD 4312; July 2004] [ORD 4532; April 2010]
12. A decision on an appeal is final on the date the signed land use order is dated and mailed. A land use order may consist of an ordinance where appropriate. The Mayor or designee shall sign the land use order.
13. [ORD 4462; January 2008] Only one appeal of a Type 3 decision is permitted before the City. Therefore the notice of a Type 3 decision on appeal shall indicate the decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals as provided in ORS 197.805 through197.860.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 3 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 54 01/01/2005
50.70.
14. If a decision of the City Council is remanded to the City by the State of Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), the City Council shall either:
A. Hold a hearing on remand if the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision can be resolved by the City Council without reopening the record for additional evidence. Notice thereof shall be given to all persons who testified either orally or in writing before the City Council at the hearing or hearings that led to the decision remanded by LUBA. The notice shall set forth issues on remand that will be considered by the City Council. Testimony shall be allowed at the hearing before the City Council, except that testimony shall be limited to the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the City Council based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall render a written decision; or
B. Remand the application, ordinance, or both to the decision making authority if the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision requires reopening the record for additional evidence. Notice of the hearing on remand shall be given in the same manner in which the initial public hearing notice was provided. The notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony will be limited to the criteria or the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the City Council based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, the notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the decision making authority shall render a written decision. A decision of the decision making authority on remand may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Section 50.70.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 4 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 55 01/01/2005
50.75. Appeal of a Type 4 Decision.
1. The decision making authority’s recommendation on a Type 4 application may be appealed only by the applicant or any other person who participated by providing either oral or written evidence leading to the decision of the decision making authority. The appeal must be received within ten (10) calendar days after the signed written land use order of the decision making authority was dated and mailed.
2. The Director shall determine whether an appeal contains at least the following information:
A. The case file number designated by the City.
B. The name and signature of each appellant.
C. Reference to the oral or written evidence provided to the decision making authority by the appellant that is contrary to the decision.
D. If multiple people sign and file a single appeal, the appeal shall include verifiable evidence that each appellant provided written testimony to the decision making authority and that the decision being appealed was contrary to such testimony. The appeal shall designate one person as the contact representative for all pre-appeal hearing contact with the City. All contact with the City regarding the appeal, including notice, shall be through this contact representative.
E. The specific approval criteria, condition, or both being appealed, the reasons why the finding, condition, or both is in error as a matter of fact, law or both, and the evidence relied on to allege the error.
F. The appeal fee, as established by resolution of the City Council.
3. Failure to comply with the requirements of Sections 50.75.1 and 50.75.2 is jurisdictional and deprives the appellant of an opportunity for the appellate decision making authority to hear an appeal.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 4 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 56 01/01/2005
50.75.
4. The appellate decision making authority on appeal of Type 4 decision shall be the City Council. The appeal hearing shall be de novo, which means new evidence and argument can be introduced in writing, orally, or both. The hearing of the appeal shall be conducted in the manner specified in Sections 50.85. through 50.88. except as otherwise required by statute.
5. For appeals filed under Section 50.75., the City shall mail written notice of an appeal hearing to parties described in Section 50.75.1. not less than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the appeal hearing, but need not post or publish the notice in a newspaper.
6. Not less than seven (7) calendar days before the date of the appeal hearing, the Director shall prepare and make available to the public, for review and inspection, a copy of the staff report and shall provide a copy of the staff report to the appellate decision making authority and to the appellant. The Director shall provide a copy of the staff report to the public at reasonable cost upon request.
7. At the conclusion of the City Council hearing in the appeal of a Type 4 decision, the Council shall take one of the following actions:
A. Continue the hearing to a date, time, and location certain, which shall be announced by the Mayor. Notice of the date, time, and location certain of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published, or posted, unless the hearing is continued without announcing a date, time, and location certain, in which case notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.
B. Remand the decision to the decision making authority for further proceedings consistent with the Council’s decision unless the remand would conflict with the City’s obligation under ORS 227.178 to issue a timely final decision. If the decision is to remand, the purpose of the remand, including any specific procedures or subjects to be addressed shall be directed to the decision making authority.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 4 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 57 04/01/2010
50.75.7.
C. Reverse or affirm the decision being appealed, with or without changes.
1. If Council indicates an intention to adopt one or more ordinances to amend the zone map, text, or both pursuant to Section 50.75.7.C., then the City Attorney shall prepare the ordinance. Ordinances shall thereafter be adopted pursuant to the City Charter. The City Council shall adopt or approve written findings which demonstrate either that approval will comply with applicable approval criteria or that, in the case of denial, the approval criteria gave not been satisfied.
2. Provisions for holding a record open or continuing a hearing set forth in ORS 197.763 (6) shall apply under this Ordinance in a manner consistent with state law.
8. After the public record on the appeal closes, a written decision in the form of a land use order.
9. Within approximately seven (7) calendar days from the date that the appellate decision making authority adopts a final decision under appeal, the Director shall cause a land use order to be signed, dated, and mailed to the appellant and other persons who appeared orally or in writing before the Planning Commission, City Council, or all while the public record on the appeal was open. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
10. A decision on an appeal is final on the date the signed land use order is dated and mailed. A land use order may include an ordinance.
11. Only one appeal of a decision is permitted before the City. Therefore the notice of a decision on appeal shall indicate the decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals as provided in ORS 197.805 through ORS 197.860.
PROCEDURES
Appeal of a Type 4 Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 58 01/01/2005
50.75.
12. If a decision of the City Council is remanded to the City by the State of Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), the City Council shall either:
A. Hold a hearing on remand if the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision can be resolved by the City Council without reopening the record for additional evidence. Notice thereof shall be given to all persons who testified either orally or in writing before the City Council at the hearing or hearings that led to the decision remanded by LUBA. The notice shall set forth issues on remand that will be considered by the City Council. Testimony shall be allowed at the hearing before the City Council, except that testimony shall be limited to the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the City Council based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall render a written decision; or
B. Remand the application, ordinance, or both to the decision making authority if the issue upon which LUBA remanded the decision requires reopening the record for additional evidence. Notice of the hearing on remand shall be given in the same manner in which the initial public hearing notice was provided. The notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony will be limited to the criteria or the issues upon which LUBA remanded the decision to the City. If the application on remand is amended in a manner which changes the applicable criteria or the factual basis on which LUBA or the City Council based its decision regarding an issue or issues not remanded, the notice shall list the applicable approval criteria and state that testimony may be provided on the full scope of the amended application. At the conclusion of the hearing, the decision making authority shall render a written decision. A decision of the decision making authority on remand may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Section 50.75.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of Planning Commission Appeal Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 59 04/01/2010
50.80. Conduct of Planning Commission Appeal Hearing.
1. The Planning Commission shall conduct appeal hearings pursuant to the requirements of this Section. [ORD 4532; April 2010]
2. At the beginning of the appeal hearing, an announcement shall be made to those in attendance that:
A. States the general nature of the appeal.
B. Lists the applicable approval criteria.
C. Testimony, arguments, and evidence must be directed toward the applicable criteria or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code which the person believes to apply to the decision.
D. Failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the appellate decision making authority and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.
E. Failure of the applicant, applicant as appellant, or appellant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed condition of approval with sufficient specificity to allow the City or its designee to respond to the issue precludes an action for damages in circuit court.
F. The appellate decision making authority must be impartial and that members of the appellate decision making authority shall not have any bias or personal or business interest in the outcome of the application. Members of the appellate decision making authority must announce any ex parte contacts. The appellate decision making authority shall afford parties an opportunity to challenge any member thereof based on bias, conflicts of interest, or ex parte contacts.
G. States that if any member of the appellate decision making authority has visited the site, they describe generally what was observed.
H. Summarize the procedure of the hearing.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of Planning Commission Appeal Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 60 01/01/2005
50.80.
3. The Chair shall next ask if there is any challenge to a member of the appellate decision making authority right to consider the appeal. Unless the challenge is based upon information disclosed pursuant to Section 50.80.2.F. and .G., a challenging party must deliver a written document stating the reasons and authority for such challenge to the member challenged and the City at least 24 hours prior to the hearing.
4. After the announcements and statements of Sections 50.80.2 and 50.80.3 are concluded, the Chair shall call for presentation of the staff report. Staff shall describe the proposal and explain the reasons behind the Director's decision.
5. The Chair shall invite testimony on the appeal to take place in the following order unless the appellate decision making authority consents to amend the order of testimony:
A. The applicant, if not the appellant.
B. The applicant as appellant.
C. The appellant, if not the applicant.
D. Testimony in support of the appeal.
E. Testimony in opposition to the appeal.
F. Testimony that is neither in support nor in opposition to the appeal.
G. Rebuttal testimony by the appellant, if the appellant is the applicant. The appellant's rebuttal is limited to responding to testimony previously submitted and shall be based solely on the evidence in the record.
6. The Chair shall allow for final comments from staff.
7. The appellate decision making authority shall deliberate and make a decision. Deliberations may include questions to or testimony by City staff regarding the criteria, evidence and testimony in the record.
PROCEDURES
Time Limits on Testimony
Chapter 50 PR - 61 04/01/2010
50.82. Time Limits on Planning Commission Appeal Hearing Testimony.
1. The purpose of time limits on testimony at an appeal hearing before the Planning Commission is to provide all interested persons with an adequate opportunity to present and respond to testimony while at the same time ensuring that the hearing can be conducted in an efficient and expeditious manner. Time limits on testimony shall not be placed on staff presentations. The following time limits on testimony shall be observed during a hearing conducted by the appellate decision making authority unless the appellate decision making authority consents to adjust the time limits in a particular instance:
A. Up to and including 20 minutes for the applicant, if not the appellant, or the applicant as appellant’s presentation.
B. Up to and including 20 minutes for the appellant’s, if not the applicant, presentation.
C. Up to and including 10 minutes for a representative of a recognized NAC, government or government agency, or other organized group recognized by the appellate decision making authority.
D. Up to and including 5 minutes each for other persons.
E. Up to and including 5 minutes of rebuttal for the applicant, if not the appellant, or the appellant who is the applicant.
[ORD 4532; April 2010]
2. The time limits set forth in Section 50.82.1. shall not include time taken by questions from or response to questions of the appellate decision making authority.
PROCEDURES
Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence
Chapter 50 PR - 62 08/10/2006
50.83. Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence before the Planning Commission.
1. Any person may present testimony at a hearing before the appellate decision making authority on an appeal of a Type 1 or Type 2 decision.
2. Any person may submit exhibits or written comments prior to the hearing. All submittals shall be made on 8 ½ by 11 inch standard bond paper. All submittals which are more than two (2) letter sized pages must include of no fewer than ten (10) complete copies of the materials being submitted. Written comments or exhibits submitted prior to the hearing to be submitted by staff at the hearing must be received by the Director no later than 4:30 p.m. on the day of the scheduled hearing. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
3. Written comments or exhibits submitted at the hearing must be filed with the recording secretary and offered into the record before the appellate decision making authority. No fewer than ten (10) copies of written comments or exhibits must be provided if those materials are submitted at the hearing.
4. Exhibits or written comments that are merely referred to in testimony but which are not offered into the record before the appellate decision making authority in accordance with this Section shall not become part of the record of the proceedings.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of City Council Appeal Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 63 01/01/2005
50.85. Conduct of the City Council Appeal Hearing.
1. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on appeal pursuant to the requirements of this Section and the Municipal Code except as otherwise required by statute. At the beginning of the appeal hearing, the Chair shall make an announcement to those in attendance that:
A. States the general nature of the appeal.
B. Lists the applicable approval criteria.
C. Testimony, arguments, and evidence must be directed toward the applicable approval criteria or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code which the person believes to apply to the decision.
D. Failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the appellate decision making authority and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.
E. Failure of the applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed condition of approval with sufficient specificity to allow the City or its designee to respond to the issue precludes an action for damages in circuit court.
F. The appellate decision making authority must be impartial and that members of the appellate decision making authority shall not have any bias or personal or business interest in the outcome of the application. Members of the appellate decision making authority must announce any ex parte contacts. The appellate decision making authority shall afford parties an opportunity to challenge any member thereof based on bias, conflicts of interest, or ex parte contacts.
G. States that if any member of the appellate decision making authority has visited the site, they describe generally what was observed.
H. Summarizes the procedure of the hearing.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of City Council Appeal Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 64 01/01/2005
50.85.
2. The Chair shall next ask if there is any challenge to the Mayor’s or a Councilor's right to consider the appeal. Unless the challenge is based upon information revealed pursuant to Section 50.85.1.F. and .G., a challenging party must deliver a written document at least 24 hours prior to the hearing setting forth the reasons and authority for such challenge to the member challenged and the Mayor.
3. After the announcements and statements of Sections 50.85.1. and .2. are made, the Chair shall call for presentation of the staff report. Staff shall describe the proposal and provide a recommendation.
4. If the appeal hearing for a Type 3 decision is an on the record hearing, the Chair shall state that City Council review is confined to the record established before the decision making authority, that only persons who testified either orally or in writing before the decision making authority may testify before the City Council, and that the only arguments that may be raised before the City Council are arguments that were raised in the letter of appeal and those arguments raised before the decision making authority with sufficient specificity to enable the decision making authority to respond.
5. If the appeal hearing is to consider an appeal of a Type 4 decision, the Chair shall state that City Council review is not confined to the arguments that were raised in the letter of appeal.
6. The Chair shall invite testimony on the appeal to take place in the following order unless the appellate decision making authority consents to amend the order of testimony:
A. The applicant, if not the appellant.
B. The appellant, if not the applicant.
C. Testimony in support of the appeal.
D. Testimony in opposition to the appeal.
F. Testimony that is neither in support nor in opposition to the appeal.
PROCEDURES
Conduct of City Council Appeal Hearing
Chapter 50 PR - 65 01/01/2005
50.85.6.
G. Rebuttal testimony by the appellant, if the appellant is the applicant. The appellant's rebuttal is limited to responding to testimony previously submitted and shall be based solely on the evidence in the record.
7. The Chair shall allow final comments from staff.
8. The Council shall deliberate and make a decision. The Council deliberations may include questions to or testimony by City staff regarding the criteria, evidence and testimony in the record.
PROCEDURES
Time Limits on Council Appeal Testimony
Chapter 50 PR - 66 01/01/2005
50.87. Time Limits on City Council Appeal Hearing Testimony.
1. The purpose of time limits on testimony at an appeal hearing before the City Council is to provide persons with an adequate opportunity to present and respond to testimony while at the same time ensuring that the hearing can be conducted in an efficient and expeditious manner. Time limits on testimony shall not be placed on staff presentations. The following time limits on testimony shall be observed during a hearing conducted by the appellate decision making authority unless the appellate decision making authority, subject to the right of the Mayor, with Council consent, waive or extend the time limits in a particular instance:
A. Up to and including 15 minutes for the applicant, if not the appellant, or applicant as appellant’s presentation.
B. Up to and including 15 minutes for the appellant's presentation, if not the applicant.
C. Up to and including 10 minutes for a representative of a recognized NAC, Homeowners’ Association, government or government agency, or other organized group recognized by the City Council.
D. Up to and including 5 minutes each for other persons.
E. Up to and including 5 minutes of rebuttal for the applicant, if not the appellant, or the appellant who is the applicant.
2. The time limits set forth in Section 50.87.1. shall not include time taken up by questions from Council or responses thereto.
PROCEDURES
Testimony, Exhibits and Other Evidence
Chapter 50 PR - 67 01/01/2005
50.88. Testimony, Exhibits, and Other Evidence before the City Council.
1. For appeal hearings which are conducted on the record, only those persons who testified either orally or in writing before the decision making authority may testify either orally or in writing before the Council on appeal. Such testimony shall be limited to argument regarding issues raised before the decision making authority. The only issues that may be raised in an appeal hearing are the issues in the written appeal and shall be based solely upon the record of the proceedings before the decision making authority. Enlargements, illustrations, maps or other exhibits may be submitted as long as they are part of the record or are entirely derived from evidence in the record.
2. For appeal hearings which are conducted de novo, any interested person may testify either orally or in writing before the Council on appeal. Such testimony shall be limited to addressing the applicable approval criteria or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or Development Code which the person believes to apply to the decision.
3. Subject to the limitations in Sections 50.88.1. and 50.88.2., written testimony may be submitted prior to the hearing. All submittals which are more than two (2) letter sized pages must include no fewer ten (10) complete copies of the materials being submitted. Written testimony submitted prior to the hearing must be received by the City Recorder by 5:00 p.m. on the day of the scheduled hearing.
4. Subject to the limitations in Sections 50.88.1 and 50.88.2, written testimony submitted at the hearing must be filed with the recording secretary and offered into the record before the City Council. No fewer than ten (10) copies of written comments or exhibits must be provided if those materials are submitted at the hearing.
5. Written evidence that is merely referred to in testimony but which is not provided to the City Council pursuant to this section shall not become part of the record of the proceedings.
6. At appeal hearings which are conducted on the record, written material that attempts to present new evidence or raises new issues which were not presented or raised before the decision making authority shall be rejected.
PROCEDURES
Withdrawal of an Appeal
Chapter 50 PR - 68 01/01/2005
50.89. Withdrawal of an Appeal.
1. Before the close of an appeal hearing in front of any appellate decision making authority, any appellant may withdraw his appeal.
2. Withdrawal of an appeal is subject to the following:
A. The party may withdraw the appeal on its own motion, which may be submitted to the appellate decision making authority orally or in writing.
B. No part of the appeal fee will be refunded.
C. No one may re-file a withdrawn appeal.
D. Where multiple people or parties sign and file a single appeal document, all must consent to the withdrawal of the appeal.
3. In addition to all the requirements of Section 50.89.1. and .2., if all appeals in a matter are withdrawn, the appellate decision making authority loses jurisdiction over the action. The underlying decision is automatically re-instated under its original date of final decision.
PROCEDURES
Expiration of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 69 09/11/2015
50.90. Expiration of a Decision.
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided in a specific decision or in this Code, a final decision made pursuant to this Chapter shall expire automatically on the following schedule unless the approval is enacted either through construction or establishment of use within the specified time period.
A. Five (5) years from the effective date of decision where phasing of the development is proposed.
Planned Unit Development (Section 40.15.15.4.)
Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision (Section 40.45.15.7.)
Preliminary Subdivision (Section 40.45.15.5.)
Replat Two (Section 40.45.15.3.)
B. Two (2) years from the effective date of decision:
Accessory Dwelling Unit (Section 40.05.15.1.)
Alteration of a Landmark (Section 40.35.15.1.)
Commercial Timber Harvest (Section 40.90.15.4.)
Conditional Use (Section 40.15.15.4.)
Demolition of a Landmark (Section 40.35.15.3.)
Design Review Two (Section 40.20.15.2.)
Design Review Three (Section 40.20.15.3.)
Emergency Demolition of a Landmark (Section 40.35.15.2.)
Expedited Land Division (Section 40.45.15.8.)
Final Land Division (Section 40.45.15.7.)
Flexible Setback for Individual Lot With Endorsement (Section 40.30.15.1.)
Flexible Setback for Individual Lot Without Endorsement (Section 40.30.15.2.)
Flexible Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division (Section 40.30.15.3.)
Food Cart Pod (Section 40.3215.2)
Major Adjustment (Section 40.10.15.2.)
Major Adjustment-Affordable Housing (Section 40.10.15.4.)
Major Modification of a Conditional Use (Section 40.15.15.2.)
Minor Adjustment (Section 40.10.15.1.)
Minor Adjustment-Affordable Housing (Section 40.10.15.3.)
Minor Modification of a Conditional Use (Section 40.15.15.1.)
New Construction in a Historic District (Section 40.35.15.4.)
Planned Unit Development (Section 40.15.15.4.) when there is no phasing to the development
PROCEDURES
Expiration of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 70 09/11/2015
50.90.1.B.
Preliminary Fee Ownership Partition (Section 40.45.15.6.)
Preliminary Fee Ownership Subdivision (Section 40.45.15.7.) when there is no phasing to the development
Preliminary Partition (Section 40.45.15.4.)
Preliminary Subdivision (Section 40.45.15.5.) when there is no phasing to the development
Property Line Adjustment (Section 40.45.15.1.)
Public Transportation Facility (Section 40.57.15.1.)
Replat One (Section 40.45.15.2.)
Replat Two (Section 40.45.15.3.) when there is no phasing to the development
Tree Plan One (Section 40.90.15.1.)
Tree Plan Two (Section 40.90.15.2.)
Tree Plan Three (Section 40.90.15.3.)
THPRD Annexation Waiver (Section 40.93.15.)
Variance (Section 40.95.15.1.)
Wireless Facility One (Section 40.96.15.1.)
Wireless Facility Two (Section 40.96.15.2.)
Wireless Facility Three (Section 40.96.15.3.)
Zero Side or Zero Rear Yard Setback for a Proposed Residential Land Division (Section 40.30.15.4.)
Zero Side Yard Setback for a Proposed Non-Residential Land Division (Section 40.30.15.5.)
C. One (1) year from the effective date of the decision:
Design Review Compliance Letter (Section 40.20.15.1.)
Food Cart Pod Modification (40.32.15.1)
Home Occupation One (Section 40.40.15.1.)
Home Occupation Two (Section 40.40.15.2.)
Loading Determination (Section 40.50.15.1.)
Parking Requirement Determination (Section 40.55.15.1.)
Shared Parking (Section 40.55.15.2.)
Sidewalk Design Modification (Section 40.58.15.)
Signs (Section 40.60.15.1.)
Solar Access (Section 40.65.15.1.)
Use of Excess Parking (Section 40.55.15.3.)
PROCEDURES
Expiration of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 71 06/01/2012
50.90.1.
D. No expiration date:
Director's Interpretation (Section 40.25.15.1.)
Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.15.4.).
Legislative Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.15.2.)
Non-Discretionary Annexation Related Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.15.3.)
Quasi-Judicial Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.15.1.)
Street Vacation (Section 40.75.15.1.)
Text Amendment (Section 40.85.15.1.)
[ORD 4265; October 2003] [ORD 4332; January 2005] [ORD 4388; May 2006] [ORD 4397; August 2006] [ORD 4487; August 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009] [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4662; September 2015]
2. The effective date of the decision for Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 applications shall be the date that the signed land use order is dated and mailed, unless appealed. If a Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 application is appealed, the effective date of the decision shall be the date of the appellate decision making authority’s signed land use order is dated and mailed. The effective date of decision for a Type 4 application is thirty (30) calendar days after the Mayor signs the ordinance, unless an emergency is declared in which case the ordinance is effective immediately upon signature of the Mayor.
3. A decision shall expire according to Section 50.90.1. unless one of the following occurs prior to the date of expiration:
A. An application for an extension is filed pursuant to Section 50.93.; or
B. The development authorized by the decision has commenced as defined herein.
1. The use of the subject property has changed as allowed by the approval;
2. In the case of development requiring construction, a construction permit has been issued and substantial construction pursuant thereto has taken place; or
PROCEDURES
Expiration of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 72 10/20/2005
50.90.
3. In the case of development authorized to be done in phases, each phase must be commenced within the time specified in the approval, or within two (2) years of completion of the prior phase if no time is specified.
4. The 45 day to five (5) year time begins from the effective date of the decision. Appeal of a decision to LUBA does not extend the time.
PROCEDURES
Extension of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 73 06/01/2012
50.93. Extension of a Decision.
1. An application to extend the expiration date of a decision made pursuant to the Development Code may be filed only before the decision expires as provided in Section 50.90. or before the decision expires as provided in the appropriate subsection of the specific application contained in Chapter 40 (Applications). [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. The following land use decisions are not subject to extensions of time: Director's Interpretation (Section 40.25.), Home Occupation (Section 40.40.), Loading Determination (Section 40.50.), Parking Requirement Determination (Section 40.55.15.1.), Shared Parking (Section 40.54.15.2.), Use of Excess Parking (Section 40.54.15.3.), Sign (Section 40.60.), Solar Access (Section 40.65.), Temporary Mobile Sales (Section 40.80.15.1.), Temporary Non-Mobile Sales (Section 40.80.15.2.), and all Zoning Map Amendment (Section 40.97.) applications. [ORD 4544; July 2010]
3. A land use decision may be extended no more than two (2) times.
4. Extension of a land use decision for an application not listed in Section 50.93.2. may be granted for a period of time not to exceed two (2) years, will be subject to a Type 2 review procedure, and must be found to be consistent with the approval criteria listed in Section 50.93.6. [ORD 4544; July 2010]
5. Extension requests shall provide mailed public notice to those parties identified in Section 50.40.2. In addition, the notice shall be mailed to the parties of record contained in the initial land use decision and any prior extension of time decision. [ORD 4544; July 2010]
PROCEDURES
Extension of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 74 10/20/2005
50.93.
6. In order to approve an extension of time application, the decision making authority shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied: [ORD 4365; October 2005]
A. It is not practicable to commence development within the time allowed for reasons beyond the reasonable control of the applicant.
B. There has been no change in circumstances or the applicable regulations or Statutes likely to necessitate modification of the decision or conditions of approval since the effective date of the decision for which the extension is sought.
C. The previously approved land use decision is not being modified in design, use, or conditions of approval.
[ORD 4483; June 2008]
PROCEDURES
Modification of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 75 01/01/2005
50.95. Modification of a Decision.
1. An applicant or successor in interest may file with the Director an application to modify a prior decision that was the subject of a Type 1, Type 2 or Type 3 procedure. In addition to other requirements, such an application to modify a prior decision shall describe the nature of the proposed change to the original decision and the basis for that change, including the applicable facts and law, together with the fee prescribed for that application type necessary to modify the prior decision. Such an application to modify a prior decision shall be subject to the approval criteria and development regulations in effect when the Director receives a complete application for the modification.
2. An application for modification is subject to pre-application conference and completeness review; provided, the Director shall only require an application for modification to contain information that is relevant or necessary to address the requested change or the facts and regulations on which it is based. An application for modification is not subject to the neighborhood review meeting requirement.
3. An application for modification does not extend the deadline for filing an appeal and does not stay appeal proceedings. An application for modification is subject to the 120 day requirement pursuant to ORS 227.178.
4. Only a decision that approves or conditionally approves an application can be modified. A decision denying an application cannot be modified. Refer to Section 50.99.
5. An application for modification shall be subject to a Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 procedure as determined by the Director.
PROCEDURES
Modification of a Decision
Chapter 50 PR - 76 01/01/2005
50.95.
6. The process type for an application to modify a decision shall be based upon the thresholds for the appropriate application listed in Chapter 40. In all cases, regardless of the thresholds listed in Chapter 40, when a proposed modification involves a condition of approval, that condition of approval can be modified or removed only by the same decision making authority that issued the original decision and through the same procedure that was followed to establish the condition to be modified. Modification or removal of a condition of approval shall only be granted if the decision making authority determines any one of the following:
A. The applicant or owner has demonstrated that a mistake of law or fact occurred, and that the mistake was substantial enough to warrant modification or removal of the condition to correct the mistake.
B. The condition could not be implemented for reasons beyond the control of the applicant and the modification will not require a significant modification of the original decision.
C. The circumstances have changed to the extent that the condition is no longer needed or warranted.
D. A new or modified condition would better accomplish the purpose of the original condition.
PROCEDURES
Permit Renewal
Chapter 50 PR - 77 08/13/2009
50.97. Permit Renewal. [ORD 4513; August 2009]
1. Only a decision that approves or conditionally approves a permit for Temporary Use - Mobile Sales, as described under Section 40.80.15.1., is eligible for renewal under this Section.
2. To be eligible for permit renewal, the applicant must submit an application for Temporary Use - Mobile Sales and fee before the existing permit expires.
3. Only the applicant who received approval for the last permit issued for the same activity on the same site may apply for and receive permit renewal.
4. Permit renewal may be granted if the Director finds as follows:
A. That all conditions of past permit approval have been satisfied.
B. That all existing site conditions remain the same as when the permit was first issued.
C. Applicable provisions of the Development Code have not changed to the extent that such change necessitates further review of the applicant’s proposal under a new permit for Temporary Use - Mobile Sales.
D. That all other required licenses and permits have been renewed.
5. The Planning Director may impose other conditions of permit renewal in addition to the conditions previously issued for Temporary Use Mobile Sales approval. Where the Planning Director has imposed other conditions for permit renewal, or denied permit renewal, the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant the proceedings as described in Section 50.60. of the Development Code.
6. An application for Permit Renewal is subject to the 120 day requirement pursuant to ORS 227.178.
7. Permit Renewal shall expire after one year and shall be allowed for no more than two consecutive periods.
PROCEDURES
Re-Application after Denial
Chapter 50 PR - 78 01/01/2005
50.99. Re-Application or Supplemental Application after Denial.
1. If an application is denied by the decision making authority and no appeal taken, or upon appeal the appellate decision making authority affirms the denial of the decision making authority or denies the appeal, no new request for the same or substantially similar proposal shall be filed within one year after the date of the final decision subject to pre-application conference, a neighborhood review meeting unless the denial is specifically stated by the decision maker to be without prejudice.
2. Only a person whose application is denied following completion of all local procedures, including local appeals allowed by right, may submit to the City a supplemental application to allow any or all other uses allowed under the existing comprehensive plan map designation for the property, pursuant to ORS 227.184.
A. Such an application shall include a request for any zone change, Conditional Use, or Variance that may be required for approval of each proposal.
B. Such an application shall be subject to a pre-application conference, a neighborhood review meeting, completeness review, and a Type 3 procedure, provided:
1. The City shall issue a final decision regarding such an application, including all local appeals, not more than 240 days after the City finds or deems the application to be complete.
2. The City decision shall include findings describing the reasons for approving or denying a use for which approval is sought under this section and for any zone change or variance requested in the application.
C. The fee for an application under this section shall be the sum of the separate fees for each review sought pursuant to the application.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Principles
Chapter 60 SR - 1 06/01/2012
CHAPTER 60 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
60.05. DESIGN REVIEW DESIGN PRINCIPLES, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES [ORD 4332; January 2005]
60.05.05. Purpose. The following design principles, standards and guidelines shall be met by new development and redevelopment where applicable, throughout the City. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
60.05.10. Design Principles. The following design principles are general statements to guide the development of the built environment, the appearance of that development, and the effect of that development on the existing surroundings. The design guidelines and standards implement these principles. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Building Design and Orientation. Design buildings that enhance the visual character of the community and take into account the surrounding neighborhoods, provide permanence, and create a sense of place. In Residential, Commercial and Multiple Use districts, design buildings that contribute to a safe, high quality pedestrian-oriented streetscape.
2. Multiple Use District Building Orientation and Design. Locate buildings so they are conveniently and safely accessible from on-site and off-site sidewalks and streets, and so buildings near the edge of a right of way provide a high quality, pedestrian oriented streetscape, contribute to safety by offering “eyes on the street” and promote pedestrian safety and use. Provide a pedestrian-friendly environment through building and site design treatments that may vary in nature and degree depending on the character of the urban area, the characteristics of the street, and the type of use and development proposed.
3. Circulation and Parking Design. Provide integrated multi-modal circulation and parking improvements that are safe and convenient, connect to surrounding neighborhoods and streets, and serve the needs of development.
4. Landscape, Open Space, and Natural Areas Design. Create landscape areas that contribute to the aesthetics of the community, conserve, protect, enhance or restore natural features and the natural environment, provide an attractive setting for buildings, and provide safe, interesting outdoor spaces for residents, customers, employees, and the community. Whenever possible, utilize native vegetative species which are disease and drought tolerant.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Principles
Chapter 60 SR - 2 06/01/2012
60.05.10.
5. Lighting Design. Provide exterior lighting for buildings, parking lots, pedestrian pathways, vehicular areas, pedestrian plazas, public open spaces to ensure public safety and convenience, and to minimize excessive illumination on environmentally sensitive areas, adjoining properties, and streets.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 3 07/10/2015
60.05.15. Building Design and Orientation Standards. Unless otherwise noted, all standards apply in all zoning districts.
1. Building articulation and variety.
A. Attached residential buildings in Residential zones shall be limited in length to two hundred (200) feet. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
B. Buildings visible from and within 200 feet of an adjacent public street shall have a minimum portion of the street-facing elevation(s) and the elevation(s) containing a primary building entrance or multiple tenant entrances devoted to permanent architectural features designed to provide articulation and variety. These permanent features include, but are not limited to windows, bays and offsetting walls that extend at least eighteen inches (18”), recessed entrances, loading doors and bays, and changes in material types. Changes in material types shall have a minimum dimension of two feet and minimum area of 25 square feet. The percentage of the total square footage of elevation area is: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Thirty (30) percent in Residential zones, and all uses in Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Fifty (50) percent in Commercial zones where glazing is less than thirty five (35) percent pursuant to Section 60.05.15.8.A.3.
3. Fifteen (15) percent in Industrial zones. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
In Industrial zones, where the principal use of the building is manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage, wholesale or distribution activities, the above standards shall apply only to elevations visible from and within 100 feet of an adjacent public street, and elevations that include a primary building entrance or multiple tenant entrances. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 4 07/10/2015
60.05.15.1.
C. The maximum spacing between permanent architectural features shall be no more than:
1. Forty (40) feet in Residential zones, and all uses in Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Sixty (60) feet in Industrial zones.
3. Fifteen (15) feet in detached residential developments in Multiple Use zones for walls facing streets, common greens, and shared courts. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
D. In addition to the requirements of Section 60.05.15.1.B. and .C., detached and attached residential building elevations facing a street, common green or shared court shall not consist of undifferentiated blank walls greater than 150 square feet in area. Building elevations shall be articulated with architectural features such as windows, dormers, porch details, alcoves, balconies or bays. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
2. Roof forms.
A. All sloped roofs exposed to view from adjacent public or private streets and properties shall have a minimum 4/12 pitch.
B. Sloped roofs on residential uses in residential zones and on all uses in multiple use and commercial zones shall have eaves, exclusive of rain gutters, that must project from the building wall at least twelve (12) inches. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. All roofs with a slope of less than 4/12 pitch shall be articulated with a parapet wall that must project vertically above the roof line at least twelve (12) inches or architecturally treated, such as with a decorative cornice. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
D. When an addition to an existing structure or a new structure is proposed in an existing development, the roof forms for the new structures shall have similar slope and be constructed of the same materials as existing roofs.
E. Smaller feature roofs are not subject to the standards of this Section.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 5 06/01/2012
60.05.15.
3. Primary building entrances.
A. Primary entrances, which are the main point(s) of entry where the majority of building users will enter and leave, shall be covered, recessed, or treated with a permanent architectural feature in such a way that weather protection is provided. The covered area providing weather protection shall be at least six (6) feet wide and four (4) feet deep.
4. Exterior building materials.
A. For attached residential uses in Residential zones and all residential uses in Multiple Use zones, a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of each elevation that is visible from and within 200 feet of a public street or a public park, public plaza or other public open space, and on elevations that include a primary building entrance or multiple tenant entrances shall be double wall construction. [ORD 4542; June 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. For Conditional Uses in Residential zones and all uses in Commercial and Multiple Use zones (except detached residential uses fronting streets, common greens and shared courts), a maximum of thirty (30) percent of each elevation that is visible from and within 200 feet of a public street or a public park, public plaza or other public open space, and on elevations that include a primary building entrance or multiple tenant entrances may be plain, smooth, unfinished concrete, concrete block, plywood and sheet pressboard. The remaining elevation area for all applicable uses in all applicable zones shall be architecturally treated. Appropriate methods of architectural treatment shall include, but are not limited to, scoring, changes in material texture, and the application of other finish materials such as wood, rock, brick or tile wall treatment. [ORD 4542; June 2010] [ORD 4576; January 2012] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 6 06/01/2012
60.05.15.4.B.
This standard shall also apply to all uses in the Industrial zones, except for buildings containing manufacturing, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution facilities as a principal use of the site where this standard shall apply only to the primary elevation that is visible from and within 200 feet of a public street or a public park, public plaza or other public open space.
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
C. For Conditional Uses in Residential zones and all uses in Commercial and Multiple Use zones, plain, smooth, exposed concrete and concrete block used as foundation material shall not be more than three (3) feet above the finished grade level adjacent to the foundation wall, unless pigmented, textured, or both. In Industrial districts, foundations may extend up to four (4) feet above the finished grade level. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
5. Roof-mounted equipment.
A. All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view from adjacent streets or adjacent properties in one of the following ways:
1. A parapet wall; or
2. A screen around the equipment that is made of a primary exterior finish material used on other portions of the building; or
3. Setback from the street-facing elevation such that it is not visible from the public street(s).
B. The vertical measuring distance for required screening shall be measured at five (5) feet above the finished or existing grade of the property line or public right-of-way abutting the development site’s front yard setback for a distance of one hundred (100) lineal feet measured outward from the development site’s front property line. Once the vertical measuring distance is established for the site’s front yard, this same vertical measuring distance shall be applied to all sides of the development site’s perimeter property lines. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 7 06/01/2012
60.05.15.5.
C. Solar panels, dishes/antennas, pipes, vents, and chimneys are exempt from this standard.
6. Building location and orientation along streets in Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Buildings in Multiple Use zones shall occupy a minimum public street frontage as follows:
1. 50 percent of the street frontage where a parcel abuts a Class 1 Major Pedestrian Route.
2. 35 percent of the street frontage where a parcel abuts a Class 2 Major Pedestrian Route.
3. 35 percent of the street frontage where a parcel does not abut any Major Pedestrian Route and the parcel exceeds 60,000 gross square feet. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
4. 50 percent of the street frontage for detached residential projects where the parcel abuts any street, common green or shared court. [ORD 4542; June 2010] [ORD 4576; January 2012]
B. [ORD 4462; January 2008] Buildings in Commercial zones shall occupy a minimum of 35 percent public street frontage where a parcel exceeds 60,000 gross square feet.
C. Buildings subject to the street frontage standard shall be located no farther than 20 feet from the property line. The area between the building and property line shall be landscaped to standards found in Section 60.05.25.5.B. or 60.05.25.5.C.
D. Buildings on corner lots of multiple Major Pedestrian Routes shall be located at the intersections of the Major Pedestrian Routes. Where a site has more than one corner on a Major Pedestrian Route, this requirement must be met at only one corner.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 8 05/19/2017
60.05.15.6.
E. Buildings subject to the street frontage standard shall have at least one primary building entrance oriented toward an abutting street or public pedestrian way. Where there is more than one abutting Class 1 Major Pedestrian Route, the primary entrance shall have a reasonably direct pedestrian connection to a minimum of one abutting Class 1 Major Pedestrian Route or shall be oriented to a Class 1 Major Pedestrian Route corner. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
1. A minimum of one primary building entrance shall not be set back more than 20 feet from the abutting public street or public pedestrian way.
2. Pedestrian connections to street oriented primary building entrances shall not cross vehicular circulation and parking areas.
F. Secondary entrances may face on streets, off-street parking areas, or landscaped courtyards.
7. Building scale along Major Pedestrian Routes.
A. The height of any portion of a building at or within 20 feet of the property line as measured from the finished grade at the property line abutting a Major Pedestrian Route shall be a minimum of twenty- two (22) feet and a maximum of sixty (60) feet. Building heights greater than sixty (60) feet are allowed if the portion of a building that is greater than sixty (60) feet in height is at least twenty (20) feet from the property line that abuts the Major Pedestrian Route. In all cases, building height shall meet the requirement of Section 20.20.50. for the specific zoning district. [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Detached residential dwellings are exempt from the minimum height standard in Section 60.05.15.7.A. Building heights shall meet the requirements of Section 20.20.20. for the specific zoning district. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
C. The maximum heights specified in Section 20.20.50. shall not be exceeded, unless separately authorized through an adjustment or variance application, or where credits are earned for height increase through Habitat Friendly Development Practices, as described in Section 60.12.40.4.B.2. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 9 05/19/2017
60.05.15.
8. Ground floor elevations on commercial and multiple use buildings.
A. Except those used exclusively for residential use, ground floor elevations visible from and within 200 feet of a public street, Major Pedestrian Route, or a public park, public plaza or other public open space, and elevations that include a primary building entrance or multiple tenant entrances, shall have the following minimum percent of the ground floor elevation area permanently treated with windows, display areas or glass doorway openings.
1. Class 1 Major Pedestrian Routes: Fifty (50) percent.
2. Class 2 Major Pedestrian Routes: Thirty-five (35) percent.
3. Buildings on parcels in excess of 25,000 gross square feet within a Commercial zoning district: Thirty-five (35) percent.
Less glazing may be provided in a Commercial zoning district when increased building articulation and architectural variety is provided pursuant to Section 60.05.15.1.B.2. of this Code.
For the purpose of this standard, ground floor elevation area shall be measured from three (3) feet above grade to ten (10) feet above grade the entire width of the elevation. The ground floor elevation requirements shall be met from grade to twelve (12) feet above grade.
B. Except those used exclusively for residential use, ground floor elevations that are located on a Major Pedestrian Route, sidewalk, or other space where pedestrians are allowed to walk shall provide weather protection to the following minimum percent of the length of those elevations.
1. Class 1 Major Pedestrian Routes: Fifty (50) percent.
2. Class 2 Major Pedestrian Routes: Thirty-five (35) percent.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 10 06/01/2012
60.05.15.
9. Compact Detached Housing design. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Primary building entrances and porches accessing a primary entrance shall face streets, common greens or shared courts and must meet the requirements of Section 60.05.15.3. Porches, if provided, shall have clear dimensions of at least six (6) feet wide and four (4) feet deep, and shall be covered by a roof. The primary entrance must be within 4 feet of grade, as measured as the average grade along the foundation of the longest wall of the building elevation containing the primary entrance or porch. [ORD 4576; January 2012]
B. Elevations on residential units facing streets, common greens and shared courts shall have a minimum of 25 percent of the elevation area on each floor permanently treated with windows.
C. Windows shall be vertical or square in proportion. Horizontal windows may be created when vertical windows or a mixture of vertical and other shaped windows are grouped together, or there is a row of clerestory windows across the top of the grouped windows.
D. [ORD 4576; January 2012] Alleys (including access easements) and shared courts are the preferred options to serve garages, and shall be provided on all lots except where topography, or other identified physical constraints preclude their use. Within a project, the majority of units shall have garages accessed from alleys or shared courts.
E. When parking is provided in a garage facing a street or shared court, the following standards must be met:
1. No more than fifty (50) percent of the horizontal length of the ground floor elevation facing a street or shared court shall be an attached garage door entrance (i.e., garage doorway) or 12 feet long, whichever is greater.
2. Garages shall be recessed at least one and one half (1.5) feet from the ground floor front of the dwelling.
3. There may be no more than two individual garage doors per dwelling unit.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 11 06/01/2012
60.05.15.9.E.
4. [ORD 4576; January 2012] The width of the driveway (at the back of sidewalk) shall not exceed 12 feet for single lane and 16 feet for double lane driveways.
5. [ORD 4576; January 2012] A maximum of 50% of the units within a project shall have driveways 16 feet in width. No two lots of this configuration shall be adjacent to one another.
F. Garages that face a street or shared court shall contain one or more of the following design features. Garages shall not terminate the view into shared courts from a public street unless they contain two or more of the following design features:
1. Garage trellis or pergola extending at least 12 inches from the building face
2. Windows on 15% of the garage door
3. Decorative hardware
4. Natural wood finish
5. A recess of at least three (3) feet
6. Multiple materials finish or colors are used
G. Residential structures must have a roof that meets or exceeds the requirements of Section 60.05.15.2.
H. There must be architectural detailing that varies from unit to unit. Architectural detailing includes but is not limited to the following list. Some design features include requirements that exceed a minimum standard found elsewhere in this code. Each dwelling shall utilize at least five (5) of the following design features:
1. The use of different exterior siding materials. In general, materials should change on horizontal planes, not vertical planes. Types of siding materials include:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 12 06/18/2019
60.05.15.9.H.1.
a. Horizontal lap siding, including simulated horizontal lap siding where the boards in the pattern are 6 inches or less in width;
b. Vertical cedar siding;
c. Beveled siding,
d. Shingles
e. Stucco
f. Brick
g. Stone
h. Scored masonry
i. Changes in a combination of texture, pattern or color of a single material
2. A primary sloped roof that is no flatter than 6/12 and no steeper than 12/12. (Exceeds the requirements of Section 60.05.15.2.).
3. A tile or shake roof.
4. One or more dormers on the front elevation.
5. Three or more gables.
6. Elevations on residential units facing streets, common greens and shared courts having at least 40 percent of the elevation area on each floor permanently treated with windows (Exceeds the requirements of Section 60.05.15.9.B.).
7. Window shutters on windows which face streets, common greens or shared courts.
8. Bay or bowed windows on the front elevation.
9. Trim marking roof lines, porches, windows and doors on all elevations. The trim must be at least 3-1/2 inches wide.
10. Weather protection for primary building entrances that exceed the minimum area requirements of Section 60.05.15.3. by 25%. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 13 06/18/2019
60.05.15.9.H.
11. Porches on the front elevation that have clear dimensions of at least eight feet wide and six feet deep, and are covered by a roof supported by structurally integral columns or brackets.
12. Balcony on the same façade as the main entrance. The balcony must be at least 48 square feet and a minimum 8 feet wide, and must be accessible from the interior living space of the house.
13. An attached garage with a gable or hip roof, or with a second story above the garage.
14. Building face or roof offsets (minimum 12 inch offset) on the front elevation.
15. Permanent planter boxes of at least 25 square feet constructed as an extension of a front elevation or primary building entrance.
16. A landscaped courtyard of at least 100 square feet located as a transition element between a primary building entrance and a street, common green or shared court. The landscaping within the courtyard shall exceed the minimum requirements of Section 60.05.25.4. by 15%. [ORD 4576; January 2012]
17. Other architectural or design elements that apply to at least 10 percent of the front elevation and result in visual interest, variety and beauty.
H. [ORD 4576; January 2012] Building elevations shall not be repeated across a street, shared court or common green from each other or on adjacent parcels. In these instances, elevations shall have at least 5 different design details as described in Section G. above.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 14 06/18/2019
60.05.15.9.
I. [ORD 4576; January 2012] The following minimum setbacks apply:
1. Front yard fronting common greens and shared courts – 3 feet
2. Front yard fronting street – 5 feet to building, 3 feet to porch or stoop
3. Side yard – 3 feet, or 8 feet if abutting a street [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. Rear yard – 0 feet
5. Garage entrance setback – 18.5 feet
6. No side, rear or garage entrance setback is required from a lot line abutting an alley or shared court.
J. [ORD 4576; January 2012] Minimum standards for alleys are:
1. Alley widths – 24 feet between buildings at the ground floor, and a paved area at least 16 feet wide
2. An alley may be up to 150 feet long. The Facilities Review Committee has the discretion to review alley length, with optional design requirements to allow for alleys to be longer than 150 feet. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
K. [ORD 4576; January 2012] The side building setback on one side of a structure may be zero, subject to the following:
1. The zero setback does not apply to the property line adjacent to a street or to the property line adjacent to lots that are not part of the zero lot line project
2. The minimum distance between all buildings in the zero lot line project must be equal to twice the required side yard setback shown in Section J.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 15 06/18/2019
60.05.15.
10. Ground floor elevations on eligible residential-only buildings. [ORD 4758; March 2019]
A. Eligible residential-only buildings are buildings which are
located within the portions of the RC-OT zoning district where
the maximum standard height is 40 feet, as described in footnote
11 of Section 20.20.15 and illustrated in Figure A. Residential-
only buildings in these areas are not subject to the density limit
if at least 50 percent of each elevation visible from and within
200 feet of a public street, Major Pedestrian Route, public park,
public plaza or public open space contains one or both of the
following methods of providing ground-floor pedestrian interest:
1. Locate ancillary residential uses, such as a leasing office, fitness room, lobby, community room or combination of those ancillary spaces, on the ground level that meet the following standards:
a. Fifty (50) percent of the ground-floor elevation area, as measured between 2 feet above grade and 12 feet above grade, is permanently treated with clear and transparent glass with a visible transmittance of 60 percent or greater.
b. The ancillary spaces must be designed for active human usage rather than building systems or storage and shall not include inactive spaces such as storage rooms, utility rooms and mechanical rooms. This does not prohibit incidental storage inside offices or other active ancillary rooms.
c. Vehicle parking areas cannot be used to satisfy this criteria.
2. Provide ground floor units that meet the following standards:
a. Each unit’s primary pedestrian entry shall have access to and from the adjacent public right of way.
b. Each unit’s entry shall not be elevated more than 4 feet above the grade of the adjacent right-of-way.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 16 06/18/2019
60.05.15.10
c. A direct path, having a minimum width of 5 feet, shall connect the adjacent right of way with the primary entrance.
d. Up to two (2) abutting connections may be combined.
e. Separate the street-facing ground-floor units by incorporating one of the following elements:
i. Provide a front porch for each street-facing ground-floor unit, having a minimum size of 48 square feet, with minimum dimensions to accommodate a 5-foot-by-6-foot rectangle inside the porch area. If the porch is recessed from the adjacent right of way, the area between the porch and right of-way shall be a minimum of 2 feet wide and landscaped. The landscaping shall include one or a combination of low-height plants, shrubs, and grass. Bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials may be used, but are not a substitute for ground cover plantings, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area.
ii. Provide a front landscaped area of at least 24 square feet for each street-facing ground-floor unit, having a minimum width of 4 feet. Use of bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials in this area shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area.
iii. Provide a raised planter between 18 inches and 4 feet in height and a minimum width of 2 feet. The raised planter shall span the length of the unit, except where a pedestrian connection is provided.
iv. If elevated, and railings are used along the stairs, landing, or porch, the railing shall be a minimum of 50 percent transparent.
f. A minimum of 25 percent of the ground-floor façade shall be permanently treated with clear and transparent glass with a visible transmittance of 60 percent or greater.
[ORD 4542; June 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 17 06/01/2012
60.05.20. Circulation and Parking Design Standards. Unless otherwise noted, all standards apply in all zoning districts.
1. Connections to the public street system.
A. Pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle connections shall be provided between the on-site circulation system and adjacent existing and planned streets as specified in Tables 6.1 through 6.6 and Figures 6.1 through 6.23 of the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
2. Loading areas, solid waste facilities and similar improvements.
A. All on-site service areas, outdoor storage areas, waste storage, disposal facilities, recycling containers, transformer and utility vaults and similar activities shall be located in an area not visible from a public street, or shall be fully screened from view from a public street. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Except for manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution activities which are the principle use of a building in Industrial districts, all loading docks and loading zones shall be located in an area not visible from a public street, or shall be fully screened from view from a public street.
C. Screening from public view for service areas, loading docks, loading zones and outdoor storage areas, waste storage, disposal facilities, recycling containers, transformer and utility vaults and similar activities shall be fully sight-obscuring, shall be constructed a minimum of one foot higher than the feature to be screened, and shall be accomplished by one or more of the following methods:
1. Solid screen wall constructed of primary exterior finish materials utilized on primary buildings,
2. Solid hedge wall with a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent opacity within two (2) years.
3. Solid wood fence
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
D. Screening from public view by chain-link fence with or without slats is prohibited.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 18 06/01/2012
60.05.20.2.
E. Screening of loading zones may be waived in Commercial and Multiple Use zones if the applicant demonstrates the type and size of loading vehicles will not detract from the project’s aesthetic appearance and the timing of loading will not conflict with the hours or operations of the expected businesses. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Pedestrian circulation.
A. Pedestrian connections shall be provided that link to adjacent existing and planned pedestrian facilities as specified in Tables 6.1 through 6.6 and Figures 6.1 through 6.23 of the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element, and to the abutting public street system and on-site buildings, parking areas, and other facilities where pedestrian access is desired. Pedestrian connections shall be provided except when one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. Where physical or topographic conditions, such as a grade change of ten (10) feet or more at a property line to an adjacent pedestrian facility, make connections impractical,
2. Where uses including manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution activities which are the principle use of a building in Industrial districts occur,
3. Where on-site activities such as movement of trucks, forklifts, and other large equipment would present potential conflicts with pedestrians, or
4. Where buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically preclude a connection now or in the future.
B. A reasonably direct walkway connection is required between primary entrances, which are the main point(s) of entry where the majority of building users will enter and leave, and public and private streets, transit stops, and other pedestrian destinations.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 19 06/01/2012
60.05.20.3.
C. A reasonably direct pedestrian walkway into a site shall be provided for every 300 feet of street frontage or for every eight aisles of vehicle parking if parking is located between the building and the street. A reasonably direct walkway shall also be provided to any accessway abutting the site. This standard may be waived when topographic conditions, man-made features, natural areas, etc. preclude walkway extensions to adjacent properties.
D. Pedestrian connections through parking lots shall be physically separated from adjacent vehicle parking and parallel vehicle traffic through the use of curbs, landscaping, trees, and lighting, if not otherwise provided in the parking lot design.
E. Where pedestrian connections cross driveways or vehicular access aisles a continuous walkway shall be provided, and shall be composed of a different paving material than the primary on-site paving material.
F. Pedestrian walkways shall have a minimum of five (5) foot wide unobstructed clearance and shall be paved with scored concrete or modular paving materials. In the event that the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) contains stricter standards for any pedestrian walkway, the ADA standards shall apply. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 20 06/01/2012
60.05.20.
4. Street frontages and parking areas.
A. Surface parking areas abutting a public street shall provide perimeter parking lot landscaping which meets one of the following standards:
1. A minimum six (6)-foot wide planting strip between the right-of-way and the parking area. Pedestrian walkways and vehicular driveways may cross the planting strip. Trees shall be planted at a minimum 2 1/2 inch caliper at a maximum of thirty (30) feet on center. Planting strips shall be planted with an evergreen hedge that will provide a 30-inch high screen and fifty (50) percent opacity within two years. The maximum height shall be maintained at no more than thirty-six (36) inches. Areas not covered by trees or hedge shall be landscaped with live ground cover. Bumper overhangs which intrude into the planting strip shall not impact required trees or hedge; or
2. A solid wall or fence 30 to 36 inches in height parallel to and not nearer than four (4) feet from the right-of-way line. The area between the wall or fence and the street line shall be landscaped with live ground cover. Pedestrian walkways and vehicular driveways may cross the wall or fence.
5. Parking area landscaping.
A. Landscaped planter islands shall be required according to the following:
1. Residential uses in residential zones, one for every eight (8) contiguous parking spaces.
2. All uses in Commercial and Multiple Use zones, one for every ten (10) contiguous parking spaces. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 21 06/01/2012
60.05.20.5.A.
3. All Conditional Uses in Residential zones one for every twelve (12) contiguous parking spaces. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. All uses in Employment / Industrial zones, one for every twelve (12) contiguous parking spaces. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. The island shall have a minimum area of 70 square feet, and a minimum width of 6 feet, and shall be curbed to protect landscaping. The landscaped island shall be planted with a tree having a minimum mature height of 20 feet. If a pole-mounted light is proposed to be installed within a landscaped planter island, and an applicant demonstrates that there is a physical conflict for siting the tree and the pole-mounted light together, the decision-making authority may waive the planting of the tree, provided that at least seventy-five (75) percent of the required islands contain trees. Landscaped planter islands shall be evenly spaced throughout the parking area.
C. Linear raised sidewalks and walkways within the parking area connecting the parking spaces and on-site building(s) may be counted towards the total required number of landscaped islands, provided that all of the following is met:
1. Trees are spaced a maximum of 30 feet on center on a minimum of one side of the sidewalk.
2. The minimum unobstructed sidewalk width is five feet.
3. The sidewalk is separated from the parking area by curbs, bollards, or other means on both sides.
4. Trees are located in planting area with groundcover or planted in covered tree wells.
5. Trees within the linear sidewalk area shall constitute no more than 50 percent of the total required number of trees within required landscaped planter islands. All remaining required trees shall be located within landscaped planter islands.
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 22 06/01/2012
60.05.20.5.
D. Trees planted within required landscaped planter islands or the linear sidewalk shall be of a type and species identified by the City of Beaverton Street Tree List or an alternative approved by the City Arborist.
6. Off-Street parking frontages in Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Off-Street surface parking areas shall be located to the rear or side of buildings. Surface parking areas located adjacent to public streets are limited to a maximum of:
1. 50% of the street frontage along Class 1 Major Pedestrian Routes,
2. 65% along Class 2 Major Pedestrian Routes, and
3. 50% of the street frontage for detached residential projects along any street. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
7. Sidewalks along streets and primary building elevations in Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. A sidewalk is required on all streets. Except where approved through Sidewalk Design Modification (40.58), the sidewalk shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide, and provide an unobstructed path at least five (5) feet wide. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. A sidewalk or walkway internal to the site is required along building elevations that include a primary building entrance, multiple tenant entrances or display windows. The sidewalk shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide, and provide an unobstructed path at least five (5) feet wide at building entrances, and along elevations containing display windows. Sidewalks shall be paved with scored concrete or modular paving materials. If adjacent to parking areas, the sidewalk shall be separated from the parking by a raised curb. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 23 06/01/2012
60.05.20.7.
C. Residential development fronting common greens and shared courts, and detached units fronting streets are exempt from these standards of 7. B above, and are subject to the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4542; June 2010] [ORD 4576; January 2012]
8. Connect on-site buildings, parking, and other improvements with identifiable streets and drive aisles in Residential, Commercial, and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Parking lot drive aisles that link public streets and/or private streets with parking stalls shall be designed as private streets consistent with the standard as described under Section 60.05.20.8.B., unless one of the following is met:
1. The parking lot drive aisle is less than 100 feet long;
2. The parking lot drive aisle serves 2 or less residential units; or
3. The parking lot drive aisle provides direct access to angled or perpendicular parking stalls.
B. Private streets, common greens, and shared courts shall meet the following standards:
1. Private streets serving non-residential uses and residential uses having five or more units shall have raised curbs and minimum five (5) foot wide unobstructed sidewalks on both sides.
2. Private streets serving less than five (5) residential units shall have raised curbs and a minimum five (5) foot wide unobstructed sidewalk on at least one side.
3. When common greens and shared courts are utilized, an unobstructed walkway a minimum of five (5) feet wide shall be provided within the common green or shared court. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 24 06/01/2012
60.05.20.
9. Ground floor uses in parking structures.
A. Parking structures located on Major Pedestrian Routes shall incorporate one or more active retail or commercial uses other than parking at ground level along the entire portion of the structure fronting onto such routes. Compliance to this standard is not required when a semi-subterranean parking structure is proposed, provided that the height of such structures, or portions thereof, is not greater than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet above the elevation of the adjoining walkway or sidewalk.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 25 06/01/2012
60.05.25. Landscape, Open Space, and Natural Areas Design Standards. Unless otherwise noted, all standards apply in all zoning districts.
1. Minimum landscape requirements for residential developments consisting of two (2) or three (3) units of Attached Housing or Compact Detached Housing. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. All areas of the lot not occupied by structures or pavement shall be landscaped as defined in Section 60.05.25.4.
[ORD 4515; September 2009]
2. Minimum landscape requirements for residential developments consisting of four (4) to seven (7) units of Attached Housing or Compact Detached Housing. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. For Attached Dwellings, a minimum of 15% of the gross site area shall be landscaped as defined in Section 60.05.25.4. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. For Compact Detached Housing, an attached private patio or yard area of at least 300 square feet in size shall be provided. No dimension of private open space area shall be less than ten (10) feet. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. Adjustments to these requirements are not permitted.
[ORD 4515; September 2009]
3. Minimum landscape requirements for residential developments consisting of eight (8) or more units of Attached Housing or Compact Detached Housing. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Common open space shall consist of active, passive, or both open space areas, and shall be provided as follows:
1. A minimum of 15% of the gross site area shall be landscaped as defined in Section 60.05.25.4. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. For developments that are part of a Planned Unit Development, provisions of Section 60.35.15.4. shall apply. [ORD 4486; July 2008]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 26 06/01/2012
60.05.25.3.
B. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the total required open space area shall be active open space. [ORD 4515; September 2009] [ORD 4542; June 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. For the purposes of this Section, environmentally sensitive areas shall be counted towards the minimum common open space requirement. Aboveground landscaped water quality treatment facilities shall be counted toward the minimum common open space requirement.
D. For the purposes of this Section, vehicular circulation areas and parking areas, unless provided as part of a common green or shared court, shall not be considered common open space. [ORD 4542; June 2010]
E. Individual exterior spaces such as outdoor patios and decks constructed to serve individual units shall count toward the common open space requirement, with the following restrictions: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Only a maximum of 120 square feet per unit may count toward the requirement. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Only patios and decks provided on the ground floor elevation level may count toward the requirement. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
F. Common open space shall not abut a Collector or greater classified street as identified in the City’s adopted Functional Classification Plan, unless that common open space shall be allowed adjacent to these street classifications where separated from the street by a constructed barrier at least three (3) feet in height.
G. Common open space shall be no smaller than 640 square feet in area, shall not be divided into areas smaller than 640 square feet, and shall have minimum length and width dimensions of 20 feet. [ORD 4515; September 2009]
H. In phased developments, common open space shall be provided in each phase of the development consistent with or exceeding the requirements for the size and number of dwelling units proposed.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 27 07/10/2015
60.05.25.3.
I. Active common open spaces shall be included in all developments, and shall include at least two (2) of the following improvements:
1. A bench or other seating with a pathway or other pedestrian way;
2. A water feature such as a fountain;
3. A children’s play structure;
4. A gazebo;
5. Clubhouse;
6. Tennis courts;
7. An indoor or outdoor sports court; or
8. An indoor or outdoor swimming and/or wading pool.
9. Plaza
J. The decision-making authority shall be authorized to consider other improvements in addition to those provided under subsection I, provided that these improvements provide a similar level of active common open space usage.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 28 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
4. Additional minimum landscape requirements for Attached Housing and Compact Detached Housing. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. All front yard areas and all required open space areas not occupied by structures, walkways, driveways, plazas or parking spaces shall be landscaped. [ORD 4542; May 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Landscaping shall include live plants or landscape features such as fountains, ponds or other landscape elements. Bare gravel, rock, bark and similar materials are not a substitute for plant cover, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area.
C. For the purposes of this Section, vehicular circulation areas and parking areas, unless provided as part of a shared court, shall not be considered landscape area. [ORD 4515; September 2009] [ORD 4542; June 2010]
D. All street-facing building elevations shall have landscaping along their foundation. When a porch obstructs a foundation, landscaping shall be installed along the outer edge of the porch. This landscaping requirement shall not apply to portions of the building facade that provide access for pedestrians or vehicles to the building, or for plazas adjacent to the building. The foundation landscaping shall meet the following minimum standards:
1. The landscaped area shall be at least three (3) feet wide; and,
2. For every three (3) lineal feet of foundation, an evergreen shrub having a minimum mature height of twenty-four (24) inches shall be planted; and,
3. Groundcover plants shall be planted in the remainder of the landscaped area.
E. The following minimum planting requirements for required landscaped areas shall be complied with. These requirements shall be used to calculate the total number of trees and shrubs to be included within the required landscape area:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 29 07/10/2015
60.05.25.4.E.
1. One (1) tree shall be provided for every eight hundred (800) square feet of required landscaped area. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum planting height of six (6) feet. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1.5 inches at time of planting.
2. One (1) evergreen shrub having a minimum mature height of forty-eight (48) inches shall be provided for every four hundred (400) square feet of required landscaped area.
3. Live ground cover consisting of low-height plants, or shrubs, or grass shall be planted in the portion of the landscaped area not occupied by trees or evergreen shrubs. Bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials may be used, but are not a substitute for ground cover plantings, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscape area.
[ORD 4515; September 2009]
F. A hard surface pedestrian plaza or combined hard surface and soft surface pedestrian plaza, if proposed shall be counted towards meeting the minimum landscaping requirement, provided that the hard-surface portion of the plaza shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum landscaping requirement. When a shared court is utilized in a residential development in a Multiple Use zone, hard surface areas shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the minimum landscaping requirement. A hard surface area shall be comprised of the following: [ORD 4542; June 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Brick pavers, or stone, scored, or colored concrete; and,
2. One (1) tree having a minimum mature height of twenty (20) feet for every three hundred (300) square feet of plaza square footage; and,
3. Street furniture including but not limited to benches, tables, chairs, and trash receptacles; and, [ORD 4542; June 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 30 07/10/2015
60.05.25.4.F.
4. Pedestrian scale lighting consistent with the City’s Technical Lighting Standards.
[ORD 4515; September 2009]
5. Minimum landscape requirements for non-residential developments and Mixed Use Development. [ORD 4542; May 2010] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. A minimum portion of the total gross lot area shall be landscaped:
1. Conditional Uses in Residential districts, and all uses in Commercial and Industrial districts, fifteen (15) percent;
2. All uses in Multiple Use districts, ten (10) percent.
3. Environmentally sensitive areas shall be counted towards the minimum landscape requirement. Aboveground landscaped water quality treatment facilities shall be counted toward the minimum landscape requirement.
B. The following minimum planting requirements for required landscaped areas shall be complied with. These requirements shall be used to calculate the total number of trees and shrubs to be included within the required landscape area:
1. One (1) tree shall be provided for every eight hundred (800) square feet of required landscaped area. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum planting height of six (6) feet. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1.5 inches at time of planting.
2. One (1) evergreen shrub having a minimum mature height of forty-eight (48) inches shall be provided for every four hundred (400) square feet of required landscaped area.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 31 07/10/2015
60.05.25.5.B.
3. Live ground cover consisting of low-height plants, or shrubs, or grass shall be planted in the portion of the landscaped area not occupied by trees or evergreen shrubs. Bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials may be used, but are not a substitute for ground cover plantings, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscape area.
C. A hard surface pedestrian plaza or combined hard surface and soft surface pedestrian plaza, if proposed shall be counted towards meeting the minimum landscaping requirement, provided that the hard-surface portion of the plaza shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum landscaping requirement for Conditional Uses in Residential districts, and shall be comprised of the following:
1. Brick pavers, or stone, scored, or colored concrete; and,
2. One (1) tree having a minimum mature height of twenty (20) feet for every three hundred (300) square feet of plaza square footage; and,
3. Street furniture including but not limited to benches, tables, chairs and trash receptacles; and,
4. Pedestrian scale lighting consistent with the City’s Technical Lighting Standards.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 32 07/10/2015
60.05.25.5.
D. All building elevations visible from and within 200 feet of a public street that do not have windows on the ground floor shall have landscaping along their foundation, which shall be counted toward the minimum landscaped requirement. This landscaping requirement shall not apply to portions of the building facade that provide access for pedestrians or vehicles to the building, for plazas adjacent to the building, or when the building is within three (3) feet of the property line. The foundation landscaping shall be at least five (5) feet wide; and shall be comprised of the following:
1. One (1) tree having a minimum planting height of six (6) feet shall be planted for every thirty (30) lineal feet of foundation.
2. One (1) shrub having a minimum mature height of twenty-four (24) inches shall be planted for every three (3) lineal feet of foundation and shall be planted between required trees; and,
3. Groundcover plants shall be planted in the remainder of the landscaped area not occupied by required trees and shrubs, and shall not be planted in rows, but in a staggered manner for more effective covering.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 33 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
6. Common Greens. The purpose of the following standards is to allow tracts designed to provide access for only pedestrians and bicycles to abutting properties. Common greens are also intended to serve as a common open space amenity for residents. The following standards apply to common greens: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. General.
1. The minimum dimension of a common green is fifteen (15) feet and must include a 5 foot wide walkway. The size of the common green right-of-way must be sufficient to accommodate expected users and uses. The size must take into consideration the characteristics of the site and vicinity, such as the pedestrian system, structures, natural features, and the community activities that may occur within the common green.
2. Common greens may be dead-end or extend between streets. If a public pedestrian connection is provided, the pedestrian connection should either directly abut or pass through the common green, or be in close proximity. See Figure 1. Common greens may also have frontage on more than one intersecting street, if the green is located at the corner of the intersecting streets. See Figure 2.
3. Where a public pedestrian connection abuts or passes through a common green, the public pedestrian connection must include design features that distinguish the pedestrian connection from the common green, such as perimeter landscaping, low decorative fencing, or paving materials.
4. Parking for dwellings fronting a common green shall be accessed from an alley or access easement.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 34 07/10/2015
60.05.25.6.
Figure 1
Figure 2
[ORD 4542; June 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 35 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
7. Shared Courts. The purpose of the shared court standards is to allow streets that accommodate pedestrians and vehicles within the same circulation area, while ensuring that all can use the area safely. See Figure 3. Special paving and other street elements should be designed to encourage slow vehicle speeds and to signify the shared court’s intended use by pedestrians as well as vehicles. See Figure 4. Access from a shared court is limited to ensure low traffic volumes that can allow a safe mixing of pedestrians and vehicles. Shared courts are limited to zones intended for more intense development to facilitate efficient use of land while preserving the landscape-intensive character of lower-density zones. The following standards apply to shared courts: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. General.
1. The minimum width of a shared court right-of-way is 20 feet. The size of the shared court right-of-way must be sufficient to accommodate expected users and uses. The size must take into consideration the characteristics of the site and vicinity, such as the pedestrian system, structures, traffic safety, natural features, and the community activities that may occur within the shared court.
2. A shared court may be up to 150 feet long. The Facilities Review Committee may allow longer shared courts, subject to additional conditions of approval or design requirements. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Shared courts shall not allow through movement of vehicles to two or more streets unless specifically allowed by the Facilities Review Committee, which may impose additional conditions of approval or design requirements. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. Up to 16 lots may have a front lot line on a shared court;
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 36 07/10/2015
60.05.25.7.
B. Shared Court paving design.
1. Vehicle maneuvering, parking and emergency access areas within shared courts shall be constructed of brick pavers, stone, or scored or colored concrete. Asphalt is permitted within a shared court, but shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of a shared court.
2. Varied paving materials and colors, bollards, fences, landscaping, lighting and other street furnishings shall be used to differentiate vehicle activities within shared courts from other activities such as pedestrian areas, bicycle areas, play areas, gardens, etc.
3. Driveway widths for the first twenty (20) feet where a shared court meets a public street are:
a. Ten feet where a driveway provides access to 10 or fewer units on a Local Street, and
b. Twenty feet where a driveway provides access to more than 10 units or when access is on a Collector or Arterial street. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Figure 3
Shared Court Diagram
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 37 07/10/2015
60.05.25.7.
Figure 4
Shared Court Concept
[ORD 4542; June 2010]
8. Retaining walls. Retaining walls greater than six (6) feet in height or longer than fifty (50) lineal feet used in site landscaping or as an element of site design shall be architecturally treated with contrasting scoring, or texture, or pattern, or off-set planes, or different applied materials, or any combination of the foregoing, and shall be incorporated into the overall landscape plan, or shall be screened by a landscape buffer. Materials used on retaining walls should be similar to materials used in other elements of the landscape plan or related buildings, or incorporate other landscape or decorative features exclusive of signs. If screening by a landscape buffer is utilized, a buffer width of at least five (5) feet is required, landscaped to the B3-High Screen Buffer standards.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 38 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
9. Fences and walls.
A. Fences and walls shall be constructed of any materials commonly used in the construction of fences and walls such as wood, stone, rock, or brick, or other durable materials.
B. Chain link fences are acceptable as long as the fence is coated and includes slats made of vinyl, wood or other durable material. Slats may not be required when visibility into features such as open space, natural areas, parks and similar areas is needed to assure visual security, or into on-site areas in industrial zones that require visual surveillance.
C. Masonry walls shall be a minimum of six inches thick. All other walls shall be a minimum of three inches thick.
D. For manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution activities which are the principle use of a building in Industrial districts, the preceding standards apply when visible from and within 200 feet of a public street.
E. Fences and walls:
1. May not exceed three feet in height in a required front yard along streets, except required above ground stormwater facilities fencing which may be four feet in height in a required front yard, and eight feet in all other locations. [ORD 4659; June 2015]
2. May be permitted up to six feet in a required front yard along designated Collector and Arterial streets.
3. [ORD 4576; January 2012] For detached housing along streets and housing facing common greens and shared courts in Multiple Use zones, 3 feet high fences and walls are permitted in front of the building, and on corner lots
abutting a street, along the side of the building. Higher fences and walls are permitted on corner lots along the side of the building beginning within 15 feet of the back end of the building nearest to the property line.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 39 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
10. Minimize significant changes to existing on-site surface contours at residential property lines.
Exempting the circumstances listed in Section 60.15.10.2, the following standards shall apply to design review proposals where grading is proposed: [ORD 4487; August 2008]
A. When grading a site within twenty-five (25) feet of a property line within or abutting any residentially zoned property, the on-site surface contours shall observe the following:
1. 0 to 5 feet from property line. Maximum of two (2) foot slope differential from the existing or finished slope of the abutting property, whichever is applicable.
2. More than 5 feet and up to and including 10 feet from property line. Maximum of four (4) foot slope differential from the existing or finished slope of the abutting property, whichever is applicable.
3. More than 10 feet and up to and including 15 feet from property line. Maximum of six (6) foot slope differential from the existing or finished slope of the abutting property, whichever is applicable.
4. More than 15 feet and up to and including 20 feet from property line. Maximum of eight (8) foot slope differential from the existing or finished slope of the abutting property, whichever is applicable.
5. More than 20 feet and up to and including 25 feet from property line. Maximum of ten (10) foot slope differential
from the existing or finished slope of the abutting property, whichever is applicable.
B. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection A. above, grading within 25 feet of a property line shall not change the existing slopes by more than ten percent within a tree root zone of an identified significant grove or tree, or an identified historic tree located on an abutting property unless evidence provided by a certified arborist supports additional grading that will not harm the subject grove or tree.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 40 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
C. The grading standards listed in subsection A. above shall not apply to the following:
1. Public right-of-way road improvements such as new streets, street widening, sidewalks, and similar or related improvements.
2. Storm water detention facilities subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
3. On-Site grading where the grading will take place adjacent to an existing public street right-of-way, and will result in a finished grade that is below the elevation of the subject public street right-of-way; provided such grading is subject to the approval of the City Engineer, who may require appropriate erosion and sediment control mitigation measures.
[ORD 4498; January 2009]
11. Integrate water quality, quantity, or both facilities. Non-vaulted surface stormwater detention and treatment facilities having a side slope greater than 2:1 shall not be located between a street and the front of an adjacent building.
12. Natural areas. Development on sites with City-adopted natural resource features such as streams, wetlands, significant trees and significant tree groves, shall preserve and maintain the resource without encroachment into any required resource buffer standard unless otherwise authorized by other City or CWS requirements. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 41 07/10/2015
60.05.25.
13. Landscape buffering and screening. All new development and redevelopment in the City subject to Design Review shall comply with the landscape buffering requirements of Table 60.05-2. and the following standards. For purposes of this Section, a landscape buffer is required along the side and rear of properties between different zoning district designations. A landscape buffer is required for non-residential land uses and parks in Residential zoning districts. Both buffering standards and side and rear building setback requirements shall be met. Only landscaping shall be allowed in the landscape buffer areas. Buffer areas and building setback standards are measured from the property line, they are not additive. Where a yard setback width is less than a landscape buffer width, the yard setback width applies to the specified buffer designation (B1, B2, or B3 as appropriate). A landscape buffer width cannot exceed a minimum yard setback dimension. In addition, the buffer area and landscape standard are intended to be continuously applied along the property line, except as authorized under Section 60.05.45.10. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Applicability of buffer standards:
1. The buffer standards shall not be applicable to individual single-family buildings on individual parcels.
2. The buffer standards shall not apply to areas where emergency access is required.
3. The buffer standards shall not apply to areas where a public utility easement exists. This exemption only applies to trees and does not exempt the requirement of shrubs and ground cover.
4. The buffer standards shall not apply along property lines where a non-residential use is already buffered by a natural feature or an open space dedication, if such a natural buffer or dedication is at least 40 feet in width, or if the width of the natural feature or open space dedication and the density and quality of landscaping meet or exceed the applicable landscape buffer standard.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 42 07/10/2015
60.05.25.13.A.
5. The buffer standards shall not apply where required for visual access purposes as determined by the City Traffic Engineer or City Police. This exemption only applies to trees and shrubs and does not exempt the requirement of ground cover. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. B1-Low screen buffer: This buffer is intended to provide a minimal amount of transitional screening between zones. This buffer consists of: 1) one (1) tree having a minimum planting height of six (6) feet for every thirty (30) lineal feet of buffer width; and 2) live ground cover consisting of low-height plants, or shrubs, or grass proportionately spaced between the trees with actual spacing for low height plants or shrubs dependent upon the mature spread of the vegetation. Bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials may be used, but are not a substitute for ground cover plantings, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required buffer area. Deciduous trees having a minimum two-inch caliper at time of planting may be planted in the B1 buffer required for across the street.
C. B2-Medium screen buffer: This buffer is intended to provide a moderate degree of transitional screening between zones. This buffer consists of live ground cover consisting of low-height plants, or shrubs, or grass, and 1) one (1) tree having a minimum planting height of six (6) feet for every thirty (30) lineal feet of buffer width; 2) evergreen shrubs which reach a minimum height of four (4) to six (6) feet within two (2) years of planting planted proportionately between the required evergreen trees. Live ground cover consisting of low-height plants, or shrubs, or grass shall be planted in the portion of the landscaped area not occupied by trees or evergreen shrubs. Actual spacing for low height plants or shrubs or evergreen shrubs shall be dependent upon the mature spread of the selected vegetation. Bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials may be used, but are not a substitute for ground cover plantings, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscape area. Deciduous trees having a minimum two-inch caliper at time of planting may be planted in the B2 buffer required for across the street.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 43 07/10/2015
60.05.25.13.
D. B3-High screen buffer: This buffer is intended to provide a high degree of visual screening between zones. This buffer consists of minimum six (6)-foot high fully sight obscuring fences or walls with an adjoining landscape area on the interior of the fence when the fence is proposed within three (3) feet of the property line. If the fence is proposed to be setback from the property line more than three feet, the landscaping shall be on the exterior of the fence within a landscape area a minimum of five (5) feet in width, with adequate provision of access and maintenance of the landscaped area. The height of the fence shall be measured from the property on which the fence is to be located, and, if located on a wall, shall be in addition to the height of the wall. The landscape area shall be planted with one (1) tree having a minimum planting height of six (6) feet for every thirty (30) lineal feet of buffer width, filled between with evergreen shrubs which reach a minimum height of four (4) to six (6) feet within two (2) years of planting. Live ground cover consisting of low-height plants, or shrubs, or grass shall be planted in the portion of the landscaped area not occupied by trees or evergreen shrubs. Actual spacing for low height plants or shrubs or evergreen shrubs shall be dependent upon the mature spread of the selected vegetation. Bare gravel, rock, bark or other similar materials may be used, but are not a substitute for ground cover plantings, and shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscape area.
E. Changes to buffer widths and standards: Required buffer widths and buffer standards are the minimum requirements for buffering and screening. Changes in buffer widths and standards shall be reviewed through the public hearing process, except for the following:
1. A request for a reduction in the buffer width when a B2 or B1 buffer standard is required and the reduction in buffer width is five (5) feet or less, shall be reviewed through administrative authorization provided that the next highest buffer standard is implemented.
Requests for changes in buffer widths and buffer standards shall only be authorized in review of the Design Review Guidelines for Landscape buffering and screening (Section 60.05.45.10.). [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 44 12/02/2016
60.05.25.13.
F. Landscaping buffering installation: All required buffering shall be installed prior to occupancy permit issuance.
G. Pedestrian plazas in buffer areas: For non-residential development in non-residential zoning districts, in which the building is proposed to be placed at the required front yard buffer line, concrete or brick pavers shall be authorized in place of required live groundcover, or bark, or grass, for the length of the building for the front yard only; provided that required trees are still installed, the paved area is connected to the public sidewalk, and pedestrian amenities including but not limited to benches or tables, are provided.
14. Community Gardens
A. Fences. Community Gardens shall have a fence constructed of a durable materials commonly used in the construction of fencing. Fences shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height. Coated chain link may be permitted. Temporary construction fencing, erosion control fencing, tree protection fencing and other temporary fencing materials shall not be permitted.
B. Parking. Parking must be available in the general vicinity of the garden, on-street parking spaces may count toward this requirement.
C. Size. Community gardens shall not exceed one acre in size.
[ORD 4659; June 2015]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 45 06/01/2012
60.05.30. Lighting Design Standards. Unless otherwise noted, all standards apply in all zoning districts.
1. Adequate on-site lighting and minimal glare on adjoining properties. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Lighting shall be provided at lighting levels for development and redevelopment in all zoning districts consistent with the City’s Technical Lighting Standards.
B. Lighting shall be provided in vehicular circulation areas and pedestrian circulation areas.
C. Lighting shall be provided in pedestrian plazas, if any developed.
D. Lighting shall be provided at building entrances.
E. Canopy lighting shall be recessed so that the bulb or lens is not visible from a public right-of-way.
2. Pedestrian-scale on-site lighting.
A. Pole-mounted Luminaires shall comply with the City’s Technical Lighting Standards, and shall not exceed a maximum of:
1. Fifteen (15) feet in height for on-site pedestrian paths of travel.
2. Twenty (20) feet in height for on-site vehicular circulation areas for residential uses in Residential zoning districts.
3. Thirty (30) feet in height for on-site vehicular circulation areas in non-residential zoning districts.
4. Fifteen (15) feet for the top deck of non-covered parking structures.
5. The height of the poles for on-site pedestrian ways and on-site vehicular circulation areas shall be measured from the site’s finished grade.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 46 06/01/2012
60.05.30.2.A.
6. The height of the poles on the top deck of non-covered parking structures shall be measured from the finished floor elevation of the top deck.
7. The poles and bases for pole-mounted luminaires shall be finished or painted a non-reflective color.
B. Non-pole-mounted luminaires shall comply with the City’s Technical Lighting Standards.
C. Lighted bollards when used to delineate on-site pedestrian and bicycle pathways shall have a maximum height of forty-eight (48) inches.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 47 06/01/2012
60.05.35. Building Design and Orientation Guidelines. Unless otherwise noted, all guidelines apply in all zoning districts.
1. Building articulation and variety. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Residential buildings should be of a limited length in order to avoid undifferentiated building elevations, reduce the mass of individual buildings, and create a scale of development that is pedestrian friendly and allow circulation between buildings by pedestrians. (Standard 60.05.15.1.A)
B. Building elevations should be varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians. Within larger projects, variations in architectural elements such as: building elevations, roof levels, architectural features, and exterior finishes should be provided. (Standards 60.05.15.1.A and B)
C. To balance horizontal features on longer building elevations, vertical building elements, such as building entries, should be emphasized. (Standard 60.05.15.1.B)
D. Buildings should promote and enhance a comfortable pedestrian scale and orientation. This guideline does not apply to buildings in Industrial districts where the principal use of the building is manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage, wholesale or distribution activities. (Standard 60.05.15.1.B) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
E. Building elevations visible from and within 200 feet of an adjacent street or major parking area should be articulated with architectural features such as windows, dormers, off-setting walls, alcoves, balconies or bays, or by other design features that reflect the building’s structural system. Undifferentiated blank walls facing a street, common green, shared court, or major parking area should be avoided. (Standards 60.05.15.1.B, C, and D) [ORD 4542; June 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 48 06/01/2012
60.05.35.1.
F. Building elevations visible from and within 100 feet of an adjacent street where the principle use of the building is manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution activities in an Industrial zoning district, should be articulated with architectural features such as windows, dormers, off-setting walls, alcoves, balconies or bays, or by other design features that reflect the building’s structural system. Undifferentiated blank walls facing a street should be avoided. (Standards 60.05.15.1.B and C)
2. Roof forms. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Roof forms should be distinctive and include variety and detail when viewed from the street. Sloped roofs should have a significant pitch and building focal points should be emphasized. (Standards 60.05.15.2.A and B)
B. Flat roofs should include distinctive cornice treatments. (Standard 60.05.15.2.C)
C. Additions to existing structures which involve the addition of new roof area should respect the roof form and material of the existing structure. (Standard 60.05.15.2.D)
3. Primary building entrances.
A. The design of buildings should incorporate features such as arcades, roofs, porches, alcoves, porticoes, awnings, and canopies to protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. This guideline does not apply to buildings in Industrial districts where the principal use of the building is manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage, wholesale or distribution activities. (Standard 60.05.15.3) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Special attention should be given to designing a primary building entrance that is both attractive and functional. Primary entrances should incorporate changes in mass, surface, or finish to emphasize the entrance. (Standard 60.05.15.3)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 49 06/01/2012
60.05.35.
4. Exterior building materials.
A. Exterior building materials and finishes should convey an impression of permanence and durability. Materials such as masonry, stone, wood, terra cotta, and tile are encouraged. Windows are also encouraged, where they allow views to interior activity areas or displays. (Standards 60.05.15.4.A and B)
B. Where masonry is used, decorative patterns (other than running bond pattern) should be provided, especially at entrances, building corners and at the pedestrian level. These decorative patterns may include multi-colored masonry units, such as brick, tile, stone, or cast stone, in a layered or geometric pattern, or multi-colored ceramic tile bands used in conjunction with materials such as concrete. This guideline does not apply to development in Industrial zones, where masonry is used for exterior finishes. (Standards 60.05.15.4.B and C) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
5. Screening of equipment. All roof, surface, and wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service equipment should be screened from view from adjacent public streets by the use of parapets, walls, fences, enclosures, dense evergreen foliage, or by other suitable means. (Standards 60.05.15.5.A through C)
6. Building location and orientation in Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4706; May 2017]
A. Buildings should be oriented toward and located within close proximity to public streets and public street intersections. The overall impression should be that architecture is the predominant design element over parking areas and landscaping. Property size, shape and topographical conditions should also be considered, together with existing and proposed uses of the building and site, when determining the appropriate location and orientation of buildings. (Standards 60.05.15.6.A and B) [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4706; May 2017]
B. On Class 1 Major Pedestrian Routes, the design of buildings located at the intersection of two streets should consider the use of a corner entrance to the building. (Standards 60.05.15.6.B and D) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 50 06/18/2019
60.05.35.6.
C. On Class 1 Major Pedestrian Routes, building entrances should be oriented to streets, or have reasonably direct pedestrian connections to streets and pedestrian and transit facilities. (Standards 60.05.15.6.C and D) [ORD 4365; October 2005]
D. Primary building entrances should be oriented toward and located in close proximity to public streets and public street intersections. Property size, shape and topographical conditions should also be considered. (Standard 60.05.15.6.E) [ORD 4706; May 2017]
7. Building scale along Major Pedestrian Routes.
A. Architecture helps define the character and quality of a street. Along Major Pedestrian Routes, low height, single story buildings located at the right-of-way edge are discouraged except where detached single family dwellings are permitted. (Standards 60.05.15.7.A and B) [ORD 4542; June 2010]
B. Building heights at or near the street should help form a sense of enclosure, but should not create an undifferentiated high wall out of scale with pedestrians. Building heights at the street edge should be no higher than sixty (60) feet without the upper portions of the building being set back from the vertical building line of the lower building stories. (Standard 60.05.15.7.A) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
8. Ground floor elevations on commercial and multiple use buildings.
A. Excluding residential only development, ground floor building elevations should be pedestrian oriented and treated with windows, display areas or glass doorway openings to the extent possible and where appropriate to the design and use of the building. This guideline particularly applies to ground floor building elevations situated along Major Pedestrian Routes. (Standard 60.05.15.8.A) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Except those used exclusively for residential use, ground floor elevations that are located on a Major Pedestrian Route, sidewalk, or other space where pedestrians are allowed to walk should provide weather protection for pedestrians on building elevations. (Standard 60.05.15.8.B)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 51 06/18/2019
60.05.35.
9. Compact Detached Housing design. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Building elevations facing streets, shared courts, and common greens should include pedestrian oriented design elements and other design features that provide articulation, variety, interest and quality. (Standards 60.05.15.9.A, B, C, G, H, I, J, K, and L) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
B. [ORD 4576; January 2012] Alleys and shared courts are the preferred option to serve garages, and should be provided on all lots except where topography or other identified physical constraints preclude their use. (Standards 60.05.15.9.D and K)
C. Garage openings should not be a dominant feature within shared courts. (Standards 60.05.15.9.D, E, and F) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
D. [ORD 4576; January 2012] The impact of curb cuts and driveways along shared courts and streets should be minimized. (Standard 60.05.15.9.E)
[ORD 4542; June 2010]
10. Ground floor elevations on eligible residential-only buildings.
[ORD 4758; March 2019]
A. Eligible residential-only buildings are buildings which are located within the portions of the RC-OT zoning district where the maximum standard height is 40 feet, as described in footnote 17 of Section 20.20.15 and illustrated in Figure A. Residential-only buildings in this area may exceed the density but should avoid long, uninterrupted blank walls and incorporate pedestrian-oriented design features on the ground floor to generate ground-floor pedestrian interest. This guideline particularly applies to ground-floor building elevations visible from a public street, Major Pedestrian Route, public park, public plaza or public open space. One or more of the following methods shall be used to provide ground-floor pedestrian interest:
1. The primary use(s) on the ground floor should generate frequent human usage and incorporate sufficient glazing to allow high levels of visibility through window glazing into the building.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 52 06/18/2019
60.05.35.10
2. Provide ground-floor units with the following:
a. Direct and convenient access to the street.
b. Design features that provide a transition between public spaces and ground-floor residential units to distinguish between the public and private realms.
c. Ample levels of glazing to ensure articulation on the façade, daylighting of interior spaces and visibility into the street.
3. Other methods of avoiding long, uninterrupted blank walls and incorporating pedestrian-oriented design features on the ground floor to generate pedestrian interest as approved by the Planning Commission.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 53 06/01/2012
60.05.40. Circulation and Parking Design Guidelines.
Unless otherwise noted, all guidelines apply in all zoning districts.
1. Connections to public street system. The on-site pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle circulation system and the abutting street system should provide for efficient access and circulation, and should connect the project to abutting streets in accordance with connections identified in Tables 6.1 through 6.6 and Figures 6.1 through 6.23 of the Comprehensive Plan. (Standard 60.05.20.1) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
2. Loading area, solid waste facilities, and similar improvements.
A. On-Site service, storage and similar activities should be designed and located so that these facilities are screened from an abutting public street. (Standard 60.05.20.2)
B. Except in Industrial districts, loading areas should be designed and located so that these facilities are screened from an abutting public street, or are shown to be compatible with local business operations. (Standard 60.05.20.2)
3. Pedestrian circulation.
A. Pedestrian connections should be made between on-site buildings, parking areas, and open spaces. (Standard 60.05.20.3.A)
B. Pedestrian connections should connect on-site facilities to abutting pedestrian facilities and streets unless separated by barriers such as natural features, topographical conditions, or structures. (Standard 60.05.20.3.A)
C. Pedestrian connections should link building entrances to nearby streets and other pedestrian destinations. (Standard 60.05.20.3.B)
D. Pedestrian connections to streets through parking areas should be evenly spaced and separated from vehicles (Standards 60.05.20.3.C through E)
E. Excluding manufacturing, assembly, fabricating, processing, packing, storage and wholesale and distribution activities which are the principle use of a building in Industrial districts, pedestrian connections designed for high levels of pedestrian activity should be provided along all streets. (Standards 60.05.20.3.A through H)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 54 06/01/2012
60.05.40.3.
F. Pedestrian connections should be designed for safe pedestrian movement and constructed of hard durable surfaces. (Standards 60.05.20.3.F through G)
4. Street frontages and parking areas. Landscape or other screening should be provided when surface parking areas are located along public streets. (Standard 60.05.20.4)
5. Parking area landscaping. Landscape islands and a tree canopy should be provided to minimize the visual impact of large parking areas. (Standards 60.05.20.5.A through D)
6. Off-Street parking frontages in Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Surface parking should occur to the side or rear of buildings and should not occur at the corner of two Major Pedestrian Routes. (Standard 60.05.20.6)
B. Surface parking areas should not be the predominant design element along Major Pedestrian Routes and should be located on the site to safely and conveniently serve the intended users of the development, without precluding future site intensification. (Standard 60.05.20.6)
7. Sidewalks along streets and primary building elevations in Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Pedestrian connections designed for high levels of pedestrian activity should be provided along all streets. (Standard 60.05.20.7.A)
B. Pedestrian connections should be provided along primary building elevations having building and tenant entrances. (Standard 60.05.20.7.B)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 55 06/01/2012
60.05.40.
8. Connect on-site buildings, parking, and other improvements with identifiable streets and drive aisles in Residential, Commercial and Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. On-Site vehicle circulation should be easily recognized and identified, and include a higher level of improvements such as curbs, sidewalks, and landscaping compared to parking lot aisles. (Standard 60.05.20.8) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. Long, continuous parking aisles should be avoided if possible, and landscaped as necessary to minimize the visual impact. (Standard 60.05.20.8)
9. Parking structures in Multiple Use zones. [ORD 4584; June 2012] Active ground floor uses should be incorporated in parking structures, particularly on street level elevations facing Major Pedestrian Routes. (Standard 60.05.20.9) [ORD 4531; April 2010]

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 56 06/01/2012
60.05.45. Landscape, Open Space and Natural Areas Design Guidelines. Unless otherwise noted, all guidelines apply in all zoning districts.
1. Common open space for residential uses in Residential zones.
A. Common open spaces should be provided that are sized and designed for anticipated users, and are located within walking distance for residents and visitors, and should be integrated into the overall landscape plan. (Standards 60.05.25.1 through 3)
B. Common open spaces should be available for both passive and active use by people of all ages, and should be designed and located in order to maximize security, safety, and convenience. (Standards 60.05.25.1 through 3)
C. Common open spaces should be free from all structural encroachments unless a structure is incorporated into the design of the common open space such as a play structure. (Standards 60.05.25.1 through 3)
D. Common open space should be located so that windows from living areas, excluding bedrooms and bathrooms, of a minimum of four (4) residences face on to the common open space. (Standards 60.05.25.1 through 3)
2. Minimum landscaping in Residential zones.
A. Landscape treatments utilizing plants, hard-surface materials, or both should be provided in the setback between a street and a building. The treatment should enhance architectural elements of the building and contribute to a safe, interesting streetscape. (Standard 60.05.25.4)
B. Landscaping should soften the edges of buildings and parking areas, add aesthetic interest, and generally increase the attractiveness of a development and its surroundings. (Standard 60.05.25.4)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 57 06/01/2012
60.05.45.
3. Minimum landscaping for Conditional Uses in Residential zones and for developments in Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zones.
A. Landscaping should soften the edges of buildings and parking areas, add aesthetic interest, and generally increase the attractiveness of a development and its surroundings. (Standards 60.05.25.5.A, B, and D)
B. Plazas and common areas designed for pedestrian traffic should be surfaced with a combination of landscape and decorative pavers or decorative concrete. (Standard 60.05.25.5.C)
C. Use of native vegetation should be emphasized for compatibility with local and regional climatic conditions. (Standards 60.05.25.5.A and B)
D. Existing mature trees and vegetation should be retained and incorporated, when possible, into the site design of a development. (Standards 60.05.25.5.A and B)
E. A diversity of tree and shrub species should be provided in required landscaped areas. (Standard 60.05.25.5)
4. Common Greens. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Common greens should be designed to provide access for only pedestrians and bicycles to abutting properties. Common greens should also serve as a common open space amenity for residents. (Standard 60.05.25.6)
B. The size of the common green right-of-way should be sufficient to accommodate expected users and uses. The size must take into consideration the characteristics of the site and vicinity, such as the pedestrian system, structures, natural features, and the community activities that may occur within the common green. (Standard 60.05.25.6.A.1)
C. When a public pedestrian connection is desired, it should be designed as a distinct feature to distinguish it from an adjacent common green. (Standards 60.05.25.6.A.2 and 3)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 58 06/01/2012
60.05.45.4.
D. Common greens should not provide access to parking. (Standard 60.05.25.6.A.4)
[ORD 4542; June 2010]
5. Shared Courts.
A. Shared courts should safely accommodate pedestrians and vehicles within the same circulation area and provide safe access to abutting properties. Special paving and other street elements should be designed to encourage slow vehicle speeds and to signify the shared court’s intended use by pedestrians as well as vehicles. (Standards 60.05.25.7.A and B)
B. The size and length of a shared court should be sufficient to accommodate expected users and uses. The size and length should take into consideration the characteristics of the site and vicinity, such as the pedestrian system, structures, traffic safety, natural features, and the community activities that may occur within the shared court. (Standards 60.06.25.7.A and .B)
[ORD 4542; June 2010]
6. Retaining walls. Retaining walls over six (6) feet in height or greater than fifty (50) feet in length should be architecturally treated, incorporated into the overall landscape plan, or screened by landscape material. (Standard 60.05.25.8) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
7. Fences and walls.
A. Fences and walls should be constructed of attractive, durable materials. (Standard 60.05.25.9) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
B. Fences and walls constructed in front yards adjacent to public streets should provide the opportunity to view into the setback from the street unless high traffic volumes or other conflicts warrant greater security and protection. (Standard 60.05.25.9.E) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
8. Changes to existing on-site surface contours at residential property lines. The perimeters of properties should be graded in a manner to avoid conflicts with abutting residential properties such as drainage impacts, damage to tree root zones, and blocking sunlight. (Standard 60.05.25.10) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 59 06/01/2012
60.05.45.
9. Integrate water quality, quantity, or both facilities. Above-ground stormwater detention and treatment facilities should be integrated into the design of a development site and, if visible from a public street, should appear as a component of the landscape design. (Standard 60.05.25.11) [ORD 4576; January 2012]
10. Natural areas. Natural features that are indigenous to a development site, such as streams, wetlands, and mature trees should be preserved, enhanced and integrated when reasonably possible into the development plan. (Standard 60.05.25.12) [ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4576; January 2012] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
11. Landscape buffering and screening.
A. A landscape buffer should provide landscape screening, and horizontal separation between different zoning districts and between non-residential land uses and residential land uses. The buffer should not be applicable along property lines where existing natural features such as flood plains, wetlands, riparian zones and identified significant groves already provide a high degree of visual screening. (Standard 60.05.25.13) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
B. When potential impacts of a Conditional Use are determined, or when potential conflicts of use exist between adjacent zoning districts, such as industrial uses abutting residential uses, landscape screening should be dense, and the buffer width maximized. When potential conflicts of uses are not as great, such as a commercial use abutting an industrial use, less dense landscape screening and narrower buffer width is appropriate. (Standard 60.05.25.13) [ORD 4531; April 2010]
C. Landscape buffering should consist of a variety of trees, shrubs and ground covers designed to screen potential conflict areas and complement the overall visual character of the development and adjacent neighborhood. (Standard 60.05.25.13)
D. When changes to buffer widths and buffer standards are proposed, the applicant should describe the physical site constraints or unique building or site characteristics that merit width reduction. (Standard 60.05.25.13.E). [ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4576; January 2012]
[ORD 4576; January 2012] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Design Review Guidelines
Chapter 60 SR - 60 06/01/2012
60.05.50. Lighting Design Guidelines. Unless otherwise noted, all guidelines apply in all zoning districts.
1. Lighting should be utilized to maximize safety within a development through strategic placement of pole-mounted, non-pole mounted and bollard luminaires. (Standards 60.05.30.1 and 2)
2. Pedestrian scale lighting should be an integral part of the design concept except for industrial projects. Poles and fixtures for pole-mounted lighting should be of a consistent type throughout the project. The design of wall-mounted lighting should be appropriate to the architectural design features of the building. (Standard 60.05.30.2)
3. Lighting should minimize direct and indirect glare impacts to abutting and adjacent properties and streets by incorporating lens shields, shades or other measures to screen the view of light sources from residences and streets. (Standards 60.05.30.1 and 2)
4. On-Site lighting should comply with the City’s Technical Lighting Standards. (Standards 60.05.30.1 and 2). Where the proposal does not comply with Technical Lighting standards, the applicant should describe the unique circumstance attributed to the use or site where compliance with the standard is either infeasible or unnecessary. [ORD 4531; April 2010]

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Major Pedestrian Route Maps
Chapter 60 SR - 61 10/17/2007
60.05.55. Major Pedestrian Route Maps.
60.05.55.1. Regional Center
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Major Pedestrian Route Maps
Chapter 60 SR - 62 10/17/2007
60.05.55.2. Town Center
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Major Pedestrian Route Maps
Chapter 60 SR - 63 01/01/2005
60.05.55.3. South Tek Station Community
SW BRIGADOON CTSW SCHOTTKY TERSW MURRAY BLVDSW MILLIKAN WAYSW FARMINGTON RDSW TUALATIN VALLEY HWYSW TERMAN RDSW HOCKEN AVESW 144TH AVESW 141ST AVESW 2ND STSW ELECTRIC STSW 142ND AVESW 141ST PLSW 139TH WAYSW TUALAWAY AVESW SHANNON PLSW MENLO DRSW WHITNEY WAYSW CAROUSEL CTSW HENRY STSW 139TH AVEG E O G R A P H I C I N F O R M A T I O N S Y S T E MMajor Pedestrian RoutesCity ofBeaverton North0500250FeetPDF Version of this map is available internally @ T:\MAPS\CDD\06_0446_MPR_STEK_2006d.pdfCity of Beaverton Community Development Department - Beaverton Zoning Data - Current as of November 2006 Major Pedestrain Routes - Current as of November 2006METRO Regional Land Information System (RLIS) - Light Rail Line and Stations - Current as of October 2006Washington County Assessement and Taxation - Washington Co. Taxlots - Current as of November 2006This product is for information purposes only and may not have been prepared for or be suitable for legal, engineering, or surveying purposes. Users of this information should review, or consult, the primary data and information sources to ascertain the usability of the information. This map represents the best data available at the time of publication. While reasonable effort has been made to insure the accuracy of the information shown on this page, the City of Beaverton assumes no responsibility, or liability, for any errors, omissions, or use of this information. Metadata available on request.Source DataDisclaimerLegendClass 1 - Both SidesClass 1 - One SideClass 2 - Both SidesClass 2 - One SideFuture Class 1GIS/RDB 11/28/2006 S:\CDD\_2006\06_0446\06_0446.mxd
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Major Pedestrian Route Maps
Chapter 60 SR - 64 01/01/2005
60.05.55.4. Elmonica / Merlo Station Community
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Major Pedestrian Route Maps
Chapter 60 SR - 65 01/01/2005
60.05.55.5. Sunset Transit Center and Teufel Town Center
SW 117TH AVESW CORBY DRNW 118TH AVEVALERIA VIEWSUNSET HWYSUNSET HWYNW CORNELL RDSW BARNES RDCEDAR HILLS BLVDNW BARNES RDNW CEDAR HILLS BLVDSW BUTNER RDNW LEAHY RDNW 107TH TAYLOR BOWMONT STNW LEE STNW 114TH AVESW LANEWOOD STNW 112TH AVESW TREMONT STNW ASH STSW CORBY DRSW MORRISON STSW 130TH AVESW ADELE DRNW REEVES STSW RITA DRNW 101ST AVENW FILBERT STNW 97TH AVESW FRENWOOD WAYSW WASHINGTON 126TH AVENW COPELAND STNW BARNES RDSW 95TH AVENW SALTZMAN 99TH AVESW CAMELLIA STNW MURLEA DRNW 113TH BROOKSIDE DRNW 123RD BRADY LNNW 109TH AVENW 110TH AVESW TODD STSW DELMONT AVENW ALPENGLOW WAYNW LEE CTNW 97TH AVENW REEVES STSW 95TH AVEG E
O
G
R
A
P
H
I
C
I
N
F
O
R
M
A
T
I
O
N
S
Y
S
T
E
MMajor RoutesPDF Version of this map is available internally @
T:\MAPS\CDD\07_0022_MPR_MERLO_2007a.pdfCity of Beaverton Community Development Department -
Beaverton City Limits - Current as of July 2006 Major Pedestrain Routes - Current as of November 2006METRO Regional Land Information System (RLIS) - Light Rail Line and Stations - Current as of October 2006Washington County Assessement and Taxation - Washington Co. Taxlots - Current as of January 2007This product is for information purposes only and may not have been prepared for or be suitable for legal, engineering, or surveying purposes. Users of this information should review, or consult, the primary data and information sources to ascertain the usability of the information. This map represents the best data available at the time of publication. While reasonable effort has been made to insure the accuracy of the information shown on this page, the City of Beaverton assumes no responsibility, or liability, for any errors, omissions, or use of this information. Metadata available on request.Source DataDisclaimerGIS/RDB 1/17/2007 S:\CDD\_2007\07_0022\07_0022_PORT.mxdCity ofBeavertonLegendClass 1 - Both SidesClass 1 - One SideClass 2 - Both SidesClass 2 - One SideFuture Class 1MPR ClassBeaverton City LimitsTaxlotLight Rail Station02004006008001,000100FeetNorth
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Technical Lighting Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 66 01/01/2005
Table 60.05-1. TECHNICAL LIGHTING STANDARDS
A. Types of Lighting. The Technical Lighting Standards shall apply to bollard luminaire, pole-mounted luminaire, and non-pole-mounted luminaire.
B. Areas to Be Applied. The roadways, access drives, parking lots, vehicle maneuvering areas, pathways and sidewalks of all new developments and building entrances shall be lighted in conformance to the technical lighting standards. These standards are not intended to apply to public street lighting.
C. Conformity of Lighting Plans to this Section. All lighting plans submitted to the City shall comply with the standards of this table.
D. Standards. The following standards are required of all exterior lighting:
1. When a bollard luminaire, or pole-mounted luminaire, or non-pole-mounted luminaire has total cutoff of an angle greater than ninety (90) degrees, the minimum required interior illumination, the maximum permitted illumination at the property line, and the maximum permitted height of Luminaires shall be as shown on Table 60.05-1.
2. When a bollard luminaire, or pole-mounted luminaire, or non-pole-mounted luminaire has total cutoff of light at an angle less than ninety (90) degrees and is located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the ground, then the minimum permitted interior illumination, the maximum permitted illumination within five (5) feet of any property line, and the maximum permitted height of Luminaires is also shown on Table 60.05-1.
E. General Provisions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary:
1. Design Standards for Residential, Commercial, Industrial and Multiple use Districts:
a. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Technical Lighting Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 67 01/01/2005
Table 60.05-1. TECHNICAL LIGHTING STANDARDS (continued)
b. No bare bulb lights shall be permitted for single-family attached development and multi-family attached development.
c. No strobe lights shall be permitted.
d. Light sources or Luminaires shall not be located within areas identified for screening or buffering except on pedestrian walkways.
2. Special Design Standard for Residential Districts. No exterior neon lights shall be permitted.
3. Special Design Standard for Commercial and Multiple use Districts. Exterior neon lights shall only be permitted when incorporated into the architectural design of a building.
F. Exemption for Specified Public Outdoor Recreation Uses:
1. Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility, public ball diamonds, public playing fields, and public tennis courts only, inclusive of facilities located on school district properties, are exempted from the exterior lighting standards of Sections D.1 through D.2 above. These outdoor recreational uses must meet all other requirements for this Section and of the Code.
2. The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not exceed a maximum permitted post height of eighty (80) feet.
3. The outdoor recreational uses specified above may exceed a total cutoff angle of ninety (90) degrees, provided that the luminaire is shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent properties. The maximum permitted illumination at the property line or, if required, the interior buffering line, shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Technical Lighting Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 68 06/17/2010
Table 60.05-1. (continued)
Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaires
Pole -mounted Luminaires (inclusive of above grade base and light fixture):
 15 feet for on-site pedestrian ways.
 20 feet for on-site vehicular circulation areas.
Wall-mounted Luminaires for the lighting of pedestrian or vehicular circulation areas:
 20 feet above building finished grade.
Pole -mounted Luminaires (inclusive of above grade base and light fixture):
 15 feet for on-site pedestrian ways.
 30 feet for on-site vehicular circulation areas.
 15 feet for the top deck of non-covered parking structures.
Wall-mounted Luminaires for the lighting of pedestrian or vehicular circulation areas:
 15 feet above building finished grade for on-site pedestrian circulation areas
 30 feet above building finished grade for on-site vehicular circulations areas.
Maximum Permitted Illumination at property line in Foot-Candles
0.5
0.5
Maximum Permitted Illumination (internal) in Foot-candles
<90
None
None
>90
None
None
Minimum Required Illumination (internal) in Foot-candles
<90
0.7
1.0
>90
1.0
1.5
Zoning District Type
Residential
Commercial and Industrial
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Technical Lighting Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 69 06/17/2010
Table 60.05-1. (continued)
Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaires
Pole -mounted Luminaires (inclusive of above grade base and light fixture):
 15 feet for on-site pedestrian ways for all development types.
 20 feet for on-site vehicular circulation areas for residential only and multiple use with residential.
 30 feet for on-site vehicular circulation areas for multiple use non-residential development and non-multiple use/non-residential development.
 15 feet for the top deck of non-covered parking structures for all development types.
Wall-mounted Luminaires for the lighting of pedestrian or vehicular circulation areas:
 20 feet above building finished grade for residential only and multiple use with residential development.
 15 feet above building finished grade for multiple use non-residential development and non-multiple use / non-residential development.
Maximum Permitted Illumination at property line in Foot-Candles
0.5 (all)
Maximum Permitted Illumination (internal) in Foot-candles
<90
None
>90
None
Minimum Required Illumination (internal) in Foot-candles
<90
0.7
0.7
1.0
1.0
>90
1.5
1.5
Zoning District Type
Multiple Use:
Residential only
Multiple Use with residential
Multiple Use with non-residential development
Non-multiple use / non residential development
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Landscape Buffer Requirements
Chapter 60 SR - 70 06/18/2019
Table 60.05-2.
Minimum Landscape Buffer Requirements Between Contrasting Districts
Regional Center
(RC-OT, RC-TO,
RC-E, OI-WS, C-WS)
20’/B3
CU
5’/B2
CU
20’/B3
CU
5’/B2
CU
10’/B2
5’/B2
10’/B1
5’/B1
5’/B2
5’/B1
Town Center (TC-MU, TC-HDR)
20’/B3
CU
5’/B2
CU
20’/B3
CU
5’/B2
CU
10’/B2
5’/B2
10’/B1
5’/B1
5’/B2
5’/B1
Station Community (SC-MU, SC-HDR, SC-E, SC-S)
20’/B3
CU
5’/B2
CU
20’/B3
CU
5’/B2
CU
10’/B2
5’/B2
10’/B1
5’/B1
5’/B2
5’/B1
Employment / Industrial
(OI, IND)
20’/B3
CU
10’/B1
CU
20’/B3
CU
10’/B1
CU
20’/B3
10’/B1
20’/B3
10’/B1
10’/B3
5’/B1
Commercial (CS, GC, NS, CC)
20’/B3
CU
10’/B1
CU
20’/B3
CU
10’/B1
CU
20’/B3
10’/B1
20’/B3
10’/B1
N/A
N/A
Urban High Density (R1)
20’/B3
CU
10’/B1
CU
20’/B3
CU
10’/B1
CU
10’/B2
CU/R4
5’/B1
N/A
N/A
10’/B3
5’/B1
Urban Medium Density(R4, R2)
10’/B2
CU
5’/B1
CU
10’/B2
CU
5’/B1
CU
N/A
N/A
10’/B2
5’/B1
10’/B3
5’/B1
Urban Standard Density (R7, R5)
5’/B1
CU
5’/B1
CU
N/A
N/A
10’/B2
CU/R4
5’/B1
20’/B3
10’/B1
20’/B3
10’/B1
Urban Low Density(R10)
CU
N/A
5’/B1
CU
5’/B1
CU
10’/B2
CU/R4
5’/B1
20’/B3
10’/B1
20’/B3
10’/B1
Location
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
District of Development
Urban Low Density
(R10)
Urban Standard Density
(R7, R5)
Urban Medium Density
(R4, R2)
Urban High Density (R1)
Commercial
(CS, GC,
NS, CC)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Landscape Buffer Requirements
Chapter 60 SR - 71 06/18/2019
Table 60.05-2. (continued)
Minimum Landscape Buffer Requirements Between Contrasting Districts
Regional Center
(RC-OT, RC-TO,
RC-E, OI-WS, C-WS)
20’/B3
10’/B2
10’/B2
5’/B1
10’/B2
5’/B1
N/A
N/A
Town Center (TC-MU, TC-HDR)
20’/B3
10’/B2
10’/B2
5’/B1
N/A
N/A
10’/B2
5’/B1
Station Community (SC-MU, SC-HDR, SC-E, SC-S)
20’/B3
10’/B2
N/A
N/A
10’/B2
5’/B1
10’/B2
5’/B1
Employment / Industrial
(OI, IND)
N/A
N/A
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
Commercial (CS, GC, NS, CC)
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
Urban High Density (R1)
20’/B3
10’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
Urban Medium Density(R4, R2)
20’/B3
10’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
10’/B3
5’/B2
Urban Standard Density (R7, R5)
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
Urban Low Density(R10)
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
20’/B3
10’/B2
Location
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
Abutting
Across Street
District of Development
Employment / Industrial (OI, IND)
Station Community
(SC-MU, SC-HDR, SC-E, SC-S)
Town Center
(TC-MU, TC-HDR,
Regional Center
(RC-OT, RC-TO, RC-E,OI-WS, C-WS)
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Landscape Buffer Requirements
Chapter 60 SR - 72 06/18/2019
NOTES FOR TABLE 60.05-2.:
1. 5’ / 10’ / 20’ = Buffer Width
2. B1 / B2 / B3 = Buffer Standard
3. N/A = Not Applicable
4. CU = Conditional Use
5. Except for non-residential uses and parks in Residential districts, buffering requirements are not in addition to building setback requirements as described in Chapter 20 of the Development Code. Where a setback width is less than a landscape buffer width described in Table 60.05-2., the minimum setback width of the zone shall apply to the specified buffer designation (B1, B2, or B3 as appropriate). A landscape buffer width cannot exceed a minimum yard setback dimension. [ORD 4531; April 2010]
6. Buffering requirements for Urban Low and Urban Standard and the R4 zoning district in Urban Medium shall only be applied when a Conditional Use (CU) is proposed.
7. A minimum 20 foot buffer developed to a B3 standard is required for non-residential land uses and parks in Residential zoning districts. This standard shall apply only to side and rear property lines that abut residentially zoned properties. The Director is authorized to approve exceptions as described under Section 60.05.25.13.A., Applicability of Buffer Standards, otherwise all proposals to modify the 20-foot buffer width or B-3 standard are subject to public hearing consideration in review of applicable guidelines (Section 60.05.45.11.). [ORD 4531; April 2010]
8. Where a site proposed for development abuts property located outside City limits, the equivalent zone shall be applied to the property as described in Table 1, Section 1.5.2. of the Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to the Washington County – Beaverton Urban Planning Area Agreement (UPAA) or similar a zone as determined by the Director. [ORD 4531; April 2010] [ORD 4759; March 2019]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Drive-Up Window Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 73 06/01/2012
60.07. DRIVE-UP WINDOW FACILITIES. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
60.07.05. Purpose. Drive-up window facilities shall be designed to provide safe, convenient and efficient traffic flow.
60.07.10. Standards. The decision making authority shall review proposed drive-up window facilities to determine that the following standards are addressed in the design:
1. Drive-through uses shall be located so that access and egress to the drive-through features are from an on-site drive aisle or other on-site circulation facility, not a public street. [ORD 4332; January 2005]
2. Restaurants providing drive-up window service shall have sufficient parking and seating to accommodate anticipated customer volume.
3. Restaurants providing drive-up window service shall provide at least two (2) designated parking spaces immediately beyond the service window, or provide other satisfactory methods, to allow customers requiring excessive waiting time to receive their food while parked.
4. Financial and other commercial establishments providing drive-up window facilities which do not provide for walk-in customer service (i.e., not allowing transactions within the structure) shall provide for safe, convenient and readily accessible exterior walk-up window service, such as an automatic teller machine, at any time during regular business hours. Additionally, at a minimum, two parking spaces shall be provided allowing convenient access to the walk-up service window.
5. The design of the stacking area shall allow customers' vehicles to leave the stacking line for emergency reasons.
6. On-Site parking for walk-in customers shall be designed to be readily accessible to all public entrances to the building and to provide safe, convenient access.
7. Establishments having drive-up window facilities shall have sufficient stacking area to ensure that public rights-of-way and shared access driveways are not obstructed. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
8. Communication’s sound system shall not exceed a measurement of 55 decibels at the adjoining property line.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Drive-Up Window Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 74 01/01/2005
60.07.15. Abatement. Drive-up window facilities shall be a public nuisance to be abated pursuant to 5.05.115A of the Municipal Code, or its successors, if the traffic at the facility causes obstruction or interference with the right-of-way or flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic as described in Section 5.05.115A of the Municipal Code. Abatement methods may include summary abatement, closure or redesign of the drive-up window facility. The Beaverton Police shall have the authority to issue citations to drivers of motor vehicles obstructing the public right-of-way or interfering with traffic flow. [ORD 3218; August 1981]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 75 11/04/2016
60.10. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
60.10.05. Purpose. Regulations governing development within floodplains are intended to recognize the need to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community, and maintain the functions and values of floodplains through control of development within the floodplain area so as to minimize public and private losses due to flooding. The preservation of natural features and topography as an aid in floodplain management is a primary purpose of these regulations. However, in the administration of these regulations the existing pattern of man-made improvements must in some areas be recognized as a constraint on achieving this purpose. The provisions of this Section are designed to: [ORD 4155; May 2001]
1. Protect human life, health, and property; [ORD 4155; May 2001]
2. Minimize expenditure of public money, costly repairs of flood damage, and costly flood control projects; [ORD 4155; May 2001]
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
7. Make information is available upon request to potential buyers that property is in an area of special flood hazard; [ORD 4155; May 2001]
8. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. [ORD 3563; May 1987]
9. Maintain the functions and values of floodplains, such as allowing for the storage and conveyance of stream flows through existing and natural flood conveyance systems. [ORD 4155; May 2001]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 76 06/18/2019
60.10.10. Floodplain Designation.
1. Consistent with Clean Water Services Design and Construction Standards, the floodplain is the flood management area and shall include those areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas," with amendments, dated October 19, 2018, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The City of Beaverton shall notify the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Federal Emergency Management Agency as soon as possible, but no later than six months after the date such information becomes available, of any changes to the base flood elevation, by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based upon current data. The Flood Insurance Study and revisions are on file with the City Engineer and the City Recorder. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4130; December 2000]. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this section, the City Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer City of Beaverton Code Section 9.05.060, subsections A and D, relating to site development. For all development applications, the best available information as determined by the City Engineer shall be used in the determination of the floodplain limits. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4337; January 2005] [ORD 4388; May 2006] [ORD 4692; November 2016] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
2. When interpretation is requested by a property owner, or designee concerning the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), or if a development application is received for a site where a floodplain is unclear or lacks an established elevation, the City Engineer shall require the concerned
person or applicant to provide a detailed hydraulic data report prepared
in accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered
engineer with background in the area of hydrology and hydraulics. This
report shall include, but is not limited to, water profiles and discharge
rates for the channel and the hydrology for the tributary areas. The
report must document the base flood elevation and specific limits of
inundation within a floodplain designated on a FIRM map in Zone A or
in Zone AO or along a stream corridor beyond the FIRM studied limits.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 77 06/18/2019
60.10.10.2.
After review of the available data and the report, the base flood elevation
shall be established by the City Engineer. [ORD 4744; October 2018]
All applicable floodplain regulations for preservation flood conveyance and flood storage of sites and building elevation requirements shall be determined from the base flood elevation as established by the City Engineer. A person dissatisfied with the City Engineer's decision may appeal that decision in the same manner as provided in Beaverton Code Section 9.05.091. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4155; May 2001] [ORD 4392; July 2006]
3. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Large floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
4. Uncontained areas of hazardous materials, as defined by the Department of Environmental Quality, are prohibited in the floodplain. Any storage or placement of materials in the floodplain that would obstruct the flow of water or reduce the available flood holding capacity of a site is prohibited. [ORD 3441; May 1985] [ORD 4093; April 2000] [ORD 4155; May 2001]
60.10.15. Development in Floodway.
1. Development in the floodway is prohibited, with the following exceptions, pursuant to the site development ordinance, which requires hydrological and hydraulic analyses demonstrating the proposed encroachment would not increase flood levels during the base flood discharge; [ORD 4744; October 2018]
A. Stormwater outfall pipes and other drainage; improvements;
B. Bridges;
C. Culverts;
D. Public utility lines;
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 78 06/18/2019
60.10.15.1
E. Trails or bikepaths;
F. Roads and other uses identified on the City’s Transportation Plan; and
G. Stream habitat restoration, including vegetated corridor enhancement. [ORD 4744; October 2018]
H. Grading associated with A through G above. [ORD 4744; October 2018]
60.10.20. Commercial and Industrial Uses in the Floodway Fringe. All commercial and industrial uses, if allowed in the primary zone are allowed in the floodway fringe if the proposed development:
1. Meets the requirements of Beaverton Code Section 9.05;
2. Meets the requirements of the City Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings;
3. Meets the requirements of the Clean Water Services District Design and Construction Standards Manual based on affirmative statements in documentation from CWS; and [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4392; July 2006]
4. Has been reviewed and approved by the appropriate City approval authority as meeting the requirements and standards of this ordinance.
[ORD 3441; May 1985] [ORD 4093; April 2000] [ORD 4155; May 2001]
60.10.25. Residential Uses in the Floodway Fringe.
1. Unless property is developed as a planned unit development, single family and two family dwellings, even though allowed in the primary zone, are prohibited in the floodway fringe on any lot smaller in area than five acres.
2. All other residential uses, if allowed in the primary zone, are allowed only as Conditional Uses in the floodway fringe. The request for a Conditional Use shall be processed and reviewed in the manner set forth in this ordinance. In addition to all other findings of fact required to be made in order to grant the Conditional Use, the following findings shall also be made: [ORD 4155; May 2001]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 79 06/18/2019
60.10.25.
A. The proposed development meets all the site and building design standards and requirements of the Beaverton Code Section 9.05 and the technical standards of this ordinance; and [ORD 4155; May 2001] [ORD 4392; July 2006]
B. The proposed development meets the building design standards and requirements of the Clean Water Services Design and Construction Standards based on affirmative statements in
documentation from CWS. [ORD 4155; May 2001] [ORD 4224; August 2002]
3. The provisions of subsection 2., above, shall not operate to impose the status of nonconforming use on any single family or two family dwelling or use lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance.
4. Single family and two family dwellings and uses located in the floodway fringe and on lots smaller in area than five acres shall be allowed to continue, subject to the provisions of the primary zone, as conforming uses.
5. A structure or use regulated by this section that does not comply with any regulation provided by this ordinance for the primary zone in which it is located shall be considered nonconforming in those particulars only and shall be treated in a manner consistent with the provisions of Chapter 30, the nonconforming use provisions.
6. All manufactured dwellings otherwise allowed to be placed or substantially improved within the floodplain shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, and shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. All electrical crossover connections shall be elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4155; May 2001] [ORD 4392; July 2006] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
7. In the floodplain, the long-term storage, permanent placement, or installation of recreational vehicles on the land is prohibited.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Floodplain Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 80 06/18/2019
60.10.30. Development of Critical Facilities within the Floodway Fringe.
1. Construction of critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities within the floodway fringe shall be permissible if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities that are constructed or substantially improved within the floodway fringe shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above the base flood elevation or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility shall be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to new critical facilities and to existing critical facilities to the extent possible. [ORD 4692; November 2016] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 60 SR - 81 11/04/2016
60.11. FOOD CART POD REGULATIONS.
60.11.05. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to establish criteria for the placement of food cart pods in the City of Beaverton. Food carts provide the community a wider choice of eating and drinking options. Food cart pods shall comply with all applicable City, County and State standards.
60.11.10. Site Design.
1. Site Design Standards for Food Cart Pods:
A. Food carts and amenities shall be located on a paved or concrete surface.
B. Food cart pods shall not occupy pedestrian walkways or required landscaping.
C. Food cart pods shall not occupy or obstruct bicycle or vehicle parking required for an existing use.
D. Carts and/or objects associated with the food cart use shall not occupy fire lanes or other emergency vehicle access areas.
E. Front yard setbacks for food carts shall be a minimum of 6 feet.
F. Rear and side yard setbacks for food carts and amenities shall be the same as the zone in which it is located, except when a side or rear yard abuts a residential zoning district. Any side or rear yard abutting a residential zoning district must meet the setbacks 60.11.10.1.G below.
G. Rear and/or side yards abutting residentially zoned property shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet or the minimum setback for the zone in which it is located, whichever is greater. This setback may be reduced to 10 feet by meeting the buffering requirements for a B-3 buffer in section 60.05.25.13.D of the Development Code but may not be less than the minimum allowed in the zoning district of the food cart pod.
H. Carts shall not be located or oriented in a way that requires customers to queue in a driveway.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 60 SR - 82 11/04/2016
60.11.10.1
I. Uses shall not create tripping hazards in pedestrian and vehicular circulation areas with items including, but not limited to, cords, hoses, pipes, cables, or similar materials.
J. Where more than one cart is located on a site, carts shall be separated by a minimum of 6 feet.
K. Food carts shall not be located in the Vision Clearance Area as described in the Engineering Design Manual.
L. Fences shall be constructed consistent with Section 60.05.25.9.
2. Standards for amenities within a food cart pod:
A. All food cart pods which provide seating for customers shall have restrooms with hand washing facilities available. Restrooms must have handwashing facilities with hot and cold running water, soap and paper towels or air dryers. Restrooms must either be on site or on an adjacent parcel. Restrooms shall be screened from view of the public right of way and abutting residentially zoned properties.
B. Required restrooms shall be available during Food Cart Pod operating hours.
C. All food carts and customer amenities within a food cart pod shall be served by a minimum 5 foot wide hard surface walkway.
D. Waste and recycling receptacles shall be provided for customer and business waste. Receptacles shall be screened from view of the right of way and abutting residentially zoned properties and serviceable by the applicable waste-hauler.
E. Storage structures accessory to food carts shall be less than 120 square feet in size and no greater than 15 feet in height. Storage structures shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from public rights-of-way.
F. Structures used to provide shelter to customers may be membrane structures such as tents or canopies or permanent structures.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 60 SR - 83 11/04/2016
60.11.10.2
a. Structures providing shelter and/or cover to patrons shall not exceed the following standards without Adjustment or Variance approval:
i. Cover 200 square feet or less in area.
ii. Have a maximum of 50 percent of the structure enclosed with walls or sides. Membrane structures may be fully enclosed.
iii. Are 15 feet in height or less, as measured to the highest point.
60.11.15. Individual Food Cart Design Standards.
1. All Food carts shall be subject to the design standards listed below:
A. Food carts shall enclose or screen from view of the right of way and abutting residentially zoned property all accessory items not used by customers, including but not limited to, tanks, barrels, or other accessory items.
B. The wheels and tongues must remain on the food cart. Wheels must remain inflated.
C. Carts shall not have missing siding or roofing.
D. Food carts shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a safe and clean condition.
E. Food carts shall not be longer than 26 feet, as measured from wall to wall.
F. Food carts shall obtain and keep current a City Business License.
G. Food carts shall maintain all required licenses by the appropriate State and/or local agency, including Washington County Health.
H. If provided, cart awnings shall have seven (7) feet of clearance between the ground and awning for safe pedestrian circulation.
I. Food Carts shall not exceed 15 feet in height without Adjustment or Variance approval.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 60 SR - 84 11/04/2016
60.11.20. Utilities.
1. Wastewater shall be addressed in one of the following two ways:
A. Food carts shall connect to the sanitary sewer consistent with applicable state plumbing codes, and will include an approved grease separator for the disposal of fats, oils and grease. Indirect discharge or leakage draining into the storm water system is prohibited.
B. Food carts shall connect to individual or community wastewater holding tanks. Tanks shall be owned and serviced by an Oregon Department of Environmental Quality licensed pumper. A copy of the contract shall be provided to the City before any food carts are located on site. Holding tanks shall be screened from view of the right-of-way by fully sight obscuring fencing. Indirect discharge or leakage draining into the storm water system is prohibited.
2. Potable water shall be addressed in one of the following two ways:
A. Food carts shall connect to a permanent water source in conformance with applicable state plumbing codes.
B. Food carts shall be connected to a potable water tank consistent with Section 5-3 of the Oregon Health Authority’s 2012 Food Sanitation Rules.
3. Food carts and amenities shall connect to a permanent power source. Power connections may not be connected by overhead wires to the individual food carts. Generators are prohibited.
4. All utilities shall be placed or otherwise screened, covered, or hidden
from view from the right of way as to minimize visual impacts and prevent tripping hazards or other unsafe conditions..
60.11.25. Parking.
1. Food Cart Pods in Commercial and Industrial zoning districts must provide a minimum of one (1) parking space per approved food cart. Food Cart Pods in Multiple Use Zoning districts are exempt from parking requirements.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Food Cart Pods
Chapter 60 SR - 85 11/04/2016
60.11.30. Signs.
1. Signage on individual food carts shall be limited to signs on the face of the food cart.
2. Freestanding signs for food cart pods are subject to provisions of Chapter 60.40.35.3.
60.11.35. Lighting.
1. Food cart pods shall have lighting to ensure safe environment for customers and employees that complies with the following:
A. At minimum, areas to be occupied by customers shall be illuminated when carts operate during hours of darkness.
B. No direct light source shall be visible from the property line.
C. Lighting fixtures shall be oriented and/or shielded to prevent glare on abutting properties.

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 86 01/05/2007
60.12. HABITAT FRIENDLY DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES
60.12.05. Purpose. Allow and encourage Habitat Friendly Development Practices (HFDPs) that integrate preservation, enhancement and creation of Habitat Benefit Areas (HBAs) and use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques in order to support natural systems that provide wildlife with food, shelter, and clean water.
All of the provisions of Section 60.12. are voluntary and are not required of new development or redevelopment. The provisions are applicable only when a property owner elects to utilize the provisions contained in this section.
The provisions of this section are intended to:
1. Promote preservation, enhancement and restoration of Habitat Benefit Areas (HBAs).
2. Reduce impacts from development on fish and wildlife habitat relative to traditional development practices.
3. Design a site in such a way that Habitat Friendly Development Practices (HFDPs) are integrated in the overall plan.
4. Use Best Management Practices (BMPs) to guide decisions regarding site design, development and construction.
5. Reduce Effective Impervious Area (EIA) in the City to the extent practicable and achieve zero (0) percent EIA on as many individual sites as practicable.
6. Avoid damaging existing wildlife habitat through preservation of HBA, minimize impacts to existing wildlife habitat by limiting the amount of habitat disturbance to only those areas required for development of a site, and mitigate impacts to existing wildlife habitat when avoidance and minimization options are limited. Use LID techniques to mitigate impacts in order to improve remaining on-site habitat and/or down-stream habitat.
7. Encourage HFDPs by adopting options that allow for flexibility in site design for new development and redevelopment.
8. Implement provisions of the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan that encourage preservation of HBA and use of LID techniques.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 87 01/05/2007
60.12.10. Process. Implementation of a HFDP shall not result in a requirement for a separate Development Code, Chapter 40, application. The level of review for a Chapter 40 application shall not be elevated or lessened based on proposed implementation of a HFDP.
60.12.15. Engineered Techniques. In some instances, proposed implementation of a HFDP will require an Engineering Design Manual Design Modification approved by the City Engineer. The Design Modification process is outlined in Section 145 of the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings (EDM). An applicant may choose to receive approval from the City Engineer prior to, or concurrent with, review of a land use application.
In order for the decision making body to approve a requested credit for proposed implementation of a technique that requires a review of the technique’s technical feasibility, engineered drawings and calculations need to be completed and submitted with the land use application for development review.
60.12.20. Guidance. The City of Beaverton Habitat Friendly Development Practices Guidance Manual provides an expanded description of principles and techniques that may be integrated into site design to meet the goals and objectives within Section 60.12.05.
60.12.25. Credits. As used in this Code section, the term credits refers to development credits an applicant may earn through HBA preservation or use of LID techniques which are described in Sections 60.12.35. through 60.12.40., below. The mix of credits requested is left to the applicant’s discretion for a single project site, as credits are not transferable between separate project sites.
60.12.30. Standards. The following standards shall be satisfied by new development and redevelopment, throughout the City when a request for use of a credit(s) allowed through Section 60.12.35. or Section 60.12.40. is proposed.
1. The proposal satisfies all applicable standards for the preservation, technique, or credit requested.
2. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Chapter 20 (Land Uses) unless the applicable provisions are subject to a credit for implementation of a proposed HFDP.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 88 01/05/2007
60.12.30.
3. The proposal is consistent with all applicable provisions of Section 60.12. (Habitat Friendly Development Practices) and all improvements, dedications, or both required by the applicable provisions of Section 60.12. (Habitat Friendly Development Practices) are satisfied or can be provided in proportion to the identified impact(s) of the proposal.
4. Implementation of the proposed Habitat Friendly Development Practice(s) is technically feasible in accordance with Section 60.12.15. (Engineered Techniques).
5. The size of the improvement proposed to implement the Habitat Friendly Development Practice(s) is greater than or equal to the amount required to receive the requested credit(s).
6. The proposed credit is a credit that is allowed for the proposed Habitat Friendly Development Practice(s).
7. Use of credits is limited to the amount of preservation or technique proposed. One (1) unit of preservation or technique results in one credit. Awarding a credit or a combination of credits shall not result in receipt of multiple credits for one (1) unit of preservation or technique.
8. Where a credit(s) toward the landscape standard, parking lot landscape island standard, or open space standard is requested, the proposed project requesting credits toward the landscape standard, parking lot landscape island standard, or open space standard does not cumulatively receive credits greater than 50 percent of the landscape or open space standard for the project site, with the exception of credit for installation of a Rain Garden.
9. Where a credit(s) toward the landscape standard, parking lot landscape island standard, or open space standard is requested for installation of a Rain Garden, the proposed project requesting credits toward the landscape standard, parking lot landscape island standard, or open space standard does not cumulatively receive credits greater than 75 percent of the landscape or open space standard for the project site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 89 01/05/2007
60.12.30.
10. Where a credit(s) to increase the building height above the maximum for the underlying zoning district is requested, the proposed project does not cumulatively receive credits greater than 12 feet additional building height, with the exception of Section 60.12.40.4.B.1. Building Height Increase, Multiple Use Zoning Districts (Eco-Roof).
11. Where a credit(s) to increase the building height above the maximum is requested for a project within a Multiple Use zoning district, the proposed project does not cumulatively receive credits greater than 12 feet, 24 feet, or 36 feet additional building height, respective of Sections 60.12.40.4.B.1.a., 60.12.40.4.B.1.b., and 60.12.40.4.B.1.c.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 90 01/05/2007
60.12.35. Habitat Benefit Area (HBA) Preservation. Locations of HBAs are depicted on the Comprehensive Plan Volume III Habitat Benefit Area Map. Habitat resource classification and delineation methodologies are included in the Comprehensive Plan for the City for Beaverton Volume III: Statewide Planning Goal 5 Resource Inventory Documents.
1. Preservation, Enhancement, Mitigation, Creation.
A. Purpose. HBA Preservation includes preservation, enhancement, mitigation, or creation of HBA based upon habitat delineation.
B. Credits. Use of the following credits is limited to the amount of HBA preservation proposed. One (1) square foot of HBA preserved results in one credit. Awarding a credit or a combination of credits shall not result in receipt of multiple credits for one (1) square foot of HBA preservation.
1. Building Envelope Offset in Commercial and Industrial zoning districts. An applicant can request a yard setback decrease of one (1) foot for every one (1) lineal foot that a proposed HBA preservation encroaches into a project site from the opposite side; in exchange the opposite yard setback shall be increased one (1) lineal foot.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 91 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.B.1.
Building Envelope Offset Example.
Standard Setbacks. standard setback standard setback Building Envelope with standard setbacks standard setback standard setback
Setback Offset applied. reduce setback x feet x feet standard setback HBA Preservation Area averaging x feet along one edge of a site equals x feet of setback increase Building Envelope with x feet of offset applied x feet standard setback
Standards. Building Envelope Offset credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Building Footprint Offset does not reduce a yard setback to less than five (5) feet.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 92 05/15/2015
60.12.35.1.B.1.
b. The requested setback reduction is not requested for any property within the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning districts unless the site is located within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area and subdivision of the site is part of a Conditional Use Planned Unit Development application. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
c. A requested setback reduction does not abut any property within the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
d. The proposed reduction will meet applicable fire or life safety requirements.
e. The proposed reduction will meet applicable building code requirements.
2. Building Height Increase. A proposal that includes HBA preservation can request an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the building footprint. The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than the square footage of HBA preservation, not to exceed the square footage of the building footprint. This credit is applicable in all zones except R4, R5, R7, and R10.
Standards. Building Height Increase credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Building Height Increase does not exceed 12 additional feet for an area equal to the building footprint.
b. When abutting an R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, the portion of the building(s) receiving the height increase shall be designed with an additional setback from the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, of two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of building height increase. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 93 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.B.2.b.
Building Height Increase Example with
additional setback. (elevation view)
c. The building receiving the height increase shall be located within the project site where the HBA is preserved.
d. The building receiving the height increase shall not increase the height within 50 feet of the Downtown Historic District or a Historic Landmark.
3. Floor Area Reduction in Multiple Use Zoning Districts. For every one (1) square foot proposed HBA preservation on a project site, an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward satisfying the minimum floor area requirement for a project site.
Standards. Floor Area Reduction credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Floor Area Reduction does not exceed 25 percent of the required floor area for the project site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 94 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.B.
4. Landscape Island Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot proposed HBA preservation, within ten (10) feet of a proposed parking lot area, an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward the landscape island standard of Section 60.05.20.5.
Standards. Landscape Island Standard Reduction credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Island Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape island standard for the project based upon the minimum number of parking spaces required for the subject site divided by the applicable standard of Section 60.05.20.5.A.
5. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of HBA preservation proposed, an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward the landscape standard.
Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
6. Lot Dimension Reduction. An applicant can request a credit toward reduction of either the standard minimum lot dimension for width or the standard minimum lot dimension for depth, while continuing to meet the minimum lot size and minimum density requirements of the underlying zoning district.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 95 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.B.6.
Standards. Lot Dimension Reduction credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Lot Dimension Reduction does not exceed 20 percent of the required width or 20 percent of the required depth of the underlying zoning district’s lot dimension requirement.
b. HBA preservation is equal to or greater than the minimum lot area square footage for one (1) lot within the underlying zoning district. If an applicant chooses to use both Lot Size Averaging (60.12.35.1.B.7.) and Lot Dimension Reduction for one project site, the applicant may propose one technique or the other for each lot, but may not apply both techniques to any one (1) lot.
c. HBA preservation is equal to or greater than the minimum lot area square footage for two (2) lots within the underlying zoning district. If an applicant chooses to use both Lot Size Averaging (60.12.35.1.B.7.) and Lot Dimension Reduction for one project site, the applicant may propose application of both techniques to all proposed lots.
7. Lot Size Averaging. An applicant can request a credit toward averaging the size of proposed lots rather than meeting the minimum lot size requirement for every proposed lot, while continuing to meet minimum density requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Standards. Lot Size Averaging credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 96 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.B.7.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Lot Size Averaging does not reduce the square footage of any one lot below 80 percent of the minimum and does not increase the square footage of any one lot above 120 percent of the maximum square footage of the underlying zoning district’s lot area standard.
b. HBA preservation is equal to or greater than the minimum lot area square footage for one (1) lot within the underlying zoning district. If an applicant chooses to use both Lot Size Averaging and Lot Dimension Reduction (60.12.35.1.B.6.) for one project site, the applicant may propose one technique or the other for each lot, but may not apply both techniques to any one (1) lot.
c. HBA preservation is equal to or greater than the minimum lot area square footage for two (2) lots within the underlying zoning district. If an applicant chooses to use both Lot Size Averaging and Lot Dimension Reduction (60.12.35.1.B.6.) for one project site, the applicant may propose application of both techniques to all proposed lots.
8. Open Space Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot HBA preservation proposed, an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward the open space standard.
Standards. Open Space Standard Reduction credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.35.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Open Space Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the open space standard of Section 60.05.25.1., Section 60.05.25.2., Section 60.05.25.4. and Section 60.35.15. for the project site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 97 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.B.8.
C. Standards. Proposals that request credits for HBA preservation shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Sections 60.12.35.B.1. through 60.12.35.B.8.
1. The area of HBA Preservation, Enhancement, Mitigation or Creation shall be placed within a conservation easement or a separate tract as described in Section 60.12.50. As a condition of approval, a covenant with the City shall be established as described in Section 60.12.50.
2. The area of HBA Preservation, Enhancement, Mitigation or Creation shall not overlap with an area that is currently regulated by the City or another jurisdictional agency.
3. When intersecting with Protected Trees (Significant Individual Trees, Historic Trees, trees within Significant Groves and Significant Natural Resource Areas (SNRAs)) and Community Trees the area of HBA Preservation, Enhancement, Mitigation or Creation shall be the area of the site protected, through either a tract or conservation easement, that is in excess of the minimum amount of tree protection required by a Tree Plan 2 application.
4. Proposals for HBA Mitigation shall:
a. replace existing HBA that is proposed for removal on the same project site.
b. be contiguous with an existing HBA or designated Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor for a minimum of 50 feet.
c. be equal to or greater than existing HBA proposed for removal.
5. Proposals for HBA Creation shall:
a. be developed with natural landscaping that supports native wildlife.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Habitat Friendly Development Practices
Chapter 60 SR - 98 01/05/2007
60.12.35.1.C.5.
b. be contiguous with an existing HBA or CWS vegetated corridor for a minimum of 50 feet.
c. be a minimum of 2,500 square feet.
60.12.35. HABITAT BENEFIT AREA (HBA) PRESERVATION - CREDIT TABLE
A. Purpose
HBA Preservation, Enhancement, Mitigation or Creation
Propose
One (1) square foot (Bldg Envelope Offset - one (1) lineal foot)
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Building Envelope Offset
setback
1 lineal ft
offsetting
2. Building Height Increase
bldg ht
1 sf
12 ft
3. Floor Area Reduction (MU)
min. floor area
1 sf
25% required floor area
4. Landscape Island Standard Reduction
landscape island
1 sf
50% landscape island std
5. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
1 sf
50% landscape std
6. Lot Dimension Reduction
lot dimension
20% width/depth
HBA sf = min 1 du
7. Lot Size Averaging
lot area per du
80% to 120%
HBA sf = min 1 du
8. Open Space Standard Reduction
open space
1 sf
50% open space std bldg = building, du = dwelling unit, ft = foot/feet, ht = height, sf = square feet, std = standard, min = minimum, max = maximum
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 99 06/01/2012
60.12.40. Low Impact Development (LID) Techniques. Use of LID techniques is allowed throughout the City unless otherwise stated.
1. Additional Street Tree Canopy.
A. Purpose. Increase street tree canopy by increasing the number of street trees for a project equal to an amount greater than the standard of one (1) tree per 30 lineal feet, but not to exceed one (1) tree per 20 lineal feet.
B. Credits. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of additional street tree canopy proposed an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward the landscape standard.
C. Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for Additional Street Tree Canopy shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
2. The additional Street Tree canopy is calculated based on the square footage of additional street tree canopy at 10 years maturity.
3. The additional street tree canopy is calculated only for those trees in excess of the standard of one (1) tree per 30 lineal feet.
4. The additional street tree is an accepted street tree as specified in the City of Beaverton’s Approved Tree List and Street of Trees Tour Guide.
2. Site Soil Amendment.
A. Purpose. Site Soil Amendment within proposed landscape areas for projects located in a Multiple-Family Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 100 01/05/2007
60.12.40.2.
B. Credits. Use of the following credits is limited to the amount Site Soil Amendment proposed. One (1) square foot of Site Soil Amendment results in one credit. Awarding a credit or a combination of credits shall not result in receipt of multiple credits for one (1) square foot of Site Soil Amendment.
1. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of Site Soil Amendment proposed an applicant can request a credit of one and one-half (1.5) square feet toward the landscape standard.
Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for Site Soil Amendment shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
2. Landscape Island Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of Site Soil Amendment proposed an applicant can request a credit of one and one-half (1.5) square feet toward the landscape island standard limited to 50 percent of the landscape island standard for the project site.
Standards. A request for Landscape Island Standard Reduction credits for Site Soil Amendment shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Island Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape island standard for the project based upon the minimum number of parking spaces required for the subject site divided by applicable standard of Section 60.05.20.5.A.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 101 06/01/2012
60.12.40.
3. Disconnect Downspouts.
A. Purpose. Disconnect a downspout directing the roof stormwater to a rain garden for projects located in a Multiple-Family Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Credits. Landscape Standard Reduction. Projects that disconnect downspouts from directly entering the piped municipal storm water system can count each square foot of roof area drained toward one-quarter (0.25) square feet of the landscape standard for the subject site. This credit is in addition to credits received for the rain garden, Section 60.12.40.B.5., that the roof stormwater is directed to flow into.
C. Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for Disconnecting a Downspout(s) shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
D. Disconnection of downspouts will also be reviewed with a Building Permit.
4. Eco-Roof.
A. Purpose. Install an Eco-Roof equal to at least 10 percent of the building footprint for projects located in a Multiple-Family Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Credits. Use of the following credits is limited to the amount Eco-Roof proposed. One (1) square foot of Eco-Roof results in one credit. Awarding a credit or a combination of credits shall not result in receipt of multiple credits for one (1) square foot of Eco-Roof.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 102 01/05/2007
60.12.40.4.B.
1. Building Height Increase, Multiple Use Zoning Districts.
a. For a proposal that includes an Eco-Roof that is at least 10 percent but less than 30 percent of the building’s footprint, an applicant can request an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the building footprint. The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than the square footage of Eco-Roof.
b. For a proposal that includes an Eco-Roof that is at least 30 percent but less than 60 percent of the building’s footprint, an applicant can request an increase in building height up to 24 feet within the building footprint. The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than two (2) times the square footage of Eco-Roof.
c. For a proposal that includes an Eco-Roof that is at least 60 percent of the building’s footprint, an applicant can request an increase in building height up to 36 feet within the building footprint.
d. Standards. Building Height Increase credits for installation of an Eco-Roof in a Multiple Use zoning district shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.4.C.
(1). Credit Limit. The proposed Building Height Increase does not exceed the relative 12, 24, or 36 foot standard outlined in a., b., or c., above.
(2). The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than three (3) times the square footage of Eco-Roof.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 103 06/01/2012
60.12.40.4.B.1.d.
(3). When abutting an R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, the portion of the building(s) receiving the height increase shall be designed with an additional setback from the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, of two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of building height increase. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Building Height Increase Example with
additional setback. (elevation view)
(4). The building receiving the height increase shall be the building with the Eco-Roof.
(5). The building receiving the height increase shall not increase the height within 50 feet of the Downtown Historic District or a Historic Landmark.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 104 06/01/2012
60.12.40.4.B.
2. Building Height Increase, Multiple-Family, Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts.
a. For every one (1) square foot of Eco-Roof proposed an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the building footprint.
b. Standards. Building Height Increase credits for installation of an Eco-Roof in a Multiple-Family, Commercial or Industrial zoning districts shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.4.C.
(1). Credit Limit. The proposed Building Height Increase does not exceed 12 additional feet for an area equal to the building footprint.
(2). The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than the square footage of Eco-Roof.
(3). When abutting an R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, the portion of the building(s) receiving the height increase shall be designed with an additional setback from the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, of two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of building height increase. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 105 01/05/2007
60.12.40.4.B.2.
Building Height Increase Example with
additional setback. (elevation view)
(4). The b
(4). The building receiving the height increase shall be the building with the Eco-Roof.
(5). The building receiving the height increase shall not increase the height within 50 feet of the Downtown Historic District or a Historic Landmark.
3. Landscape Standard Reduction. For a proposal that includes an Eco-Roof, every one (1) square foot of Eco-Roof earns one (1) square foot toward the landscape standard for the subject site.
Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for installation of an Eco-Roof shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.4.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 106 06/01/2012
60.12.40.
5. Rain Garden.
A. Purpose. Integration of a facility that provides a bio-detention function, bio-retention function, or other vegetated on-site stormwater disposal function within a project site that is located in a Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Credits. Use of the following credits is limited to the amount of stormwater that can be retained or detained by the Rain Garden proposed. One (1) cubic foot of stormwater retention or detention results in one credit. Awarding a credit or a combination of credits shall not result in receipt of multiple credits for one (1) cubic foot of stormwater retained or detained by the Rain Garden.
1. Building Height Increase. A proposal for integration of a Rain Garden can request an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the building footprint.
The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less three (3) square feet for every one (1) cubic foot of water retained or detained by the Rain Garden, not to exceed the square footage of the building footprint.
Standards. Building Height Increase credits for installation of a Rain Garden shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.5.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Building Height Increase does not exceed 12 feet of height above the standard for the underlying zoning district.
b. When abutting an R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, the portion of the building(s) receiving the height increase shall be designed with an additional setback from the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, of two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of building height increase. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 107 01/05/2007
60.12.40.5.B.1.
Building Height Increase Example with
additional setback. (elevation view)
c. The building receiving the height increase shall be located within the project site where the Rain Garden is proposed.
d. The building receiving the height increase shall not increase the height within 50 feet of the Downtown Historic District or a Historic Landmark.
2. Landscape Island Standard Reduction. For every one (1) cubic foot of water retained or detained in the design of a proposed Rain Garden that is located within the design of the parking lot(s) for a project site, an applicant can request a credit of one and one-half (1.5) square feet toward the landscape island standard.
Standards. Landscape Island Standard Reduction credits for installation of a Rain Garden shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.5.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Island Standard Reduction does not exceed 75 percent of the landscape island standard for the project site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 108 01/05/2007
60.12.40.5.B.
3. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) cubic foot of water retained or detained in the design of a proposed Rain Garden, an applicant can request a credit of three (3) square feet toward the landscape standard.
Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for installation of a Rain Garden shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.5.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 75 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
C. Standards. Proposals that request credits for integration of a Rain Garden(s) shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30 and Sections 60.12.40.5.B.1. through 60.12.40.5.B.3.
1. The rain garden shall be designed to capture thirty-six hundredths (0.36) of an inch of rainfall in a four (4) hour period, minimum. The maximum bonus given shall be for a design that captures three (3) inches of rainfall in a 24 hour period (approximately a five-year storm) equivalent volume, even if part of a larger storm detention facility intended to meet the City’s 25-year storm event requirement.
2. The rain garden shall be located on the site or abut the site in a right-of-way so that it is visible to the public from sidewalks that provide access to the project.
3. Any retaining walls proposed around the Rain Garden shall be less than or equal to 30 inches in height.
4. Landscape planting plans for the rain garden shall be prepared with consideration to sun and shade conditions.
5. There shall be no vertical obstruction with northern exposure of greater than four (4) feet directly adjacent to the rain garden. The minimum distance from such a north facing vertical obstruction to the rain garden shall be half the height of the vertical obstruction.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 109 06/01/2012
60.12.40.5.C.
6. The design and location of the rain garden shall be approved as part of the overall project during development review.
7. If not within a public right-of-way, the property owner shall set aside the rain garden in a conservation easement or a separate tract. The conservation easement or tract shall comply with the requirements of Section 60.12.55.2.
6. Rooftop Garden.
A. Purpose. Integration of a Rooftop Garden in the design of a building(s) located in a Multiple-Family Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Multiple Use zoning district. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Credits. Use of the following credits is limited to the amount Rooftop Garden proposed. One (1) square foot of Rooftop Garden results in one credit. Awarding a credit or a combination of credits shall not result in receipt of multiple credits for one (1) square foot of Rooftop Garden.
1. Building Height Increase. A proposal that integrates a Rooftop Garden can request an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the building footprint. The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than one-half (0.5) square foot for every one (1) square foot of Rooftop Garden proposed, not to exceed the square footage of the building footprint.
Standards. Building Height Increase credits for integration of a Rooftop Garden shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.6.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Building Height Increase does not exceed 12 feet of height above the standard for the underlying zoning district
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 110 06/01/2012
60.12.40.6.B.1.
b. When abutting an R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, the portion of the building(s) receiving the height increase shall be designed with an additional setback from the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, of two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of building height increase. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Building Height Increase Example with
additional setback. (elevation view)
c. The building receiving the height increase shall be the building with the Rooftop Garden.
d. The building receiving the height increase shall not increase the height within 50 feet of the Downtown Historic District or a Historic Landmark.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 111 06/01/2012
60.12.40.6.B.
2. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of Rooftop Garden constructed an applicant can request a credit toward one and one-half (1.5) square feet of the landscape standard for the project site.
Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for integration of a Rooftop Garden shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30. and Section 60.12.40.6.C.
a. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape island standard for the project site.
C. Standard. A Rooftop Garden shall be equivalent to at least 25 percent of the building footprint and at least 30 percent of the garden area shall contain live plants. In addition, a proposal for a Rooftop Garden shall satisfy the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
7. Integrated Parking.
A. Purpose. Integration of below-grade, tuck-under, or structured parking within the footprint of a building(s) located in a multiple use, multiple-family residential, commercial, or industrial zoning district or structured parking located in a multiple use zoning district.
B. Credit. Building Height Increase. A proposal that includes Integrated Parking can request an increase in building height up to 12 feet within the building footprint. The square footage of the building footprint receiving the building height increase shall be equal to or less than two (2) square feet for every 100 square feet of integrated parking proposed, not to exceed the square footage of the building footprint.
C. Standards. Building Height Increase credits for Integrated Parking shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 112 06/01/2012
60.12.40.7.C.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Building Height Increase does not exceed 12 feet of height above the standard for the underlying zoning district.
2. For every structured parking space provided there shall be a reduction of at least one surface parking space that otherwise could have been provided within the maximum parking ratio requirements of Section 60.30.
3. When abutting an R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, the portion of the building(s) receiving the height increase shall be designed with an additional setback from the R4, R5, R7, or R10 zoning district, or equivalent County zoning district, of two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of building height increase. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Building Height Increase Example with
additional setback. (elevation view)
4. The building receiving the height increase shall be the building with the Integrated Parking.
5. The building receiving the height increase shall not increase the height within 50 feet of the Downtown Historic District or a Historic Landmark.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 113 01/15/2009
60.12.40.
8. Trees, Existing Canopy Preservation.
A. Purpose. Preservation of existing tree canopy within ten (10) linear feet of a proposed surface parking lot and vehicle maneuvering area.
B. Credit. Landscape Island Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of existing Tree Canopy preserved, an applicant can request a credit of one (1) square foot toward the landscape island standard of Section 60.05.20.5.
EXAMPLE: If an applicant proposes development of a site and the size of the proposed parking lot results in standard construction of five (5) landscape islands equal to an area of 350 square feet and planting of five (5) trees, the applicant can alternately propose preservation of three mature trees within a 200 square foot area and supply two (2) or three (3) landscape islands totaling 175 square feet landscape area with two (2) trees. 60.12.40.8.
C. Standards. Landscape Island Standard Reduction credits for Existing Canopy Preservation of Trees shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Island Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape island standard for the project site.
2. The proposal satisfies the approval criteria of the applicable Tree Plan application, if any.
3. The tree(s) that holds the canopy proposed for preservation is proposed for protection as outlined in Section 60.60.20. of this Code for Protected Trees.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 114 01/15/2009
60.12.40.
9. Trees, Mitigation.
A. Purpose. Mitigation for removal of non-exempt surveyed tree(s) considered Community Trees, Historic Trees or Street Trees.
B. Credits. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of tree canopy mitigated, an applicant can request a credit toward one-half (0.5) square foot of the landscape standard for the project site.
C. Standards. Landscape Standard Reductions for Mitigation of Trees shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
1. The proposal satisfies the approval criteria of the applicable Tree Plan application, if any.
2. Mitigation of Community Trees, Historic Trees or Street Trees under the provisions of this section satisfies the mitigation standards of Section 60.60.25.1. for Significant Individual Trees or trees within Significant Groves or SNRAs.
10. Trees, Preservation.
A. Purpose. Preservation of at least 25 percent of the total tree canopy square footage of non-exempt surveyed tree(s) considered Community Trees, Historic Trees or Street Trees.
B. Credit. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of tree canopy preserved, an applicant can request a credit toward one (1) square foot of the landscape standard for the project site, limited to 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site.
C. Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for Preservation of Trees shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 115 01/15/2009
60.12.40.10.C.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site. 60.12.40.10.C.
2. The proposal satisfies the approval criteria of the applicable Tree Plan application, if any.
3. The Community, Historic or Street tree(s) proposed for preservation under the provisions of this section is proposed for protection during development as outlined by Section 60.60.20. of this Code for Protected Trees.
11. Trees, Box Filter.
A. Purpose. Integration of a Tree Box Filter(s) and its associated improvements in the design of a project site.
B. Credits. Landscape Standard Reduction. For every one (1) square foot of proposed site improvements associated with installation of a Tree Box Filter an applicant can request a credit of two (2) square feet toward the landscape standard.
C. Standards. Landscape Standard Reduction credits for integration of a Tree Box Filter(s) shall satisfy the following standards in addition to the applicable standards of Section 60.12.30.
1. Credit Limit. The proposed Landscape Standard Reduction does not exceed 50 percent of the landscape standard for the project site. 60.12.40. LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) TECHNIQUES - CREDIT TABLE 1. Additional Street Tree Canopy
A. Purpose
Add tree canopy by adding street trees above standard
Propose
1sf additional street tree canopy
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
1 sf
50% landscape std 2. Site Soil Amendment
A. Purpose
Amend soils for additional water absorption
Propose
1sf amended site soils
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
1.5 sf
50% landscape std
2. Landscape Island Standard Reduction
landscape island
1.5 sf
50% landscape island std 3. Disconnect Downspouts
A. Purpose
Direct roof stormwater runoff to a Rain Garden
Propose
1sf of roof area drained
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
0.25 sf
50% landscape std bldg = building, du = dwelling unit, ft = foot/feet, ht = height, sf = square feet, std = standard, min = minimum, max = maximum
[ORD 4498; January 2009]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Low Impact Development Techniques
Chapter 60 SR - 116 06/01/2012
60.12.40.
60.12.40. LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) TECHNIQUES - CREDIT TABLE 4. Eco-Roof
A. Purpose
Eco-Roof to absorb roof stormwater
Propose
1sf of Eco-Roof
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Building Height Increase, Multiple use zoning districts
a. 10% to < 30% of building footprint
bldg height
1 sf
12 ft above bldg ht
b. 30% to < 60% of building footprint
bldg height
2 sf
24 ft above bldg ht
c. 60% or more of building footprint
bldg height
3 sf
36 ft above bldg ht
2. Building Height Increase, Multiple-Family, Commercial, and Industrial zoning districts
bldg height
1 sf
12 ft above bldg ht
3. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
1 sf
50% landscape std 5. Rain Garden
A. Purpose
Bio-detention, bio-retention, or other vegetated facility
Propose
1cu ft of water detained/retained
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Building Height Increase
bldg height
3 sf
12 ft above bldg ht
2. Landscape Island Standard Reduction
landscape island
1.5 sf
75% landscape island std
3. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
3 sf
75% landscape std 6. Rooftop Garden
A. Purpose
Rooftop improvements to absorb roof stormwater
Propose
1sf of rooftop garden
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Building Height Increase
bldg height
0.5 sf
12 ft above bldg ht
2. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
1.5 sf
50% landscape std 7. Integrated parking
A. Purpose
Below-grade, tuck-under, or structured parking
Propose
100 sf of integrated parking
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Building Height Increase
bldg height
2 sf
12 ft above bldg ht 8. Trees, Existing Canopy Preservation
A. Purpose
Preserve tree canopy within 10 ft of parking & maneuvering
Propose
1sf tree canopy preserved
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Landscape Island Standard Reduction
landscape island
1 sf
50% landscape island std 9. Trees, Mitigation
A. Purpose
Mitigate Community, Historic, or Street Tree removal
Propose
1sf tree canopy mitigated
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
0.5 sf
50% landscape std 10. Trees, Preservation
A. Purpose
Preserve Community, Historic, or Street Tree canopy
Propose
1sf tree canopy preserved
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
1 sf
50% landscape std 11. Trees, Box Filter
A. Purpose
Install Tree Box Filter
Propose
1sf tree box filter & improvements
B. Credits
Toward
Amount
Limit
1. Landscape Standard Reduction
landscape
2 sf
50% landscape std bldg = building, du = dwelling unit, ft = foot/feet, ht = height, sf = square feet, std = standard, min = minimum, max = maximum
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
HBA and LID Maintenance
Chapter 60 SR - 117 01/05/2007
60.12.45. Maintenance.
1. Covenant with the City. An applicant that requests enhancement, mitigation or creation of HBA or integration of LID techniques in association with the provisions of Section 60.12. shall execute a covenant with the City that ensures the preservation, installation, maintenance, and replacement, if necessary, of the HBA or LID improvements and that meets the requirements of Section 60.12.45.1.A., below. Covenants shall be liberally construed for maximum protection of health, safety, and welfare of life and property.
A. Content of the covenant. A covenant required by this Code or as a condition of land use approval shall provide that:
1. The City’s need to address a clear and present danger to life or property shall supersede limitations of a covenant;
2. The owner will comply with all applicable Code requirements and conditions of approval;
3. If the owner fails to perform under the covenant, the City may at any time seek any available legal or equitable remedy. However, there is a preference for negotiated resolution without the necessity of litigation;
4. If, within one year of a citation filed by the City for violation under this section, the owner fails to carry out necessary repairs to on-site facilities, or to otherwise restore facilities to their intended functions, the city may terminate occupancy of the site and seek an injunction prohibiting future occupancy of the site while a violation of the covenant exists;
5. Where the development rights of one site are dependent on the performance of conditions by the owner of another site, the covenants are judicially enforceable by the owner of one site against the owner of another;
6. The applicant and property owner shall submit to the City of Beaverton a right of inspection allowing City staff or City contracted personnel to inspect the facility for proper function: and
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
HBA and LID Maintenance
Chapter 60 SR - 118 01/05/2007
60.12.45.1.A.
7. The city may condition permit or development approval upon provision of a surface and subsurface utility easement notwithstanding the beneficial effect of a covenant under this section.
B. The covenant shall run with the land. The covenant shall be attached to the deed and be recorded in the appropriate records of Washington County. Proof of the recording shall be made prior to the issuance of any construction permits.
C. Modifying the covenant.
1. Modifications to a land use approval or a condition thereof shall be obtained through an amendment to the original land use decision subject to the provisions of Section 50.95. of this Code.
2. Modifications that do not affect a land use approval or a condition thereof may be amended by written agreement by the parties without undergoing a land use application.
3. The modified covenant shall run with the land. The modified covenant shall be attached to the deed and be recorded in the appropriate records of Washington County. Proof of the recording shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permits.
2. Preserved HBA.
A. Commercial, Industrial or Multiple use zoning districts. When preserving HBA in a Commercial, Industrial or Multiple Use zoning district, the property owner shall place the preserved HBA in a conservation easement and shall execute a covenant for preservation and maintenance of the HBA. The conservation easement and covenant documents shall be attached to the deed and be recorded in the appropriate records of Washington County.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
HBA and LID Maintenance
Chapter 60 SR - 119 01/05/2007
60.12.45.2.
B. Residential zoning districts.
1. Single-family Residential zones. When preserving HBA in a single-family residential development that requires a Land Division application, the property owner shall place the preserved HBA in a separate tract. This tract may be retained by the property owner with the execution of a covenant or the tract may be dedicated to a public entity willing to receive the HBA.
2. Multi-family Residential zones. When preserving HBA in a multi-family residential development that does not require a Land Division application, the property owner shall place the preserved HBA in a conservation easement and shall execute a covenant for preservation and maintenance of the HBA. The conservation easement and covenant documents shall be attached to the deed and be recorded in the appropriate records of Washington County.
3. Conditions of Approval. A land use approval shall include conditions of approval that define the specific obligations for the site regarding preservation, installation, maintenance, and replacement of improvements related to preserved HBA or LID technique implementation or both.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Land Division Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 120 06/01/2012
60.15. LAND DIVISION STANDARDS. [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4487; August 2008]
60.15.05. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish uniform design and development standards and requirements for all land division applications in Section 40.45. of this Code.
60.15.10. Grading Standards.
1. Applicability. The on-site surface contour grading standards specified in Section 60.15.10.3. are applicable to all land use proposals where grading is proposed, including land division proposals and design review proposals, as applicable. This Section does not supersede Section 60.05.25. (Design Review) and the exemptions listed in Section 60.15.10.2. will apply equally to design review proposals.
2. Exemptions. The following improvements will be exempted from the on-site surface contour grading standards specified in Section 60.15.10.3.:
A. Public right-of-way road improvements such as new streets, street widening, sidewalks, and similar or related improvements.
B. Storm water detention facilities subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.
C. On-site grading where the grading will take place adjacent to an existing public street right-of-way, and will result in a finished grade that is below the elevation of the subject public street right-of-way; provided such grading is subject to the approval of the City Engineer, who may require appropriate erosion and sediment control mitigation measures.
3. On-site surface contouring. When grading a site within twenty-five (25) feet of a property line within or abutting any residentially zoned property, the on-site surface contours shall observe the following:
A. 0 to 5 feet from property line: Maximum of two (2) foot slope differential from the existing or finished elevation of the abutting property, whichever is applicable. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Land Division Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 121 06/01/2012
60.15.10.3.
B. More than 5 feet and up to and including 10 feet from property line: Maximum of four (4) foot slope differential from the existing or finished elevation of the abutting property, whichever is applicable. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
C. More than 10 feet and up to and including 15 feet from property line: Maximum of six (6) foot slope differential from the existing or finished elevation of the abutting property, whichever is applicable. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
D. More than 15 feet and up to and including 20 feet from property line: Maximum of eight (8) foot slope differential from the existing or finished elevation of the abutting property, whichever is applicable. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
E. More than 20 feet and up to and including 25 feet from property line: Maximum of ten (10) foot slope differential from the existing or finished elevation of the abutting property, whichever is applicable. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
F. Where an existing (pre-development) slope exceeds one or more of the standards in subsections 60.15.10.3.A-E, above, the slope after grading (post-development) shall not exceed the pre-development slope.
G. The on-site grading contours standards above apply only to the property lines of the parent parcel of a development. They do not apply to internal property lines within a development. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
4. Significant Trees and Groves. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 60.15.10.3, above, grading within 25 feet of a significant tree or grove, where the tree is located on- or off-site, shall observe the following: A. 0 to 10 feet from the trunk of a significant tree or grove: No change in pre-development ground elevation; B. More than 10 feet, and up to and including 25 feet, from the trunk of a significant tree or grove, or to the outside edge of the tree’s drip line, whichever is greater: Maximum 10% slope gradient difference from the pre-development ground elevation;
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Land Division Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 122 06/01/2012
60.15.10.4. C. Based on a recommendation of the City Arborist, the decision making body may require additional setbacks and/or other tree protection measures to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
60.15.15. Final Plat Standards.
1. Easements and rights-of-way. Refer to Chapter 9.05 of the Beaverton Municipal Code and Chapter 1, Section 120 of the Beaverton Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Building lines. The Director may approve special setbacks based upon the consideration for safety, topography, geology, solar access or other such reasons. If special building setback lines are to be established in the land division that are greater than required by this Code, they shall be shown on the final land division and included in the deed restriction.
3. Dedications. Infrastructure or public improvements such as public streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bikeways, multi-use paths, sanitary sewer, storm water system, water system, traffic control devices, parks, open space, and other public rights-of-way required as needed to serve the development, shall be installed at the expense of the developer and dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the City or the appropriate jurisdiction for maintenance. Dedication of any land for park or open space purposes must be approved by the jurisdiction to which the park or open space is being dedicated prior to Final Land Division approval.
4. Homeowners’ Associations and declarations. When a Homeowners’ Association Agreement or other restrictive covenants are to be recorded with the development, a copy of the appropriate documents shall be submitted with the final plat. The City shall review such documents to ensure that common areas are properly maintained and that other restrictions required by the City are included.
5. Monuments and bench marks. The developer shall establish and designate monuments and bench marks on the Final Plat.
6. Street trees. Prior to City approval of the Final Plat, street trees shall be planted along street frontages in accordance with the following:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Land Division Standards
Chapter 60 SR - 123 08/20/2008
60.15.15.6.
A. For detached dwelling land divisions, the Developer shall pay a fee to the City. The City shall be responsible for tree purchase and planting, and maintenance for one year, consisting of pruning, disease control and watering. The fee shall be based upon a standard of one tree per thirty (30) lineal feet of street frontage, with standard rounding methods applied for fractions thereof. The fee to be charged and collected shall be established and from time to time amended by Resolution of the City Council.
B. For all other land divisions, trees shall be planted in accordance with an approved street tree plan.
C. Trees shall be planted in accordance with the City’s Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mobile and Manufactured Home Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 124 01/01/2005
60.20. MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME REGULATIONS.
[ORD 3191; December 1980] [ORD 3739; September 1990] [ORD 3846; May 1993] [ORD 3899; June 1994]
60.20.05. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to establish criteria for the placement of mobile homes and manufactured homes within the City of Beaverton. Mobile homes and manufactured homes provide a wider choice of housing types suitable for a greater range of households, lifestyles and economic levels of present and anticipated populations. Mobile homes and manufactured homes will be located and shall comply with all applicable City and State standards. [ORD 3899; June 1994]
60.20.10. Mobile Home Subdivisions.
1. Mobile Home subdivisions are Permitted Uses in the R5 zone. [ORD 3739; September 1990] In addition to the standards of the zone in which the proposals are located and the other standards of this ordinance, they shall comply with all applicable State standards and other City standards for a subdivision. No other types of residential units, other than mobile homes and manufactured homes, shall be located in subdivisions of this type. The placement of manufactured homes in a mobile home subdivision shall be governed by Section 60.20.20 of this ordinance.
2. Standards for the placement of mobile homes on individual lots within a mobile home subdivision:
A. The mobile home shall have an Oregon insignia [ORD 3739; September 1990] No reconstruction or equipment installation shall have been made to a mobile home unless it has been approved by the State as evidence by the appropriate insignia.
B. A mobile home shall be attached to a foundation for which a building permit has been obtained.
C. The mobile home shall be connected to a public water supply and sewage disposal system.
D. The wheels, tongue and traveling lights of the mobile home shall be removed.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mobile and Manufactured Home Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 125 01/01/2005
60.20.10.2.
E. In the event a mobile home is removed after installation, the property owner shall within 120 days either replace the mobile home with another approved mobile home or remove the foundation, mobile home accessory buildings and other structures on the property. At the time of mobile home is removed, water, sewer and all other utilities shall be disconnected as may be specified by the City. The City may make the removal and disconnection and place a lien against the property for the cost of the work if the owner fails to perform the work within a specified time.
F. The mobile home shall be owned by the owner of the lot on which it is installed.
G. Except for a structure which conforms to the State definition of a mobile home accessory structure, no extension shall be attached to a mobile home.
H. The mobile home shall have a roof with a minimum slope of sixteen percent (16%) (2:12), and have composite or shake roof, or other roofing materials approved by the Director. [ORD 4332; January 2005]
I. The mobile home shall be double wide or wider.
J. The underside of the floor shall be a minimum of 18 inches above ground level at any point.
K. Mobile home siting shall conform to lot area, yard dimensions and all other dimensional requirements of the zone in which it is located.
60.20.15. Mobile Home Park Regulations.
1. Mobile home parks are Permitted Uses in the R5 zone. They are Conditional Uses in the R2 zone, subject to Section 40.15. [ORD 3739; September 1990]. Density for the mobile home parks shall be compatible with the zone in which they are located and calculated according to Chapter 90. Mobile home parks shall be subject to the following standards:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mobile and Manufactured Home Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 126 01/01/2005
60.20.15.1.
A. The design for the mobile home park shall conform to all applicable State standards established by the State of Oregon, Department of Commerce mobile home park standards (effective - February 1, 1979).
B. All mobile homes shall have an Oregon insignia. [ORD 3739; September 1990] No reconstruction or equipment installation shall be made to a mobile home unless it has been approved by the State as evidenced by the appropriate insignia.
C. The mobile home park shall occupy at least one acre.
D. Evidence shall be provided that the park will be eligible for a certificate of sanitation as required by State Law.
E. Each mobile home shall be connected to a public water supply and sewer disposal system.
F. A mobile home and any attached accessory structure shall not be located closer than:
1. Fifteen (15) feet from any other mobile home.
2. Ten (10) feet from any detached accessory building or other building located within the mobile home park.
3. Five (5) feet from a mobile home park property line.
G. Except for a structure which conforms to the State definition of a mobile home accessory structure, no extension shall be attached to a mobile home.
H. Mobile homes shall be installed under the provisions of the administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Commerce (adopted February 1, 1979).
I. A mobile home shall have continuous perimeter skirting installed pursuant to State regulations. Skirting shall be of the same material and finish as the exterior of the mobile home or otherwise approved by the Director.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mobile and Manufactured Home Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 127 01/01/2005
60.20.15.1.
J. Except for nonconforming mobile homes as described in 2., below, a mobile home shall contain a minimum floor area of 800 square feet of gross floor area. The size shall exclude the tongue of the mobile home.
K. The wheels, tongue and traveling lights of the mobile home shall be removed.
L. The underside of the floor area shall be a minimum of 18 inches above ground level at any point.
M. The internal street system shall conform to the standards specified by the City Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
N. Setbacks for a mobile home park property shall be the same as the zone in which it is located.
O. Landscaping shall be equivalent to 15% of the area of the park.
[ORD 4332; January 2005]
2. Mobile home parks existing at the adoption of this ordinance not meeting the standards set forth herein shall be considered nonconforming and are subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this ordinance. Nonconforming mobile homes in such parks may be replaced with like mobile homes when they are moved or destroyed.
3. Mobile homes not meeting the size requirements set forth in subsection 1.L. above, which at the adoption of this ordinance are located in approved mobile home parks in the City, shall be considered nonconforming structures and may continue to remain or to be moved to another mobile home park.
4. Mobile home parks and subdivisions are prohibited in Commercial and Industrial districts. [ORD 3739; September 1990]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mobile and Manufactured Home Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 128 06/01/2012
60.20.20. Manufactured Homes. [ORD 3899; June 1994]
1. Manufactured Homes are Permitted on individual lots in the R5, R7, and R10 zones subject to the siting and design standards listed below: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. The manufactured home shall be multisectional ("double-wide" or wider) and enclose a floor area of at least 1000 square feet;
B. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than 12 inches above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 12 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home. If the manufactured home is placed on a basement, the 12 inch limitation will not apply.
C. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than a nominal 3 feet in height for each 12 feet in width;
D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit authority
E. The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the state building code as identified under ORS 455.010.
F. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials.
G. A manufactured home shall have continuous perimeter skirting installed. Skirting shall be of the same material and finish as the exterior of the manufactured home. Pressure treated wood, concrete, brick, or stone shall be used.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mobile and Manufactured Home Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 129 08/20/2008
60.20.20.1.
H. A manufactured home shall not be sited abutting any structure or property identified as a Historic District, Preservation District or Landmarks.
I. All manufactured homes shall utilize at least two of the following design features:
1. Dormers;
2. Recessed entries;
3. Cupolas;
4. Bay or bow windows;
5. Attached garages;
6. Window shutters;
7. A roof with a pitch greater than nominal 3/12;
8. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 12”);
9. Gables;
10. Covered porch or entry;
11. Pillars or posts;
12. Eaves (minimum 6”);
13. Tile or shake roof;
14. Horizontal lap siding.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Loading
Chapter 60 SR - 130 01/01/2005
60.25. OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
60.25.05. Applicability. No building or structure subject to the off-street loading requirements of this section shall be erected, nor shall any such existing building or structure be altered so as to increase its gross floor area to an amount exceeding 25% more than its existing gross floor area, without prior provisions for off-street loading space in conformance with the requirements of this section.
60.25.10. Loading Berth Design. Required off-street loading space shall be provided in berths which conform to the following minimum specifications:
1. Type A berths shall be at least 60 feet long by 12 feet wide by 15 feet high, inside dimensions with a 60 foot maneuvering apron.
2. Type B berths shall be at least 30 feet long by 12 feet wide by 14 feet 6 inches high, inside dimensions with 30 feet maneuvering apron.
60.25.15. Number of Required Loading Spaces. The following numbers and types of berths shall be provided for the specified uses. The uses specified below shall include all structures designed, intended or arranged for such use. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be the same as a use which is most similar.
AGGREGATE
FLOOR AREA
BERTHS
USE
(SQ. FT.)
REQUIRED
TYPE
1.
Freight terminals, Industrial plants, Manufacturing or wholesale establishments, Warehouses.
12,000 - 36,000
36,001 - 60,000
60,001 - 100,000
each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof
1
2
3
1 additional
A
A
A
A
2.
Auditoria, Motel, Convention Halls, or Sports Arenas.
[ORD 3293; November 1982]
25,000 - 150,000
150,001 - 400,000
each additional 250,000 or fraction thereof
1
2
1 additional
B
B
B
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Loading
Chapter 60 SR - 131 06/01/2012
60.25.15.
3.
Hospitals, Residential Care Facilities. [ORD 4036; April 1999]
10,000 - 100,000
over 100,000
1
2
B
B
4.
Department stores, retail establishments, funeral homes, restaurants, and commercial establishments not otherwise specified.
7,000 - 24,000
24,001 - 50,000
50,001 - 100,000
each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof
1
2
3
1 additional
B
B
B
B
5.
Hotels, Extended Stay Hotels or Office Buildings. [ORD 3958; June 1996] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
25,000 - 40,000
40,001 - 100,000
each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof
1
2
1 additional
B
B
B
6.
Schools
over 14,000
1
B
7. Concurrent different uses. When any proposed structure will be used concurrently for different purposes, final determination of loading requirements will be made by the decision making authority but in no event shall the loading requirements be less than the total requirement for each use based upon its aggregate floor area.
60.25.20. Loading Facilities Location.
1. The off-street loading facilities required for the uses mentioned in this Code shall be in all cases on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.
2. No space for loading or unloading vehicles shall be so located that a vehicle using such loading space projects into any public street. Loading space shall be provided with access to any alley, or if no alley adjoins the lot, with access to a street. Any required front, side or rear yard may be used for loading unless otherwise prohibited by this Code.
60.25.25. Loading Determination. Off-Street loading requirements may be modified pursuant to Section 40.50. (Loading Determination)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 132 07/15/2016
60.30. OFF-STREET PARKING.
60.30.05. Off-Street Parking Requirements. Parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained by the owner of the property for each building or use which is erected, enlarged, altered, or maintained in accordance with the requirements of Sections 60.30.05. to 60.30.20.
1. Availability. Required parking spaces shall be available for parking operable passenger automobiles and bicycles of residents, customers, patrons and employees and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use.
2. Vehicle Parking. Vehicle parking shall be required for all development proposed for approval after November 6, 1996 unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance. The number of required vehicle parking spaces shall be provided according to Section 60.30.10.5.
3. Bicycle Parking. [ORD 3965; November 1996] Bicycle parking shall be required for all multi-family residential developments of four units or more, all retail, office and institution developments, and at all transit stations and park and ride lots which are proposed for approval after November 6, 1996. The number of required bicycle parking spaces shall be provided according to Section 60.30.10.5. All bike parking facilities shall meet the specifications, design and locational criteria as delineated in this section and the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
[ORD 4107; May 2000]
60.30.10. Number of Required Parking Spaces. Except as otherwise provided under Section 60.30.10.11., off-street vehicle, bicycle, or both parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
1. Parking Calculation. Parking ratios are based on spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, unless otherwise noted.
2. Parking Categories.
A. Vehicle Categories. Contained in the table at Section 60.30.10.5. are vehicle parking ratios for minimum required parking spaces and maximum permitted number of vehicle parking spaces to be provided for each land use, except for those uses which are located in the Regional Center which are governed by Section 60.30.10.6. These requirements reflect the parking requirements of Title 4 of Metro’s Regional Transportation Functional Plan. [ORD 4471; February 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4686; July 2016]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 133 07/15/2016
60.30.10.2.A.
1. Minimum number of required parking spaces. For each listed land use, the City shall not require more than the minimum number of parking spaces calculated for each use.
2. Parking Zone A. Parking Zone A reflects the maximum number of permitted vehicle parking spaces allowed for each listed land use. Parking Zone A areas include those parcels that are located within one-quarter mile walking distance of bus transit stops that have 20 minute peak hour transit service or one-half mile walking distance of light rail station platforms that have 20 minute peak hour transit service.
3. Parking Zone B. Parking Zone B reflects the maximum number of permitted vehicle parking spaces allowed for each listed land use. Parking Zone B areas include those parcels that are located within one-quarter mile walking distance of bus transit stops, one-half mile walking distance of light rail station platforms, or both, or that have a greater than 20 minute peak hour transit service. Parking Zone B areas also include those parcels that are located at a distance greater than one-quarter mile walking distance of bus transit stops, one-half mile walking distance of light rail station platforms, or both.
4. Dual parking zones. If a parcel is partially located within Parking Zone A, then the use(s) located on the entire parcel shall observe the Parking Zone A parking ratios. Specifically exempted from this requirement are parcels located within the Regional Center—East zoning district. In the cases in the Regional Center—East zoning district where parcels are bisected by the boundary of Parking Zones A and B, the applicable maximum parking ratios may be averaged, and that average may be applied over the whole parcel. [ORD 4107; May 2000]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 134 07/15/2016
60.30.10.2.A.
5. Regional Center Parking Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Located within the boundary of the Regional Center are five (5) parking districts. Within these five districts, the parking requirements of Section 60.30.10.5.A. do not apply. The required number of parking spaces for Regional Center Parking Zones 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 shall be governed by Section 60.30.10.6. [ORD 4471; February 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4686; July 2016]
B. Bicycle Categories. The required minimum number of short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces for each land use is listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
1. Short-Term parking. Short-term bicycle parking spaces accommodate persons that can be expected to depart within two hours. Short-term bicycle parking is encouraged to be located on site within 50 feet of a primary entrance, or if there are site, setback, building design, or other constraints, bicycle parking shall be located no more than 100 feet from a primary entrance in the closest available area to the primary entrance as determined by the decision-making authority.
2. Long-Term parking. Long-term bicycle parking spaces accommodate persons that can be expected to leave their bicycle parked longer than two hours. Cover or shelter for long-term bicycle parking shall be provided. School buildings are exempted from the requirement to cover long-term bicycle parking.
3. Bicycle parking shall be designed, covered, located, and lighted to the standards of the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings. [ORD 4302, June 2004]
4. Bicycle parking in the Old Town Parking Zones 1 and 2 shall be governed by the bicycle parking requirements listed in Section 60.30.10.5. [ORD 4471; February 2008]
3. Ratios. In calculating the required number of vehicle and bicycle parking spaces, fractions equal to or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. In calculating the required number of vehicle and bicycle parking spaces, fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. [ORD 3965; November 1996]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 135 07/15/2016
60.30.10.
4. Uses Not Listed. For uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for vehicles and bicycles shall be determined with a Parking Requirement Determination (Section 40.55.1.). [ORD 4224; August 2002]
5. Parking Tables. The following tables list the required minimum and maximum vehicle and bicycle parking requirements for listed land use types. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 136 07/10/2015
60.30.10.5.A.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES Land Use Category Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking Spaces Multiple Use Zones All Other Zones Zone A Zone B
Residential Uses
Detached dwellings (per unit)
1.0
1.0
n/a
n/a
Attached dwellings
One bedroom (per unit)
1.0
1.25
1.8
1.8
Two bedroom (per unit)
1.0
1.50
2.0
2.0
Three or more bedrooms (per unit)
1.0
1.75
2.0
2.0
Dwellings, Live/Work (per unit)
1.25
1.25
1.8
1.8
Dwelling, Accessory Unit
1.0
1.0
1.8
1.8
Mobile Homes (per unit)
1.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
Residential Care Facilities (per bed, maximum capacity)
0.25
0.5
0.5
0.5
Rooming, Boarding, or Lodging Houses (per guest room)
1.0
1.0
1.25
1.5
Commercial Amusements
Arena / Stadium (per seat, maximum occupancy)
n/a
n/a
0.25
0.25
Movie Theaters (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.5
Sports Clubs / Recreational Facilities
4.3
4.3
5.4
6.5
Tennis / Racquetball Courts
1.0
1.0
1.3
1.5
Institutions
Hospital (per bed)
2.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Public Buildings or other Structures
2.7
2.7
3.4
4.1
Welfare or Correctional Institution (per bed)
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.75
Fire Station
1.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
[ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4224; August 2002][ORD 4462; January 2008]
[ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4653; June 2015]
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. Refer to Section 60.30.10.10. for exceptions.
4. In calculating the required number of vehicle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 137 06/01/2012
60.30.10.5.A.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES
Land Use Category Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking Spaces Multiple Use Zones All Other Zones Zone A Zone B
Commercial Uses
Retail, including shopping centers
3.0
3.3
5.1
6.2
Offices, Administrative Facilities
2.7
2.7
3.4
4.1
Bank, Financial Institutions
3.0
3.3
5.4
6.5
Service Businesses
3.0
3.0
5.1
6.2
Rental Businesses, including vehicle and trailer rental
2.7
3.3
3.5
4.1
Medical, Dental Clinics
3.9
3.9
4.9
5.9
Mortuaries (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.75
Eating, Drinking Establishments
Fast Food with drive-through service in the RC-TO, SC-MU, and SC-HDR zones.
5.0
n/a
12.4
14.9
Fast Food with drive-through service in all other zones.
10.0
10.0
12.4
14.9
Other eating, drinking establishments in the RC-TO, SC-MU, and SC-HDR zones.
5.0
n/a
19.1
23.0
Other eating, drinking establishments in all other zones.
10.0
10.0
19.1
23.0
Temporary Living Quarters (per guest room)
1.0
1.0
1.25
1.5
[ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. Refer to Section 60.30.10.10. for exceptions.
4. In calculating the required number of vehicle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 138 06/01/2012
60.30.10.5.A.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES
Land Use Category Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking Spaces Multiple Use Zones All Other Zones Zone A Zone B
Places of Assembly
Places of Worship (per seat at maximum occupancy)
0.25
0.25
0.6
0.8
Auditoria, meeting facilities; Social or Fraternal Organizations (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.5
Educational Institutions: College, University, High School, Commercial School (spaces / number of FTE students and FTE staff)
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
Educational Institutions: Middle School, Elementary School (spaces / number of FTE staff)
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.5
Nursery Schools, Day or Child Care Facilities (spaces / number of FTE staff)
0.8
1.5
2.0
2.0
Library, museum, art gallery
2.5
2.5
4.0
6.0
Park and Ride facilities
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Transit Centers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Industrial
Manufacturing
1.6
1.6
2.0
2.0
Storage warehouse, wholesale establishment, rail or trucking terminal, vehicle or trailer storage.
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.5
Limited Industrial
Research Facilities
2.5
2.5
3.4
3.4
[ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. Refer to Section 60.30.10.10. for exceptions.
4. In calculating the required number of vehicle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 139 07/10/2015
60.30.10.5.B.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR BICYCLES
Land Use Category Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces Short Term Long Term
Residential Uses
Detached dwellings
Not required
Not required
Single family attached dwellings
Not required
Not required
Multi dwelling structure containing 4 or more dwelling units
2 spaces or
1 space per 20 dwelling units
1 space per dwelling unit
Residential Care Facilities (based upon maximum capacity)
1 space per 100 beds
1 space per 50 beds
Rooming, Boarding, or Lodging Houses (per guest room)
Not required
1 space for every 10 guest rooms
Commercial Amusements
Arena / Stadium / Theater
2 spaces or 1 space per 200 seats
2 spaces or 1 space per 1,000 seats
Bowling Alley
1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area
1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Dance Hall, Skating Rink
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area
1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area
[ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4659; June 2015]
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. In calculating the required number of bicycle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
4. Where an option is provided under bicycle parking, whichever standard results in the greater number of bicycle parking spaces is the minimum number required. “Not required” means that the provision of bicycle parking is at the option of the property owner.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 140 07/10/2015
60.30.10.5.B.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR BICYCLES
Land Use Category Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces Short Term Long Term
Commercial Amusements - continued
Recreational Facility
2 spaces, or spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted
2 spaces, or spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted
Commercial Uses
Retail, including shopping centers
2 spaces or 1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces or 1 space per 12,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Offices, Administrative Facilities
2 spaces or 1 space per 8,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces or 1 space per 8,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Bank, Financial Institutions
2 spaces or 1 space per 8,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces or 1 space per 8,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Medical, Dental Clinics
2 spaces or 1 space per 20,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces or 1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. In calculating the required number of bicycle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
4. Where an option is provided under bicycle parking, whichever standard results in the greater number of bicycle parking spaces is the minimum number required. “Not required” means that the provision of bicycle parking is at the option of the property owner.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 141 07/10/2015
60.30.10.5.B.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR BICYCLES
Land Use Category Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces Short Term Long Term
Commercial Uses - continued
Eating, Drinking Establishments
2 spaces or 1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces or 1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Mortuaries
Not required
1 space
Automotive Service, Minor
2 spaces or 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces or 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Truck, trailer, and automobile rental
Not required
2 spaces
Temporary Living Quarters
Not required
1 space per 50 guest units
Places of Assembly
Auditoria, meeting facilities
1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces
Places of Worship
1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area
2 spaces
Social or Fraternal Organizations
2 spaces, or spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted
2 spaces, or spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. In calculating the required number of bicycle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
4. Where an option is provided under bicycle parking, whichever standard results in the greater number of bicycle parking spaces is the minimum number required. “Not required” means that the provision of bicycle parking is at the option of the property owner.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 142 06/01/2012
60.30.10.5.B.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR BICYCLES
Land Use Category Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces Short Term Long Term
Places of Assembly - continued
Educational Institutions: College, University, Commercial School
Not required
4 spaces per classroom
Educational Institutions: High School
Not required
1 space per 18 students
Educational Institutions: Middle School, Elementary School
Not required
1 space per 9 students
Nursery Schools, Day or Child Care Facilities
Not required
1 space per classroom
Library, museum, art gallery
1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. of floor area
1 space per 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Park and Ride facilities
Not required
5% of auto spaces
Transit Centers
Bus
Not required
2 spaces per bus bay
Light Rail (per station)
Not required
10 spaces
Institutions
Hospital
1 space per 100 beds
1 space per 50 beds
Welfare or Correctional Institution
1 space per 100 beds
1 space per 50 beds
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. In calculating the required number of bicycle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
4. Where an option is provided under bicycle parking, whichever standard results in the greater number of bicycle parking spaces is the minimum number required. “Not required” means that the provision of bicycle parking is at the option of the property owner.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 143 06/01/2012
60.30.10.5.B.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR BICYCLES
Land Use Category Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces Short Term Long Term
Industrial
Manufacturing
Not required
2 spaces, or 1 space per 20,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Storage warehouse, wholesale establishment, rail or trucking terminal, vehicle or trailer storage.
Not required
2 spaces, or 1 space per 80,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Notes: 1. Parking ratios are based on number of spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless otherwise noted.
2. Refer to Section 60.30.10.4. for uses not listed in Section 60.30.10.5.
3. In calculating the required number of bicycle parking spaces, fractions equal or more than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
4. Where an option is provided under bicycle parking, whichever standard results in the greater number of bicycle parking spaces is the minimum number required. “Not required” means that the provision of bicycle parking is at the option of the property owner.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 144 07/15/2016
60.30.10.
6. Regional Center Parking Tables. The following tables list the required minimum and maximum vehicle parking requirements for land use types in the Regional Center. Within the boundary of the Regional Center—Old Town (RC-OT), Regional Center—Transit-Oriented (RC-TO), and Regional Center—East (RC-E) are five (5) parking districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4686; July 2016]
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES
IN THE REGIONAL CENTER Land Use Category Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking Spaces Parking Districts 1, 2, and 3 Parking District 4 Parking District 5 Zone A Zone B
Residential Uses
Detached dwellings (per unit)
.75
1.0
1.0
n/a
n/a
Attached dwellings
One bedroom (per unit)
.75
1.0
1.0
1.8
1.8
Two bedroom (per unit)
.75
1.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
Three or more bedrooms (per unit)
.75
1.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
Dwellings, Live/Work (per unit)
.75
1.25
1.25
1.8
1.8
Dwelling, Accessory Unit
.75
1.0
1.0
1.8
1.8
Residential Care Facilities (per bed, maximum capacity)
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.5
Rooming, Boarding, or Lodging Houses (per guest room)
0
1.0
1.0
1.25
1.5
Commercial Amusements
Arena / Stadium (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0
n/a
n/a
0.25
0.25
Movie Theaters (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.5
Sports Clubs / Recreational Facilities
0
4.3
4.3
5.4
6.5
Tennis / Racquetball Courts
0
1.0
1.0
1.3
1.5
Institutions
Hospital (per bed)
2.0
2.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Public Buildings or other Structures
2.7
2.7
2.7
3.4
4.1
Welfare or Correctional Institution (per bed)
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.75
Notes: Those notes identified in Section 60.30.10.5.A. shall apply to Section 60.30.10.6. [ORD 4584; June 2012] [ORD 4686; July 2016]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 145 07/15/2016
60.30.10.6.
PARKING RATIO REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES
IN THE REGIONAL CENTER Land Use Category Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking Spaces Parking Districts 1, 2, and 3 Parking District 4 Parking District 5 Zone A Zone B
Commercial Uses
Retail, including shopping centers
0
3.0
3.0
5.1
6.2
Offices, Administrative Facilities
0
2.7
2.7
3.4
4.1
Bank, Financial Institutions
0
3.0
3.0
5.4
6.5
Service Businesses
0
3.0
3.0
5.1
6.2
Rental Businesses, including vehicle and trailer rental
0
2.7
2.7
3.5
4.1
Medical, Dental Clinics
0
3.9
3.9
4.9
5.9
Mortuaries (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.75
Eating, Drinking Establishments
Fast Food with drive-through service.
0
5.0
10.0
12.4
14.9
Other eating, drinking establishments.
0
5.0
10.0
19.1
23.0
Temporary Living Quarters (per guest room)
0
1.0
1.0
1.25
1.5
Places of Assembly
Places of Worship (per seat at maximum occupancy)
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.6
0.8
Auditoria, meeting facilities; Social or Fraternal Organizations (per seat, maximum occupancy)
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.5
Educational Institutions: College, University, High School, Commercial School (spaces / number of FTE students and FTE staff)
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
Educational Institutions: Middle School, Elementary School (spaces / number of FTE staff)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.5
Nursery Schools, Day or Child Care Facilities (spaces / number of FTE staff)
0.8
0.8
0.8
2.0
2.0
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 146 07/15/2016
Land Use Category Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking Spaces Parking Districts 1, 2, and 3 Parking District 4 Parking District 5 Zone A Zone B
Places of Assembly (cont.)
Library, museum, art gallery
2.5
2.5
2.5
4.0
6.0
Park and Ride facilities
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Transit Centers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Industrial
Manufacturing
1.6
1.6
1.6
2.0
2.0
Limited Industrial
Research Facilities
2.5
2.5
2.5
3.4
3.4
Notes: Those notes identified in Section 60.30.10.5.A. shall apply to Section 60.30.10.6. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4471; February 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4686; July 2016]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 147 07/15/2016
REGIONAL CENTER PARKING DISTRICTS MAP
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 148 07/15/2016
60.30.10.
7. Exceeding Parking Ratios. More parking spaces for motor vehicle and bicycle parking may be required as a condition of a Conditional Use. Variation from the specified minimum or maximum number of required motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces may be approved by the City subject to Section 40.10.15.2. (Major Adjustment) of this Code. However, if surplus parking is located in a parking structure, the parking ratios may be exceeded without requiring an approval of a Major Adjustment for parking.
Any surplus parking may be designed to any of the City standards for off-street parking lot design. The Facilities Review Committee may recommend approval of parallel parking spaces or other non-standard designs for surplus parking in any zone. [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4498; January 2009] [ORD 4659; June 2015]
8. Residential Parking Dimensions. For all residential uses, any required parking space shall not be less than 8 1/2 feet wide and 18 1/2 feet long. (See also Section 60.30.15. (Off-Street Parking Lot Design) for other standards.) [ORD 4312; July 2004]
9. Parking Space Calculation.
A. Multiple Uses. In the case of multiple uses, the total requirements for off-street vehicle and bicycle parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately.
B. Spaces which only meet the requirements of one establishment may serve more than one establishment on the same parking lot, provided that sufficient evidence is presented which shows that the times of peak parking demand for the various establishments do not coincide, and that adequate parking will be available at all times when the various establishments are in operation.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 149 06/18/2019
60.30.10.
10. Location of Vehicle Parking.
A. All required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same property as the use requiring the spaces, with the following exceptions:
1. By approving a Parking Determination application for Shared Parking, the decision making authority may permit the required off-street parking spaces in Residential, Commercial, and Industrial zoning districts to be located on any property within 500 feet of the property where the use requiring the parking is located: and, in Multiple Use zoning districts, on any lot within any distance. [ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4706; May 2017] [ORD 4757; March 2019]
2. By approving a Temporary Displaced Parking application, the decision making authority may permit parking displaced by development to be located off site temporarily, in accordance with the provisions of Section 40.80.15.5. [ORD 4757; March 2019]
B. Except for single-family and duplex dwellings, groups of more than two parking spaces shall be so located and served by an access that their use will require no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street or right-of-way other than an alley.
C. In R10, R7, R5 and R4 zones parking and loading spaces may be located in side and rear yards and may be located in the front yard of each dwelling unit only if located in the driveway area leading to its garage. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
D. Parking in the front yard is allowed for each dwelling unit in the driveway area leading to its garage. Also, one additional space shall be allowed in that area in front of the required side yard and closest to the driveway subject to the following conditions:
2. The owner of the lot upon which the space is sought shall enter into a written agreement allowing the space with the owner of the property on that side closest to the proposed additional space. This agreement shall be binding on the successors in interest to the property of both parties and
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 150 06/01/2012
60.30.10.10
shall be recorded with the Washington County Department of Records and Elections.
2. Notwithstanding the agreement of the property owners, the additional space shall not be allowed if it creates a traffic sight obstruction.
3. The additional space shall be hard surfaced.
11. Reductions and Exceptions. [ORD 3358; March 1984] Reductions and exceptions to the required vehicle and bicycle parking standards as listed in Sections 60.30.10.5. and 60.30.10.6. may be granted in the following specific cases: [ORD 4471; February 2008] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Vehicle Parking Reduction for Transit Amenities. [ORD 3965; November 1996] Any existing use or proposed use on an existing transit route may apply for and the City may reduce the number of required vehicle parking spaces by either five percent or ten percent through provision of a pedestrian plaza. The property owner shall initiate the request for parking space reduction through the City application process.
1. A five percent (5%) credit may be approved if:
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
a. The pedestrian plaza is adjacent to a transit route with transit service currently available, and is within 1/4 mile of a major transit stop on that route. If there is a bus stop along the site’s frontage, the plaza must be adjacent to the bus stop,
b. The pedestrian plaza is open to the public,
c. The pedestrian plaza is at least 200 square feet exclusive of connecting walkways,
d. A bench, landscaping and trash receptacle is provided as part of the pedestrian plaza. (Landscaping shall not exceed 50 percent of the total area.), and
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 151 06/01/2012
60.30.10.11.A.1.
e. The property owner provides a parking analysis demonstrating to the City’s satisfaction that the vehicle parking demand for the existing or proposed use will be met with the reduction in place.
2. A ten percent (10%) credit may be approved if:
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
a. The pedestrian plaza is adjacent to a transit route with transit service currently available, and is within 1/4 mile of a major transit stop on that route. If there is a bus stop along the site’s frontage, the plaza must be adjacent to the bus stop,
b. The pedestrian plaza is open to the public,
c. The pedestrian plaza is at least 300 square feet exclusive of connecting walkways,
d. A transit shelter (if required by Tri-Met and the City), landscaping and trash receptacle is provided as part of the pedestrian plaza. (Landscaping shall not exceed 50 percent of the total area.), and
e. The property owner provides a parking analysis demonstrating to the City’s satisfaction that the vehicle parking demand for the existing or proposed use will be met with the reduction in place.
3. Provision of pedestrian plazas shall be coordinated with Tri-Met through the City’s application process and shall be constructed to Tri-Met and City standards.
B. Reduction for Transportation Management Association Participation. [ORD 4107; May 2000] The minimum number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced by as much as ten percent (10%), if the applicant agrees to participate in a Transportation Management Association program approved by the City for the area within which the project is located. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 152 06/01/2012
60.30.10.11.
C. Reduction for Combination of Uses with Shared Parking.
[ORD 4107; May 2000] The minimum number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced by as much as thirty percent (30%) subject to all of the following: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. The combination of uses will permit shared parking sufficient to justify a reduction in the parking standard and the design of the site and parking, and conditions of operation of parking agreed to by the applicant, will promote parking patterns and parking use consistent with the permitted reduction;
2. The probable long-term occupancy of the building or use, based upon its design, will not generate additional parking demand; and
3. The applicant agrees to participate in a Transportation Management Association approved by the City for the subarea within which the project is located.
D. Reduction for Special Needs Residential. The Director may, upon request, allow a reduction in the number of required off-street vehicle and bicycle parking spaces in housing developments for elderly or handicapped persons if such reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development, resident auto ownership, number of employees, possible future conversion to other residential uses and other similar relevant factors. [ORD 3108; April 1979] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 153 06/01/2012
60.30.10.11.
E. Reduction for Substitution of Bicycle Parking. For uses located within a 1/4 mile radius of a transit stop, as measured from any portion of a parcel to the centerline of the nearest adjacent public right of way or the center of the station platform, the provision of bicycle parking may be used to reduce minimum vehicle parking requirements at a rate of two long-term bicycle parking spaces per vehicle space, but not more than five percent (5%) of the total number of required vehicle parking spaces. The property owner shall provide a parking analysis demonstrating that the vehicle parking demand will be met with the reduced number of vehicle spaces. Bicycle parking used to reduce vehicle parking spaces shall be covered long-term bicycle parking consistent with the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings. [ORD 4365; October 2005] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
F. Exemption for Temporary Uses. Temporary uses authorized by this Code are exempt from bicycle parking requirements. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
12. Compact Cars. Compact car parking spaces may be allowed as follows:
A. For residential uses, required vehicle parking spaces shall be provided at standard size pursuant to Section 60.30.10.8. Parking in excess of the required parking may be provided as compact parking subject to Section 60.30.10.7. [ORD 4471; February 2008]
B. For uses other than residential uses, twenty percent (20%) of the required vehicle parking spaces for long term or designated employee parking lots may be compact spaces. The Facilities Review Committee may recommend allowing more than twenty percent (20%) of the required parking spaces to be used for compact car parking when the applicant shows that more compact car spaces are appropriate. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
C. The Facilities Review Committee may recommend allowing the required parking spaces for short term parking to include spaces for compact cars if the applicant shows that there will be adequate parking for non-compact cars and a method of enforcing the compact car parking is available. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 154 02/28/2008
60.30.10.12.
D. Compact car parking spaces shall be generally grouped together and designated as such. [ORD 3228; December 1981]
13. Carpool and Vanpool Parking Requirements. [ORD 3965; November 1996]
A. In industrial, institution, and office developments, including government offices, with 50 or more employee parking spaces, at least three percent of the employee parking spaces shall be designated for carpool and/or vanpool parking. For the purposes of this section, carpool is defined as two or more persons per car, and vanpool is defined as five or more persons per van. The carpool/vanpool spaces shall be clearly marked and signed for reserved carpool and/or vanpool parking. The reserved carpool/vanpool parking time may be specified so that the reserved spaces may be used for general parking if the reserved spaces are not occupied after a specific time period, which shall be clearly posted on the sign.
B. Location. Designated carpool/vanpool spaces shall be the closest employee motor vehicle parking spaces to the building entrance normally used by employees, except for the motor vehicle parking spaces designated for persons with disabilities, which shall be the closest to the building entrance. [ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4302, June 2004]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 155 12/02/2016
60.30.15. Off-Street Parking Lot Design. All off-street parking lots shall be designed in accordance with City Standards for stalls and aisles as set forth in the following drawings and tables:
A = Parking Angle
B = Stall Width
C = Stall Depth (no bumper overhang)
D = Aisle Width
E = Stall Width (parallel to aisle)
F = Module Width (no bumper overhang)
G = Bumper Overhang
H = Backing Area
I = Module Intermesh
NOTE:
1) For one (1) row of stalls use "C" plus "D" as minimum bay width.
2) Public alley width may be included as part of dimension "D", but all parking stalls must be on private property, off the public right-of-way.
3) For estimating available parking area, use 350 sq. ft. per vehicle for stall, aisle and access areas.
4) The stall width for self-parking of long duration is 8.5 feet; for higher turnover self-parking is 9.0 feet; and for supermarkets and similar facilities (shoppers and packages) is 9.5-10 feet.
5) The minimum aisle width for two-way traffic and for emergency vehicle operations area is 24 feet. The minimum aisle width for emergency vehicle access (one way traffic) is 20 feet.
6) Where appropriate, bumper overhang area is provided (extruded curbs), "G" can be subtracted from "C" to determine stall depth. Dimensions of required recreational vehicle spaces are 10 feet by 25 feet.
7) Parking lots in conjunction with government and public buildings, as defined by Chapter 11 of the International Building Code, are to include parking for the handicapped as required in that chapter. These special spaces may be included within the total spaces required. [ORD 3494; March 1986] [ORD 4365; October 2005]
[ORD 4697; December 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 156 06/01/2012
A B C D E F G H I
45 degrees 8.5 18.7 12.0 12.0 49.4 2.0 5.0 43.4
60 degrees 8.5 19.8 14.5 9.8 54.1 2.5 5.0 49.9
75 degrees 8.5 19.6 23.0 8.8 62.2 2.5 5.0 60.0
90 degrees 8.5 18.5 24.0 8.5 61.0 3.0 5.0 61.0
90 degrees* 7.5 15.0 24.0 7.5 58.0 2.0 5.0 58.0
*"Compact" Car (Section 60.30.10.12.)
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 157 06/01/2012
ANGLE TWO-WAY
90° DEAD END TWO-WAY
H
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street Parking
Chapter 60 SR - 158 01/01/2005
60.30.20. Off-Street Parking Lot Construction. Every parcel of land hereafter developed for use as a parking area shall conform to the requirements of the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings. [ORD 3293; November 1982] [ORD 4302, June 2004] [ORD 4332; January 2005]
60.30.25. Enforcement. The Director is authorized to suspend any permit if the usage of parking by the original use or temporary use or both increases beyond the capacity of the on-site parking or that the use is causing a nuisance to the public or surrounding properties. The Director shall notify the applicant of the Director's intent to suspend the permit and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing prior to suspension. However, in any case where the Director, or any Code Enforcement Officer designated by the Mayor, finds a serious danger to the public health or safety, the Director or Code Enforcement Officer may suspend the permit without a hearing. Upon suspension of a permit, the Director or Code Enforcement Officer may require that the temporary use or structure vacate the site within five working days or can require the use to discontinue operation. The Director shall notify the applicant of the reasons for the action, and the Director shall afford the applicant the opportunity for a hearing within five days from the date of the suspension. The Director may reinstate a suspended permit upon a showing by the applicant that the cause of the suspension has been corrected. Appeal of any decision of the Director shall be pursuant to Section 50.75. of this Code. [ORD 4224; August 2002]

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Parks and Recreations Facilities and Services
Chapter 60 SR - 159 06/01/2012
60.33. PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES AND SERVICES PROVISION. [ORD 4388; May 2006]
60.33.05. Purpose. The City of Beaverton has declared Tualatin Hills Parks and Recreation District (THPRD) as the parks and recreation provider for the City (Policy 5.8.1.h. of the Comprehensive Plan). Since THPRD is the parks and recreation provider for the City, annexation to the District will generally be required by the City for all new development or redevelopment of properties that are outside THPRD boundaries. The provisions of this Section are designed to:
1. Ensure that all residents of the City of Beaverton have access to high quality recreational facilities and services; and
2. Require all new development to pay its fair share for the park and recreational system that serves Beaverton.
60.33.10. Annexation to THPRD.
Except as provided in Section 60.33.15, the approval of a Conditional Use, Design Review or Land Division application for any property located in the City of Beaverton, and not within THPRD’s boundaries, shall be conditional on the submittal of a legally sufficient petition to annex the property to THPRD; issuance of building permits shall be delayed until the annexation is effective. Delay of issuance of building permits until after the annexation is effective may be waived as a condition of approval by the review authority if the applicant agrees in writing to pay the appropriate THPRD Systems Development Charge for all building permits issued prior to the effective date of annexation. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
60.33.15. Waiver of Requirement.
Any proposed development that can document to the City’s satisfaction that it will provide park land, recreation facilities and services at a level similar to that provided by THPRD may have the requirements of Section 60.33.10 waived by the City. See Section 40.93.15.

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 160 06/01/2012
60.35. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. [ORD 4430; April 2007]
60.35.05. Purpose. It is the purpose of these provisions to allow a Planned Unit Development (PUD) in any City zoning district. Uses or combinations of uses may be developed as a single, integral, functional unit or entity. The PUD provisions are intended to encourage innovation and creative approaches for developing land while enhancing and preserving the value, character, and integrity of surrounding areas which have developed or are developing under conventional district regulations. This is to be accomplished by using the following development and design principles: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. Site design shall use the flexibility afforded by the planned unit development to:
A. Provide setbacks and buffering through landscape or building design abutting to existing development;
B. Cluster buildings to create open space and protect natural resources;
C. Provide for active recreation and passive open space;
D. Use resource efficient development and building practices that encourage innovative design techniques and construction practices that use energy saving technology.
2. Site design shall maximize the opportunities for diversified architecture and outdoor living environments that respond to the existing site context by exploring design flexibility for siting structures, open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking areas, streetscapes, resource conservation, and creation of other site improvements that facilitate efficient use of land and create a comprehensive development plan which is better than that resulting from traditional subdivision development;
3. Building architecture including detached residential, shall use innovative design that should consider the context of the existing built and natural environment. Buildings shall be architecturally detailed, and of a size and mass that contribute to a pedestrian-friendly streetscape, and respond to the natural features of the site. Cluster housing, such as Courtyard, Patio, or Cottage development, that groups buildings in areas to maximize open space and preserve significant cultural and natural resources is highly encouraged as are the use of sustainable building materials and practices. The orientation of buildings should promote human scaled and pedestrian friendly environments and maximize solar exposure for passive solar gain;
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 161 01/15/2009
60.35.05.
4. Open space should provide opportunities for active and/or passive recreation that includes preservation of natural and cultural resources. Good site design shall retain and protect special topographic, natural, and environmentally sensitive features and existing Significant Groves and Historical and Individual trees should be retained and protected. Understory and the use of native plant material and sustainable landscape practices are encouraged.
60.35.10. Modification of Base Zoning Standards.
1. Permitted Uses.
A. The uses in a PUD shall comply with the Permitted and Conditional Use requirements of the zoning district.
B. Detached and attached dwellings may be allowed in a PUD provided the overall residential density satisfies the applicable residential density provisions of this Code.
C. In addition to the accessory uses and structures typical in the zoning district in which the PUD is located, accessory uses approved as a part of a PUD may include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Private or public park, lake or waterway;
2. Recreation area;
3. Recreation building, clubhouse or social hall; or
4. Other accessory uses or structures which the Planning Commission finds are designed to serve primarily the residents of the PUD, and are compatible with the neighborhood and to the design of the PUD.
2. Density and Lot Dimensions. Density and building scale shall relate to the surrounding neighborhood development and natural resources by providing massing and architectural compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 162 12/02/2016
60.35.10.2.
A. Density Transfers.
1. A density transfer allows an equal transfer of dwelling units from one portion of the site to another. Density transfers are allowed for the following areas:
a. Area within a floodplain;
b. Area over twenty-five (25) percent slope;
c. Known landslide areas or areas shown to have potential for severe or moderate landslide hazard;
d. Area in designated resource areas including: significant tree groves, wetlands, riparian corridors, and their associated buffers;
e. Areas constrained by monitoring wells and similar areas dedicated to remediation of contaminated soils or ground water;
f. Parks, trails, or both in tracts;
g. Areas similar to those in a through f above, as approved by the Planning Commission through the PUD process.
B. Residential Lot Sizes.
1. Minimum lot size may be reduced to 50 percent of the minimum land area of the applicable zoning district(s), except as permitted in 60.35.10.3.B.2.
2. Minimum lot size proposed between 25 percent and 50 percent of the minimum land area of the applicable zoning district, shall meet the applicable Design Standards or Design Guidelines related to Compact Detached Housing in Section 60.05 of the Development Code and is at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 163 05/15/2015
60.35.10.
3. Maximum lot size may not exceed 195 percent of the minimum land area of the applicable zoning district(s) in conformance with the table below unless designated for a future phase, which includes further division of property or development of attached product. When the maximum density for the parent parcel has been achieved or a lot is greater than 195 percent of the base zone, the oversized lot(s) shall include a deed restriction to preclude unintended partitioning or subdividing of such lots in accordance with the requirements of the approved PUD. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Zoning
R1
R2
R4
R5
R7
Maximum
Lot Size
1,950
sq. ft.
3,900
sq. ft.
7,800
sq. ft.
9,750 sq. ft.
13,650 sq. ft.
4. A proposed Planned Unit Development shall not result in fewer dwelling units (lower density) than if the subject site were reviewed as a Preliminary Subdivision.
3. Setbacks. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
A. The dimensional standards for the applicable zoning district as listed in Chapter 20 may be modified through approval of a Planned Unit Development, except for the following situations:
1. For proposed lots abutting the perimeter of the property, the required setbacks shall comply with the standard front and rear setbacks of the parent parcel.
a. Where the side yard of the parent parcel abuts existing development the setback for new development shall not be reduced, except by meeting 60.35.10.3.A.1.b below.
b. By meeting the Development Bonus and Development Incentive Options in Section 60.35.30 the setbacks of proposed perimeter parcels may be reduced by up to ten (10) percent upon approval of the Planning Commission.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 164 05/15/2015
60.35.10.3.A.
2. Where standard modifications would not promote pedestrian or bicycle connection to the street; support storm water management; or meet fire and building codes.
B. Front Setbacks.
The following shall apply to all lots within a proposed residential development(s); except lots proposed along the perimeter of the subject site, which shall be consistent with Section 60.35.10.3.A.1.
1. Front setbacks for a residential structure, interior to a Planned Unit Development may be reduced, excluding the garage where the garage door faces the front property line. Structures shall not encroach into a public utility easement.
2. All single-family attached and detached garages that face a public or private street shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from property line. Attached and detached garage door façade(s) shall be set back a minimum of four (4) additional feet from the set back of the front of the building, not including porches, when facing a public or private street. All other garage and carport entrances must be set back a minimum of two (2) additional feet when the set back of the front of the building is at least twenty (20) feet
C. Rear setbacks.
1. Rear setbacks shall be the same as the designated zone for the parent parcel for lots abutting the perimeter of the proposed development excepting alley accessed lots for which rear setbacks may be reduced to four (4) feet for alley-accessed lots with no less than a 20-foot alley width.
2. Garages and carports accessed from both sides of an alley shall be setback a minimum of four (4) feet with no less than 28-feet between garage doors.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 165 05/15/2015
60.35.10.3.
D. Side setbacks. Except for zero-lot line development, side setbacks internal to the Planned Unit Development, shall be a minimum of three (3) feet with a total of six (6) feet between two buildings. In no case shall a building encroach into a Public Utility Easement (PUE). All zero-lot line development shall have side yard setbacks of 10 feet on one side of the dwelling unit and no setback required on the opposite side.
60.35.15. Open Space.
Open space shall provide opportunities for active and/or passive recreation and may include existing stands of trees, resource areas, and storm water facilities as outlined in this section. Active open space shall allow human activities including recreational and social opportunities such as play fields, playgrounds, swimming pools, plazas and other recreational facilities. Open space may also be passive and include human activities limited to walking, running, and cycling, seating areas and wildlife viewing or natural areas such as a wetland.
1. A Planned Unit Development shall provide baseline open space of an area equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the subject site.
2. Exemptions. Properties within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan Area are exempt from the open space requirements in Section 60.35.15.1, but shall provide all community features, including but not limited to, trails, habitat benefit areas, and scenic views identified in the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan, as identified in Section 60.35.25. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
3. Open Space Standards. Open space shall be land that is available for the creation of active and/or passive areas, or resource areas that provide visible and accessible open space to the proposed community. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
A. The following resource areas may count towards passive open space requirements: Significant trees and/or groves, habitat benefit areas, view corridors, steep slopes, water quality facilities, environmentally sensitive areas including wetlands and any buffers required by Clean Water Services or other regulatory body, and other resources as deemed appropriate by the decision maker.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 166 05/15/2015
60.35.15.3
B. Open space shall be easily accessible, physically or visually, to all members of the planned community via a minimum thirty (30) foot wide street frontage or access easement;
C. No more than sixty (60) percent of the gross land dedicated to active open space may have slopes greater than five (5) percent. Additional reductions to this standard may be granted by the Planning Commission based on the context of the proposed amenities and existing site conditions.
D. Open space areas shall have a dedicated meter and underground irrigation system to ensure adequate water supply during establishment period (3-years) and during periods of drought for all newly planted areas. Resource areas are exempt from this criterion.
E. For developments ten (10) acres or greater, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total required open space area shall be active open space and subject to the provisions of 60.35.15.4.
F. For the purpose of this Code, open space does not include:
1. Public or private streets;
2. Surface parking lots or paved areas not designated for active or passive recreation;
3. Private lots and buildings including setbacks or landscape buffers. However, community buildings, community rooms, or both developed for the common use and ownership of the residents within a Planned Unit Development may be counted as open space.
4. Vehicular access driveways or maneuvering areas.
4. Active Open Space. Active open space areas are common areas that may be gathering spots, community rooms, play areas, overlooks, or any that consist of active uses for owners, residents, or the community at large. Active open space shall meet the following criteria: [ORD 4654; March 2015]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 167 05/15/2015
60.35.15.4
A. Active open space that is provided outdoors shall be no smaller than the minimum lot size requirement of the underlying zoning district with a minimum width 40 feet. For properties in multiple use zoning districts with no minimum lot size active open space areas shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet in area. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement to accommodate trails, overlooks, and other types of recreational features which serve the residents of the development.
B. Active open space may abut a Collector or greater classified street as identified in the City’s adopted Functional Classification Plan, when separated from the street by a constructed barrier, such as a fence or wall, at least three (3) feet in height.
C. Active Open Space shall be physically accessible to all residents of the development.
D. Active open space shall include physical improvements to enhance the area. Physical improvements may include; benches, gazebos, plazas, picnic areas, playground equipment, sport courts, swimming/wading pools, indoor clubhouses or meeting facilities, play fields, or other items permitted by the Planning Commission.
E. Floor area within buildings devoted to common uses which serve the residents of the development, such as indoor pools, game rooms, or community rooms, may be counted towards Active Open Space requirements based on the total floor area devoted to such uses.
5. Maintenance and Ownership. Land shown on the final development plan as common open space, and landscaping and/or planting contained therein shall be permanently maintained by and conveyed to one of the following:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 168 05/15/2015
60.35.15.5
A. An association of owners or tenants, created as a non-profit corporation under the laws of the state (ORS 94.572) which shall adopt and impose articles of incorporation and bylaws and adopt and impose a declaration of covenants and restrictions on the common open space that is acceptable to the City Attorney as providing for the continuing care of the space. Any subsequent changes to such CC&Rs regarding open space must be approved by the City Attorney. Such an association shall be formed and continued for the purpose of maintaining the common open space and shall provide for City intervention and the imposition of a lien against the entire planned unit development in the event the association fails to perform as required; or
B. A public agency which agrees to maintain the dedicated open space and any buildings, structures, or other improvements which have been placed on it. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
C. Dedicated open space shall be protected by Covenants (CC&Rs) or deed restriction to prevent any future commercial, industrial, or residential development. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
60.35.20. Building Architecture.
1. Purpose. This section applies to development which is not subject to Section 60.05. (Design Review) of this code.
The following architectural standards are intended to promote innovative design that considers the context of the existing built and natural environment. Buildings shall be detailed, human-scale, and respond to the natural features of the site. Cluster housing or grouping buildings in areas to maximize open space and preserve significant cultural and natural resources is highly encouraged along with the use of sustainable building materials and practices. Building shall be oriented to the street or other public spaces such as parks, plazas, courtyards and open commons when served by an alley. This building architecture section also offers applicable Development Bonuses and Development Incentive Options in Section 60.35.30.
2. Building Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented to the street or other public spaces such as parks, plazas, courtyards and open commons when served by an alley. The orientation of buildings shall promote environments that encourage walking, social interaction, and safety.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 169 05/15/2015
60.35.20.2
A. Exceptions to this standard may be allowed by the Planning Commission where access, topography, and natural resources prohibit the orientation of buildings to the street or other public open spaces.
B. In all cases buildings and or private lots shall be served by or have direct access to sidewalks or paths that connect to a private or public street/sidewalk system.
C. Garages with rear alley access or garages located in the rear of the lot with shared driveways are encouraged.
D. All buildings shall have their primary entrance to a street or publicly accessible sidewalk where buildings face public parks, common areas or open space.
E. All primary entrances shall be covered or recessed with a minimum depth of three (3) feet deep and five (5) feet wide.
3. Building Heights. Buildings shall be to scale with similar types of existing structures on adjacent properties. This can be accomplished by utilizing graduated building heights which offer a transition between single-story residential development and multiple-story residential.
A. Maximum building height standards may be increased up to twelve feet (12’) when the applicable building setback distance along the perimeter of the parent parcel is increased at a ratio of 1.5 additional feet of setback for every foot of building height over the base zone standard for building height.
B. For the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area, structures that do not abut the exterior boundary of the plan area, may be allowed to vary building heights, without satisfying the graduated building height transitions of Section 60.35.20.3 in order to provide for a variety in housing types within developments. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
C. Graduated building height standards shall not apply where existing structures on adjacent properties are rural in their development or use. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 170 05/15/2015
60.35.20.
4. Architectural Standards. Architectural standards are intended to promote quality design and detail that promote innovation and creativity that allows for a variety of building styles and types. The following standards apply to all single-family developments proposed through the PUD process. Attached residential structures, Compact Detached Housing, and commercial, industrial, and multiple use buildings are subject to the Design Standards or Guidelines of Section 60.05 of the Development Code. [ORD 4654; March 2015]
A. Building scale and massing shall complement surrounding uses by complying with the provisions in this Code and meeting the following criteria for residential development.
B. Front façade elevations shall not be repeated on adjacent lots along the same street frontage.
C. All detached residential structures shall include design elements that provide building articulation, continuity of form and variety. Architecture should avoid long expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces. Buildings shall incorporate at least six (6) of the following building elements on the front, rear, common open space, and street facing elevations and four (4) of the following elements on interior side yard elevations:
1. Window reveals, canopies, awnings, and covered patios.
2. Balcony on the same façade as the main entrance. The balcony must be at least 48 square feet and a minimum 8 feet wide, and must be accessible from the interior living space of the house.
3. Porches on the front elevation that have dimensions of at least eight feet wide and six feet deep, and are covered by a roof supported by structurally integral columns, cables or brackets.
4. Three or more gables.
5. Offsets in roof elevations of two (2) feet or greater;
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 171 05/15/2015
60.35.20.4.C
6. A primary sloped roof that is no flatter than 6/12 and no steeper than 12/12.
7. Bay or bowed windows extending out from the front building elevation that reflect an internal space such as a room or alcove.
8. Elevations on residential units facing streets, common greens and shared courts having at least 40 percent of the elevation area on each floor permanently treated with windows.
9. Window shutters on windows.
10. Staggered windows that do not align with windows on adjacent properties and minimize the impact of windows in living spaces that may infringe on the privacy of adjacent residents.
11. Windows grouped together to form larger areas of glazing, if individual window units are separated by moldings or jambs.
12. Windows with multiple panes of glass or designed to mimic the look of multiple panes.
13. Window patterns, building articulation and other treatments that help to identify individual residential units.
14. Dormers.
15. Trim markings provided for roof lines, porches, windows and doors on all elevations. The trim must be at least 3-1/2 inches wide.
16. Weather protection for primary building entrances that exceed 7½ feet wide by five feet deep.
17. An attached garage with a gable or hip roof, or with a second story above the garage.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 172 05/15/2015
60.35.20.4.C
18. Building face or roof offsets (minimum 12 inch offset).
19. The use of differentiated exterior siding materials. In general, materials should change on horizontal planes, not vertical planes. Types of siding materials may include:
a. Horizontal lap siding, including simulated horizontal lap siding where the boards in the pattern are 6 inches or less in width;
b. Vertical cedar siding;
c. Beveled siding,
d. Shingles
e. Stucco
f. Brick
g. Stone or manufactured stone
h. Scored masonry
i. Changes in a combination of texture, pattern or color of a single material
20. Decorative structural accents such as kneebrackets or corbels, widow walks, turrets, hooded windows, pinnacles and pendants, pillars or posts, board and batten, or other architectural vernacular style common to the Pacific Northwest.
21. Permanent planter boxes of at least 25 square feet constructed as an extension of a front elevation or primary building entrance.
22. A landscaped courtyard of at least 100 square feet located as a transition element between a primary building entrance and a street, common green or shared court. The landscaping within the courtyard shall exceed the minimum requirements of Section 60.05.25.4. by 15%. [ORD 4576; January 2012]
23. An alternative feature approved by the Planning Commission.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 173 05/15/2015
60.35.20.4
D. Building elevation is measured as the horizontal plane between the lowest plate line and the highest plate line of any full or partial building story containing doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows.
E. Alternative building design may reflect modern building form and style. These styles may have less detail or ornamentation but shall have demonstrated successful use of materials and form, and a cohesive architectural style and be approved by the Planning Commission.
60.35.25. South Cooper Mountain Community Plan [ORD 4654; March 2015]
The South Cooper Mountain Community Plan is part of the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Beaverton. It provides regulatory policies and maps, along with descriptions and illustrations of the context for those policies and maps, for 544 acres within the southwestern area of the City of Beaverton. This section of the Development Code of the City of Beaverton outlines specific implementation requirements and connections to the policies of the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan.
1. Proposals within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area shall demonstrate compliance with the following applicable South Cooper Mountain Community Plan policies and figures:
A. Land Use:
1. Land Use Implementation Policy 6: location criteria guiding the selection of appropriate sites for Neighborhood Parks and Elementary Schools.
2. Neighborhood and Housing Policy 1: neighborhood design principles for creating walkable neighborhoods.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 174 05/15/2015
60.35.25.1.A
3. Neighborhood and Housing Policy 2: Residential developments shall provide a variety of housing types consistent with the permitted uses of applicable zone(s). The goal of this policy and implementing code standards is to ensure that, over time and multiple individual development reviews, South Cooper Mountain’s neighborhoods and livability are enhanced by variety in the type and design of housing in order to promote aesthetically pleasing residential neighborhoods as well as opportunities for people of varying incomes and life stages to live within the same neighborhood.
a. Residential developments in the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area shall provide a variety of housing types, as identified below, for sites:
i. Up to 15-acres (gross), a minimum of one (1) housing type;
ii. Greater than 15-acres and up to 30-acres (gross), a minimum of two (2) housing types;
iii. Greater than 30-acres (gross), a minimum of three (3) housing types.
b. Housing Types include:
i. Standard Lot Single Family. Density range from 90 percent to 195 percent of the minimum land area per dwelling unit requirement of the underlying zoning district;
ii. Small Lot Single Family. Density range from 50 percent to 70 percent of the minimum land area per dwelling unit requirement of the underlying zoning district;
iii. Compact Detached Housing & Cluster Housing. Density range from 25 percent up to 49 percent of the minimum land area per dwelling unit requirement of the underlying zoning district;
iv. Accessory Dwelling Unit with Single Family Detached Dwelling;
v. Alley-Loaded Dwellings. A dwelling unit designed with the front façade oriented toward a street and the garage door façade oriented toward an alley.
vi. Duplex;
vii. Triplex & Four-plex;
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 175 05/15/2015
60.35.25.1.A
viii. Townhouse / Townhome;
ix. Multi-family;
x. Live /work, only permitted in the NS zoning district.
Zoning District
R1
R2
R4
R5
R7
Base Zone (sq. ft / dwelling)
1,000
2,000
4,000
5,000
7,000
Land Area (sq ft)
Standard Lot Single Family
maximum
195%
1,950
3,900
7,800
9,750
13,650
minimum
90%
900
1,800
3,600
4,500
6,300
Small Lot Single Family
maximum
70%
700
1,400
2,800
3,500
4,900
minimum
50%
500
1,000
2,000
2,500
3,500
Compact Detached and Cluster Housing
maximum
49%
499
999
1,999
2,499
3,499
minimum
25%
250
500
1,000
1,250
1,750
c. For developments requiring more than one (1) housing type a minimum of 10 percent of the total dwelling units shall be of each housing type.
d. For developments utilizing the Standard Lot Single Family housing type (Section 60.35.25.1.A.3.b.i.) and not utilizing the Small Lot Single Family housing type (Section 60.35.25.1.A.3.b.ii.), the lot size for Standard Lot Single Family may range from 50 percent to 195 percent of the minimum land area per dwelling unit requirement of the underlying zoning district and it shall count as one housing type.
4. Main Street Policy 2: Main Street pedestrian orientation and access.
5. Main Street Policy 4: Main Street design principles.
B. Transportation:
1. Figure 10: Community Plan Street Framework map.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 176 05/15/2015
60.35.25.1.B
2. Street Policy 1: Community Plan Street Framework and Comprehensive Plan Chapter 6.
3. Street Policy 10: Community Plan Street Framework, refining specific alignments.
4. Figure 11: Community Plan Bicycle and Pedestrian Framework map.
5. Bicycle and Pedestrian Framework Policy 1: Bicycle and Pedestrian Crossings.
6. Bicycle and Pedestrian Framework Policy 2: Trails.
C. Resource Protection and Enhancement:
1. Figure 12: Natural Resources in the Community Plan area map.
2. Natural Resource Policy 1: Local Wetlands and Riparian Areas
3. Natural Resource Policy 2: Development adjacent the Significant Natural Resource Areas.
4. Urban Forestry Policy 2: Tree Planting.
5. Urban Forestry Policy 3: Regionally Significant Upland Habitat.
6. Scenic Views Policy 1: Protection of View Corridors.
7. Rural Edges and Transitions Policy 1: SW Tile Flat Road Landscape Buffer.
D. Infrastructure Provision:
1. Infrastructure Policy 1: Urban development not allowed without urban services
2. Infrastructure Policy 7: Alignment for new water and sewer.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 177 05/15/2015
60.35.25.
2. Proposals within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area shall demonstrate compliance with the following applicable Comprehensive Plan policies and figures:
A. Chapter Six, Transportation Element:
1. Figure 6.2a: Planned Bicycle and Pedestrian Network.
2. Figure 6.4a: Functional Classification.
3. Figure 6.6a: Future Streets Where Right-of-Way is Planned for More Than Two Lanes.
4. Figure 6.20: Local Connectivity Map.
60.35.30. Development Bonuses and Development Incentive Options.
The PUD also offers the applicant additional standards which can be met as incentives to promote more creative and innovative approaches to site design and infrastructure. The Development Incentive Options are not required; an applicant may choose to meet the standard provisions and requirements of the PUD code. The Development Incentive Options are intended to promote a wide variety of creative and sustainable design practices that better integrate site design, building architecture, and open space with the existing built and natural environment and lead to exceptional community building in the City of Beaverton. Development Incentive Options shall also consider the form and function of the physical improvements and their relationship to each other and the existing environment. Development plans that meet selected Development Incentive
Options chosen by the applicant may take advantage of one or both:
 Reduced open space requirements;
 Setback reduction of the parent parcel.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 178 05/15/2015
60.35.30.
Development Incentive bonuses are described below and quantify the flexibility and options that the developer may use to obtain additional flexibility in open space requirements and setback reductions. Approval of the Development Incentive Options and the additional development flexibility allowed are at the discretion of the Planning Commission. In all cases the total incentives and bonuses may not reduce open space by more than sixty (60) percent of the open space as required in Section 60.35.15. [ORD 4654; March 25]
The following Development Bonuses and Incentive Options are intended to provide design flexibility.
60.35.40. Allowed Development Bonuses.
Site plans that meet selected Development Incentive Options chosen by the applicant may take advantage of one or a combination of the following Development Bonuses:
1. Decrease open space area requirement by using a combination of Development Incentive Options up to a maximum of sixty (60) percent of that required by the PUD standard open space requirements; [ORD 4654; March 2015]
2. Reduce front and rear setbacks of parent parcel up to ten (10) percent within the perimeter of the PUD.
60.35.50. Development Incentive Options.
1. Open Space Development Incentive Options = Twenty (20) Percent Open Space Reduction. Up to a twenty (20) percent reduction in the required amount of open space as approved by the Planning Commission may be achieved by conforming to the open space options listed below. The Planning Commission may consider other improvements in addition to those listed that offer a similar level of quality and continuity in the proposed open space:
A. Active Recreation – Development of Twenty-five (25) percent of active open space in addition to the minimum required active open space as usable for active recreation, such as: play structures, picnic areas, or sports field; or [ORD 4654; March 2015]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 179 05/15/2015
60.35.50.1
B. View Preservation – Open space is sited such that a view corridor of a significant natural vista is preserved for the community at large, such as views into Significant Tree Groves or Significant Natural Resource Areas.
2. Architectural Development Incentive Options for a Decrease in Open Space, Front and Rear Setbacks. The following architectural incentives promote sustainable building practices and architectural detail in order to promote high quality design and character. A maximum decrease of up to twenty (20) percent of required open space or ten (10) percent of the front and rear setbacks on the parent parcel is at the discretion of the Planning Commission, where the applicant’s site plan and proposed architecture meet one of the following incentives: [ORD 4654; March 2015]
A. Develop lots such that 90% meet solar access requirement (60.45.05) for a ten (10) percent decrease in open space.
B. Install a ‘Greenroof’ or Ecoroof on 100 percent of the roof area of twenty (20) percent of the detached dwellings or 20 percent of the total roof area for attached dwellings, multifamily dwellings, commercial, or industrial buildings for a ten (10) percent decrease in the required open space.
C. Up to ten (10) percent reduction in front and rear parent parcel setbacks as approved by the Planning Commission may be achieved by developing cluster housing that preserves and increases open space by twenty (20) percent above baseline requirement.
3. Affordable Housing Development Incentive Options for a Decrease in Open Space. Up to a fifty (50) percent reduction in the required amount of open space as approved by the Planning Commission may be achieved by development of ten (10) percent of the units as affordable housing. Up to a sixty (60) percent reduction in the required amount of open space as approved by the Planning Commission may be achieved by development of twenty (20) percent of the units as affordable housing.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Planned Unit Development
Chapter 60 SR - 180 05/15/2015
60.35.50.3
Affordable housing is defined as housing affordable to households earning up to 100 percent of the median household income in Washington County, or less as adjusted for family size as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Housing prices and/or rents shall be limited to that level through deed restriction for up to thirty (30) years. Approval of the affordable housing Development Incentive Option shall be subject to a developer identifying and contracting with a public, or private housing agency that will administer the housing affordability

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 181 05/01/2017
60.40. SIGN REGULATIONS.
60.40.05. Purpose. The general purpose of this Chapter is to implement the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan, to protect the health, safety, property, and welfare of the public, and to ensure compliance with State and Federal constitutional protections to freedom of speech. To achieve these purposes, the text of this Chapter is to establish a regulatory framework for signs which will:
1. Provide a neat, clean, orderly, and attractive appearance to the community.
2. Provide for safe construction, location, erection, and maintenance of signs.
3. Prevent proliferation of signs and sign clutter and minimize adverse visual safety factors to travelers on public rights-of-way.
4. Provide for readily identifiable locations and addresses to persons travelling on public right-of-way.
5. Provide clear standards for regulating signs based on location, size, type, time, place, manner, aesthetics and number. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.07 Compliance.
1. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of Section 60.40 of this Code.
2. Except as provided in Section 60.40.10, no person shall erect, construct or alter a sign, or permit the same to be done, unless a sign permit has been issued by the city. A sign permit for the construction and continued use of a sign is subject to the terms and conditions stated in the permit and this Code.
3. An application for sign permit approval is subject to the procedures set forth in Section 40.60 (Signs) of this Code. The city may require as a condition of a sign permit that any and all unlawful sign(s) on the applicant’s property be removed by a stated time.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 182 05/01/2017
60.40.07.
4. The provisions of this Code shall not be construed to permit the erection or maintenance of any sign at any place or in any manner unlawful under any other federal, state, or local law. Where a part of the provisions of Section 60.40 conflict with a provision of any zoning, development, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
5. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is declared invalid for any reason by a court having jurisdiction under State or Federal law, the remaining portions of this Code shall remain in full force and effect. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.10. Signs Exempt from Permits and Regulation. The following signs are exempt from regulation and do not require permits:
1. Signs constructed or placed in a public right-of-way by or with the approval of a governmental agency having legal control of that right-of-way for the purpose of traffic control, transit, public safety and wayfinding. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. Signs constructed or placed by public utility companies for the general purpose of providing information concerning a pole, line, pipe or other facility belonging to the public utility as an aid to public safety. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
3. Signs that are placed outside and are not visible from public right-of-ways. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
4. Public Art as defined in Section 2.03.245.A of the Beaverton City Code. [ORD 4482; April 2008]
5. Street address identifiers (numbers or letters) of buildings. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
6. Plaques, markers or banners placed by the city or city recognized agency or organization for the general purpose of recognizing historic significance or military service. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 183 05/01/2017
60.40.10.
7. Signs allowed as part of a Special Event Permit, subject to separate regulation under Chapter 7, Section 7.05 of the Beaverton City Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
8. No sign is exempt from the provisions of Section 60.40.25 (Prohibited Signs) and Section 60.40.55. (Nonconforming and Illegal Signs). [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.15. Signs not Subject to Permit but Subject to Regulation for Size, Dimensions, Location, Duration and Aesthetics. No permit is necessary before placing, constructing or erecting the following signs so long as any such signs conform to the following regulations:
1. Window Sign. As defined in Chapter 90 of Development Code, such signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of interior window area per window. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. Face Changes to Existing Cabinet Style Signs. Changes to existing approved cabinet style signs that only replace the material on which the sign text is located do not require a permit, provided that the replacement material is similar in opaqueness to the existing material. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
3. Flags on Poles. In residential zones, flags on poles extending from the ground are limited to twenty-five (25) feet in height except for non-residential uses where the pole height is limited to sixty (60) feet. In all other zones, poles extending from the ground are limited to forty-five (45) feet in height. No flag shall be located within the public right-of-way. Flag area shall not exceed the dimensions of six feet by ten feet. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
4. Signs Located in Parking Lots for Traffic Safety, Parking Restrictions and Compliance with State and Federal Standards. For the purpose of this section, signs for controlling traffic and parking, including but not limited to ADA posting and towing notification, are allowed in any zone. Signs for this purpose shall be placed outside the required vision clearance areas specified in Chapter 2 of the City Engineering Design Manual and shall be limited to six (6) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height as measured from the nearest parking lot surface where placed. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 184 05/01/2017
60.40.15.
5. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs as provided in Section 60.40.45. of this Code and subject to regulations as stated therein. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
6. Maintenance of Existing Signs that Conform to Standards. Maintenance and repair of existing signs that conform to current sign regulations and standards are not subject to permit, provided that the signs are not altered and retain the same size, shape, location and height. Preexisting nonconforming sign(s) are subject to restriction and regulation under Section 60.40.55. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
7. Sign(s) Associated with Temporary Use Permit. Temporary uses as allowed by Section 40.80. of the Development Code, shall be allowed one (1) wall sign thirty-two (32) square feet in area. A-frame style signs are not allowed in the public right-of-way for this purpose. Wall signs must be affixed to a structure. All signs shall be removed from the site when the use ceases operation. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
8. Signs Placed on Public Property for Internal Users. Signs placed on public property for general purpose of internal way-finding, circulation or posting of rules for use of property shall be placed outside required vision clearance areas and shall be limited to twenty-four (24) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height as measured from the nearest ground or surface area where placed. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
9. Name Plate. One (1) name plate associated with an approved Home Occupation, not to exceed two (2) square feet in size. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.20. Signs for which a Sign Permit is Required. The following new signs or proposals which alter the area, size, or dimensions of existing signs or sign structures are subject to all ordinance regulations, and permits are required prior to on-site construction, installation or placement of such signs or sign structures.
1. Fence Sign. Fence signs shall be subject to the same requirements as a freestanding sign and shall not exceed the height of the fence.
2. Freestanding Sign.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 185 05/01/2017
60.40.20.
3. Wall Sign. [ORD 4139; January 2001]
4. Projecting Sign.
5. Athletic Field Signage (permanent oriented to face the field). Any number of signs, including but not limited to scoreboards, may be placed within existing athletic fields maintained by a public or private school or public park agency, provided that such signs are oriented to face the field of play and not to public right-of-ways or abutting properties. Athletic field signage may be indirectly visible from a public right-of-way or abutting private property so long as the message is not readable from the public right-of-way because of the placement or angle of the sign and may be subject to other restrictions under past Conditional Use approval, if applicable. Athletic field signage shall be limited to 85 square feet in size and shall be no higher than 15 feet above grade on which the sign is located. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
6. Awning Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
7. Canopy Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
8. Blade Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
9. Electronic Message Center. Subject to the regulations as provided in Section 60.40.50 of this Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
10. Sign Associated with Drive-up Window Facility. One or more signs are allowed, in addition to other signs allowed by permit. Any one sign for this purpose shall not exceed 25 square feet in size and the total cumulative area of all signs shall not exceed 50 square feet. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.25. Signs Expressly Prohibited. The following signs are prohibited by this ordinance within City limits.
1. Bench Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. Billboard. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
3. Feather Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
4. Flashing Sign.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 186 05/01/2017
60.40.25.
5. Obstructing Sign.
6. Portable Sign except where allowed as a temporary sign in Section 60.40.45. of this Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
7. Portable Electronic Message Center Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
8. Roof Sign except on single story buildings where a sloped roof is a predominant architectural feature of the building and the Planning Director determines that signs placed on wall(s) of the same building cannot be seen from the nearest abutting street. In these cases, the top of the sign shall not be placed higher than one foot below the roof parapet wall. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
9. Rotating or Revolving Sign.
10. Trailer Sign including any sign attached to or placed on a trailer that is parked on public or private property. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
11. Video Sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
12. Other Prohibitions. In addition to 1 through 11 above, the following are prohibited:
A. Signs in vision clearance areas as established in Chapter 2 of the City Engineering and Design Manual.
B. Pennants, streamers, festoon lights and other similar devices with parts that are moved by the wind. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
C. Signs attached to any tree or public utility pole, other than signs identified as exempt in Section 60.40.10. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
D. Signs using bare-bulb illumination or lighted so that the immediate source of illumination is visible. This is not intended to prohibit the use of neon as a source of illumination.
E. Signs using flame as a source of light.
F. Any sign which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 187 05/01/2017
60.40.25.12.
G. Any sign which by reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device, or which blocks visibility of any traffic sign or signal. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
H. Signs designed or used for the purpose of emitting sound or dispersing smells.
I. Inflatable signs, balloons greater than eight cubic feet, or similar devices. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.30. General Size and Location Provisions
1. Size. The size of a sign shall be the entire area within any type of perimeter or border which encloses the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area with a parallelogram or a triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of the parallelogram or a triangle. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign. Conforming and/or nonconforming signs in existence at the time of the enactment of this ordinance shall be counted in establishing the permitted area or size of all new signs to be allowed on the property.
2. Height of Sign. The height of a sign shall be measured from the finished ground level, excluding mounds, berms, etc., to the top of the sign or the highest portion of the sign structure or frame, whichever is greater.
3. Finish Ground Level (Grade). The average elevation of the ground adjoining the structure of building upon which the sign is erected.
4. Location. Sign location shall comply with Section 60.55.35.3. (Intersection Standards) of this Code and shall be accurately represented on sign permit applications. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
5. Unless otherwise allowed by a specific Code provision, signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 188 05/01/2017
60.40.35. Signs in Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use Zones. In all commercial, industrial zones, and multiple use zones, as defined in Sections 20.10, 20.15, and 20.20, the following regulations apply:
1. Wall Sign. [ORD 4139; January 2001] Wall signs, as defined in Chapter 90, shall be allowed for each business and shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Wall Sign Area Calculation Method. The total signage area allowed for exterior building walls shall be determined by measuring the exterior wall length and the exterior wall height of the Primary Building Wall. Wall length is then multiplied by wall height, where for calculation purposes height may not exceed 25 feet, and the product is then multiplied by twenty percent (20%). The resulting product represents the cumulative maximum face area allowed for all signs on the subject building. The maximum face area of any one wall sign is 120 square feet. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
B. Wall Sign Area Allocation to Primary and Other Building Walls. The total amount of face area allowed for wall signs under section 1.A., above, may be allocated to building walls other than the Primary Building Wall at any percentage amount, provided the sum total for allocation purposes is equal or less than the total maximum face area as determined for the Primary Building Wall. For example, sign area may be allocated to an amount of ten percent (10%) of two building faces or five percent (5%) of four building faces. For buildings that have multiple tenants, the general allowance of 20% may be divided among the lessees in proportion to their lease frontages, or in another manner approved by the building owner in the case of a master sign program. (ORD 3374) (ORD 3494) [ORD 4708; May 2017]
C. Wall Sign Location. One hundred percent (100%) of the allowed wall sign area may be located on any portion of the exterior wall that is up to twenty-five (25) feet above finished grade and in no case may any portion of a wall sign be higher than one (1) foot below the top of the exterior wall to which it is attached. For exterior walls that are in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in height, twenty-five percent (25%) of the total allowed wall sign area may be located above the twenty-five (25) foot height and in no case may any portion of a wall sign be higher than one (1) foot below the top of the exterior wall to which it is attached.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 189 05/01/2017
60.40.35.1.
D. Maximum Wall Sign Projection. The exposed face of the sign shall be in a plane approximately parallel to the face of said exterior wall and not projecting more than sixteen (16) inches from the wall. This distance is inclusive of the electrical raceway component if proposed. This provision does not apply to Projecting Signs, Blade Signs, Awning Signs and Canopy Signs. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
E. Master Sign Program. For developments containing one or more businesses, a master sign program may be proposed by the property owner. Master sign programs shall contain the proposed colors, lettering styles, sizes and the location of wall and freestanding signs for tenants in the development. The general allowance of twenty percent (20%) of exterior wall area for wall signs will be used with the allowable square footage divided among lessees. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to administer and control any aspect of a master sign program that is more restrictive than the City's sign regulations. Individual business signs which are part of a master sign program are subject to the permit application process.
2. Awning Sign. Signs may be placed on or incorporated into awnings and canopies that are part of the building architecture. Signs placed on awnings and canopies are inclusive of the total wall sign area calculation and limited to 25 feet in height as measured from the ground. All signs attached to awnings and canopies must conform to the latest edition of the International Building Code in meeting wind and deadload requirements and must be adequately maintained to prevent deterioration which could be a hazard to pedestrian traffic beneath the sign. Awning signs shall have an underneath clearance of eight (8) feet. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
3. Projecting Sign (Perpendicular to Building Wall). Buildings within the Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts may have one projecting sign in-lieu of a freestanding sign. Projecting signs may project over private property, a public right-of-way, or both and shall be subject to the following:
A. Projecting signs may project no more than eight (8) feet or two-thirds (2/3) of the width of the sidewalk or to within two (2) feet of the curb, whichever is less.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 190 05/01/2017
60.40.35.3.
B. Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above the ground or sidewalk.
C. The maximum size of a projecting sign is 32 square feet per sign face. The total amount of projecting sign area shall not exceed 64 square feet.
D. Projecting signs shall not utilize guy wires for structural support. Bracket or arm supports shall be utilized so that the sign is positioned at least two inches away from the nearest wall. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
4. Blade Sign - Projecting. Buildings within the Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts may attach blade signs perpendicular to building walls or to awnings. Blade signs are inclusive of the total wall sign area calculation and may project over private property, a public right-of-way, or both and shall be subject to the following:
A. Blade signs may project from the building elevation no more than five (5) feet or to within two (2) feet of a street curb, whichever is less.
B. Blade signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet and a maximum clearance of twenty-five (25) feet above the ground or sidewalk.
C. The maximum size of a blade sign is nine (9) square feet.
D. Multiple blade signs per building are allowed and shall be limited to one (1) blade sign per tenant owned or leased space within the building and shall be separated by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet.
E. Blade signs shall not be internally illuminated.
F. Blade signs shall not utilize guy wires or cable lines for structural support. Bracket or arm supports shall be utilized so that the sign is positioned at least two inches away from the nearest wall. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 191 05/01/2017
60.40.35.
5. Freestanding Sign. Except as provided in Section 60.40.35(5)(I), one Freestanding sign shall be allowed per legal lot of record. Contiguous legal lots of record under one ownership shall be considered one lot for the purposes of calculating the number of freestanding signs allowed. (ORD 3494) [ORD 4058, August 1999] [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
NS
CS
CC
GC
IND
OI-NC
OI
A. Number*
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
B. Size (Maximum sq. ft. for all faces combined)
64
64
64
64
64
64
64
C. Size (Maximum for any one face)
32
32
32
32
32
32
32
D. Height Maximum
8’
15’
8’
15’
8’
8’
8’
* Additional freestanding signs are possible based on lineal street frontage length. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Multiple Use Zoning Districts [ORD 4058, August 1999] [ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4265; September 2003]
RC-TO, RC-OT, RC-E, OI-WS,
C-WS TC-MU, TC-HDR,SC-MU,
SC-HDR, SC-E, SC-S, SC-E1,2,3
E. Number*
1
F. Size (Maximum sq. ft. for all faces combined)
64
G. Size (Maximum for any one face)
32
H. Height Maximum
15’
* Additional freestanding signs possible based on lineal street frontage length. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 192 05/01/2017
60.40.35.5.
I. Number of Allowed Freestanding Signs based on Street Frontage Length. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
1. When the lineal frontage exceeds 300 feet, an additional freestanding sign shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lineal property frontage. In applying this standard, each freestanding sign must be at least 200 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same site along the lineal property frontage.
a. Where lineal property frontage distance would allow four (4) or more signs (1200 lineal feet of property frontage), two (2) of the freestanding signs may be replaced with one (1) double face sign sixty-four (64) square feet per face and not more than twenty (20) feet in height. (ORD 3494)
b. In the instance where multiple freestanding signs are allowed, projecting signs may be substituted for freestanding signs. If a freestanding sign and projecting sign are located on the same site, the separation standard of 300 feet only applies to freestanding signs. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. In the case of a through lot which has a distance of 200 feet or greater at its shortest measurement point between the streets, and the frontages are on streets which have a collector or higher status, a freestanding sign may be placed on each street frontage, so long as all freestanding signs on the lot are a minimum of 200 feet apart. (ORD 3494)
3. Signs associated with drive-through window operation are not subject to location and spacing standards applied to freestanding signs. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 193 05/01/2017
60.40.35.5.
J. Combined Freestanding Signs for Separate Properties. Two or more owners of adjacent separate properties zoned commercial or multiple use may combine their respective street or highway frontages and erect one (1) freestanding sign with combined square footage per face, but not to exceed the height limitation for the zone, or twenty (20) feet and not to exceed 64 square feet for a double-faced sign if the combined frontage exceeds 1200 feet. In applying this option, no other freestanding signs shall be permitted on the premises and agreement between property owners for this purpose shall be recorded for posterity. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
6. Downtown Regional Center Design and Material Standards In addition to the standards for sign number, size, height and placement identified in this section, signs located in Regional Center – Old Town (RC-OT) and Regional Center – Transit Oriented (RC-TO) zones are subject to the following design and materials standards:
A. Freestanding Signs Utilizing a Pole. All freestanding signs that are supported by pole(s) shall employ use of durable materials, including but not limited to, rock, brick, stone, tiles or combination thereof at the base of the pole for a minimum height of three feet and a minimum diameter of two feet. Similarly, all monument style freestanding signs with a single base for support shall apply the same material elements. If concrete is used as a base material, the exterior shall be architecturally treated to include scoring or texture. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
B. Projecting Signs, including Blade Signs. Projecting signs shall employ use of durable materials, including but not limited to, wrought iron and steel for support where attached to the wall of a building. Use of guy wires for sign support is prohibited. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 194 05/01/2017
60.40.35.
7. Signs at Entrances to Industrial Parks in Industrial Zones. Platted industrial land divisions may have a maximum of four (4) double-faced freestanding signs, at a maximum height of eight (8) feet, placed at primary vehicle entrances, at one per entrance, for the purpose of identifying the subdivision industrial parks. The sign face shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. A sign shall be located at least 100 feet from any other permitted freestanding sign on the same lot. No sign may be located in a public right-of-way or in a vision clearance area specified in Chapter 2 of the City Engineering Design Manual. (ORD 3494) [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.40. Residential Zones (R-1, R-2, R-4, R-5, R-7, R-10). In residential zones as identified in 20.05, the following signs are allowed:
1. General Provisions.
A. Authorized Non-residential uses. One (1) indirectly lighted sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face shall be permitted for an authorized or conditional non-residential use not in conjunction with a home occupation. The one (1) sign may be a freestanding sign or a wall sign. If the sign is to be a freestanding sign, the maximum height of the sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet. (ORD 3374) (ORD 3494) [ORD 4708; May 2017]
B. Signs at Entrances to Land Divisions and Multi-Family Uses. One (1) single or double faced indirectly lighted sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per face shall be allowed at primary vehicle entrances of land division or multi-family unit development. If the sign is to be freestanding, the maximum height of the sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet. (ORD 3374) (ORD 3494) [ORD 4708; May 2017]
60.40.45. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs may be erected and maintained in the City only in compliance with the regulations in this Code, and with the following specific provisions:
1. The following provisions apply to all temporary signs in all zones:
A. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 195 05/01/2017
60.40.45.1
B. Temporary signs shall be constructed in a manner that prevents the sign from being blown from its location and allows for the easy removal of the sign.
C. Temporary signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles or traffic control signs or devices.
D. Temporary signs shall not be erected or maintained in a way which, by reason of their size, location or construction constitutes a hazard to the public.
E. Temporary signs shall be located outside of the vision clearance area specified in Chapter 2 of the City Engineering Design Manual.
F. Conditions of Temporary Use or Special Event approval shall govern the placement, type and duration of all temporary signs consistent with the approved signage plan.
G. During a period not to exceed sixty (60) days prior to any special, primary or general election, any number of lawful, indirectly lighted temporary signs not exceeding six (6) feet in height may be erected in all zones; provided, however, that,
1. No signs shall be erected on public property or in the public right-of-way, and
2. All signs erected pursuant to this subsection shall be removed no later than five (5) days following the election.
2. Temporary Signs in Residential zones (Private Property). In all Residential zoning districts, temporary signs are allowed under the following circumstances:
A. If Property is for Sale or Rent. When properties or dwellings are for sale or rent, the owner or the owner's authorized representative may erect the following signs:
1. Two (2) double-faced signs on the lot, not to exceed four (4) square feet per face.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 196 05/01/2017
60.40.45.2.A.
2. Four (4) off-premise portable signs no greater than four (4) square feet per face that comply with placement standards of Section 60.40.45.4 if placed in public right-of-way and with property owner consent if placed on private property. These signs must be removed within 24 hours of placement. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
B. If Property has received Land Use approval for New Residential Subdivision. While property is under construction and has been approved for a land division that creates more than three (3) contiguous lots, the owner or the owner's authorized representative may erect the following signs:
1. One (1) double-faced sign of thirty-two (32) square feet per face, or two (2) thirty-two (32) square foot single-faced signs placed at the primary vehicle entrance to the new residential subdivision. The sign(s) shall be removed at the end of the two (2) years or when ninety percent (90%) of the subdivision lots contain a completed structure, whichever occurs first. These signs may be externally illuminated. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
C. If Property has received Land Use approval for New Multi-family Development or Non-Residential Use. While property is pending site development or under construction for a new multi-family residential building or a non-residential use, the owner or the owner's authorized representative may erect the following signs:
1. One (1) double-faced wall or freestanding sign of thirty-two (32) square feet per face, or two (2) thirty-two (32) square foot single-faced signs. Such signs may not be placed earlier than the first issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a residential structure. The sign(s) shall be removed no later than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for a residential structure, or one (1) year from the first issuance, whichever comes first. These signs may be externally illuminated. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 197 05/01/2017
60.40.45.2.C.
2. One (1) banner per building no more than thirty-two (32) square feet per face, from the date of issuing building permits to four (4) weeks after issuing a Certificate of Occupancy. Banners shall be affixed to exterior wall(s) of the building(s) so as to lie flat.
D. If Property Contains Athletic Field Maintained by a Public or Private School or Public Park Agency. Temporary banners or temporary rigid signs located on a fence and oriented to face athletic fields and not adjoining streets are allowed in any zone. Each sign shall be no more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. There shall be no more than thirty-two (32) square feet of area for any eight (8) linear feet of fence. The maximum height shall not exceed eight (8) feet above grade. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
3. Temporary Signs in Commercial, Industrial or Multiple Use zones (Private Property). In any Commercial, Industrial or Multiple Use zoning district, the following temporary signs are allowed under the following circumstances:
A. If Property Is for Sale or Rent. When properties or buildings are for sale or rent, the owner or the owner's authorized representative may erect the following signs:
1. One (1) double-faced wall or freestanding sign of thirty-two (32) square feet per face, or two (2) thirty-two (32) square foot single-faced signs. The sign(s) shall be removed no later than thirty (30) days after sale, lease or occupancy of the property, or one (1) year from the first occupancy, whichever comes first. These signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. For properties that have more than 300 feet of frontage along a street, an additional sign, subject to the same size and height limits, may be placed on site for the same period. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
B. If a New Business occupies a Building or when a Building Permit has been issued by the City for Tenant Improvements. While improvements to a building are under construction, the building owner or authorized representative may erect:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 198 05/01/2017
60.40.45.3.B.
1. One (1) banner per business, either from the date of issuing building permits to four (4) weeks after issuing a Certificate of Occupancy; or, if no building permit is issued, four (4) weeks from occupancy of the new business. Banners shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size and shall be affixed to exterior wall(s) of the building(s) so as to lie flat. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
C. If Property has received Land Use approval for New Development or Redevelopment. While property is pending site development or under construction, the owner or the owner's authorized representative may erect the following signs:
1. One (1) double-faced wall or freestanding sign of thirty-two (32) square feet per face, or two (2) thirty-two (32) square foot, single-faced signs. The sign(s) shall be removed no later than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. These signs may be externally illuminated. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. In addition to the above, the Planning Director may authorize additional temporary signs as determined necessary for traffic control and safety when approved through a Temporary Use permit. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
4. Temporary Portable Signs in Public Right-of-Way. Signs on the ground within the public right-of-way, shall be permitted in accordance with the following standards:
A. Placement Standards:
1. Temporary signs shall be placed in accordance with the Portable Sign in Right-of-Way Graphic. For signs placed within the right-of-way with an adjacent sidewalk, the sign shall not be placed within six (6) inches of the face of the curb and shall provide a clearance width of at least four (4) feet on the sidewalk to ensure safe pedestrian passage. For signs placed in the right-of-way without an adjacent sidewalk, the sign shall be located outside of any street pavement and shall not be located closer than four (4) feet from the travel lane, turning lane, shoulder, parking lane or bicycle lane. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 199 05/01/2017
60.40.45.4.A.
2. Temporary signs shall not be placed in parking spaces, pedestrian pathways, bicycle paths, street corners, transit stop areas, ADA accessible curb ramps, ADA accessible parking spaces, at building exits or fire escapes, or any portion of the street (automobile and bicycle travel lanes, shoulder, medians, traffic islands, and parking areas). Temporary signs also shall not be placed in a way that impedes or hinders the vision of drivers or bicyclists. Any temporary sign shall be located entirely outside of the area of a right-of-way corner that is between the curb and the lines created by extending the property line to the curb face. Signs placed within the right-of-way shall not obstruct traffic control signs or devices. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
3. In addition to the above, temporary portable signs shall be placed within twenty (20) feet of an overhead existing light source that provides at least one foot-candle of illumination at the location where sign(s) are placed. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
B. Number of Portable Signs allowed in Public Right-of-way:
1. In all Residential zones, temporary signs require a Special Event or Temporary Use approval. Portable off-site signs placed when properties are for sale are limited to the number and duration stated in Section 60.40.45. of this Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. In all Commercial, Industrial and Multiple Use zones except for RC-OT, RC-TO and RC-E, only one (1) temporary portable sign is allowed for every one hundred (100) linear feet of property frontage along a street. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 200 05/01/2017
60.40.45.4.B.
3. In all Downtown Regional Center zones, including RC-OT, RC-TO and RC-E, the number of signs on the ground within the right-of-way is limited to the number of operating and accessible public entrances that face the right-of-way where the sign is located. Multiple doors at one (1) entrance are allowed one (1) sign. Multiple individuals or entities which share the same public entrance are allowed one (1) sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
C. Material, Design and Size Standards:
1. The sign shall be a T-frame or A-frame structure that is composed of wood, plastic or metal.
2. The sign width shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) inches.
3. The sign depth shall not exceed two (2) feet.
4. The sign height shall not exceed three (3) feet.
5. The display area shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, and the sign face shall not exceed six (6) square feet. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
D. Duration of Placement in Public Right-of-way.
1. Portable signs in residential zones may be displayed on Saturday and Sundays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and from 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Tuesdays. Portable signs shall be removed at the end of each day. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. Portable signs in non-residential zones may be displayed all days of the week within the right-of-way between the hours of six 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., and shall be removed at the end of each day. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
E. Temporary banners which extend over a roadway or are attached to utility or streetlight poles shall be permitted in the right-of-way upon issuance of a Special Event permit under the Municipal Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 201 05/01/2017
60.40.50. Electronic Message Centers (EMCs). Electronic Message Centers may be erected and maintained only in compliance with the regulations in this Code. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
1. The following provisions shall apply to all Electronic Message Centers where allowed:
A. EMCs shall only be placed along streets that are classified as Arterials according to the Functional Classification Plan of the Beaverton Comprehensive Plan (Figure 6.4, Chapter 6).
B. EMCs are allowed only as a component to freestanding signs and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the maximum sign face area for any one (1) sign as identified by the numeric standard of the zone.
C. EMCs shall remain in a static display where the frame effect does not appear to flash, dissolve, fade, scroll, travel, contain animation, portray blinking or chasing lights or otherwise create continuously changing images. The rate of change from one (1) frame to another, shall be no more frequent than every eight (8) seconds and the actual frame change shall be accomplished in a transition period of two (2) seconds or less. Terms applied in this regulation are further defined in Electronic Message Center Technical Definitions, Chapter 90.
D. EMCs shall not operate at illumination levels of more than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light, as measured using a foot-candle meter at a pre-set distance. The pre-set distances to measure the foot-candles are calculated using the following table:
Sign Area Versus Measurement Distance
Area of Sign
Distance
Less than or equal to 10 square feet
32 feet
11 to 15 square feet
39 feet
16 to 20 square feet
45 feet
21 to 25 square feet
50 feet
26 to 30 square feet
55 feet
Greater than 30 square feet
60 feet
All measurements shall be taken facing the sign structure with the light meter pointed at the sign. The measurement distance can be rounded to the nearest whole number.
E. All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and shall be either programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or manually adjusted to comply with subsection (D) above.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 202 05/01/2017
60.40.50.1.
F. Applications for EMCs shall include a statement by a licensed engineer certifying that the lighting will comply with the lighting standards of this Code. Along any property line where the abutting use is residential, the maximum permitted illumination from EMC is 0.5 foot-candles, or 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light as measured pursuant to the table in (D) of this section, whichever is less.
2. Allowed Locations for EMCs. EMCs are allowed in all Commercial, Industrial, Residential and Multiple Use zones under the following circumstances and standards:
A. In residential zones (R-1, R-2, R-4, R-5, R-7 and R-10) EMCs must comply with the following standards:
1. The property where the EMC is located must be at least ten (10) acres in size and developed for a non-residential use. This standard applies to the combined area of multiple abutting properties under the same ownership and for the same use if the combined area is at least ten (10) acres in size.
2. No more than one EMC is allowed per property as a component of a freestanding sign, subject to the sign height and size standards of the zone for freestanding signs.
3. The EMC sign shall be located at a minimum distance of sixty (60) feet from any abutting property line where the abutting use is residential.
B. In commercial and industrial zones (NS, CS, GC, CC, OI, OI-NC and IND) EMCs must comply with the following standards:
1. The property where the EMC is located must be at least three (3) acres in size and developed for a non-residential use. This standard applies to the combined area of multiple abutting or adjacent properties under the same ownership.
2. No more than one (1) EMC is allowed as a component of a free- standing sign, subject to the sign height and size standards of the zone.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 203 05/01/2017
60.40.50.2.B.
3. EMCs shall not be allowed as a component of a nonconforming sign unless the sign is brought into compliance with the standards of this Code.
C. In multiple use zones (SC-S, SC-HDR, SC-E, SC-MU, TC-HDR, TC-MU, RC-OT, RC-E, RC-TO, C-WS and OI-WS) EMCs must comply with the following standards:
1. The property where the EMC is located must be at least three (3) acres in size and developed for a non-residential use. This standard applies to the combined area of multiple abutting or adjacent properties under the same ownership.
2. No more than one EMC is allowed as a component of a free- standing sign, subject to the sign height and size standards of the zone.
3. EMCs shall not be allowed as a component of a nonconforming sign unless the sign is brought into compliance with the standards of this Code.
60.40.55. Nonconforming and Illegal Signs.
1. The City may require, as a condition of a sign permit or as a condition of any development approval on property that is the site of a preexisting nonconforming sign, that the nonconforming sign(s) be removed, reconstructed, or replaced. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
2. Any sign installed or placed in the public right-of-way or on City-owned real property, except in conformance with the requirements of this Code, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be removed by the Director as follows:
A. Immediate confiscation without prior notice to the owner of the sign.
B. The city shall store any sign that has been confiscated for a period of thirty (30) calendar days from the time the person responsible for the sign is notified as provided in subsection C below.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Sign Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 204 05/01/2017
60.40.55.2.
C. If a sign includes the telephone number or address of the sign owner of the sign or of the person or business that is the subject of the sign text, the City shall contact the person or business by telephone or by mail and advise that the City believes that:
1. The sign was found in the public right-of-way or City-owned property;
2. No permit was issued for the placement of the sign, and the sign is not lawfully permitted to be in such location;
3. The communication shall advise the person or business that the City has confiscated the sign and will destroy the sign after thirty (30) calendar days from the date of notification, unless the sign is claimed and any citation fees are paid in full.
If the telephone number and mailing address of the sign owner or other appropriate party for notification are unknown, the City shall retain the sign for a period of fourteen (14) calendar days to permit the sign owner or appropriate party to notice that the sign has been removed and attempt to recover the sign from the City. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 205 01/01/2005
60.45. SOLAR ACCESS PROTECTION. [ORD 3619, September 1988]
60.45.05. Purpose.
This ordinance has been developed to provide solar access protection to new development in subdivisions, to new and remodeled single family homes, to structures within Single Family zoning districts, and to homes which make beneficial use of solar energy.
1. To promote energy conservation and the wise use of the sun as a renewable resource.
2. To implement provisions of the Beaverton comprehensive plan encouraging solar energy.
3. To provide a means of encouraging investment in solar design and solar equipment.
THE FOLLOWING FIGURES ARE REFERENCED THROUGHOUT THE TEXT PERTAINING TO SOLAR ACCESS PROTECTION:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 206 01/01/2005
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 207 01/01/2005
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 208 01/01/2005
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 209 01/01/2005
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 210 01/01/2005
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 211 01/01/2005
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 212 06/01/2012
60.45.10. Solar Access for New Development.
1. Purpose. The purposes of the solar access ordinance for new development are to ensure that land is divided so that structures can be oriented to maximize solar access and to minimize shade on adjoining properties from structures and trees.
2. Applicability. The solar design standard in subsection 3., below, shall apply to subdivisions and partitions in the R10, R7 and R5 zones, except to the extent the Director finds that the applicant has shown one or more of the conditions listed in subsections 4. and 5., below, exist, and exemptions or adjustments provided for therein are warranted. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Design Standard. At least 80 percent of the lots in a development subject to this ordinance shall comply with one or more of the options in this section.
A. Basic Requirement (see Figure 9). A lot complies with this Section if it:
1. Has a north-south dimension of 90 feet or more; and
2. Has a front lot line that is oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis.
B. Protected Solar Building Line Option (see Figure 10). In the alternative, a lot complies with this Section if a solar building line is used to protect solar access as follows:
1. A protected solar building line for the lot to the north is designated on the plat, or documents recorded with the plat; and
2. The protected solar building line for the lot to the north is oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis; and
3. There is at least 70 feet between the protected solar building line on the lot to the north and the middle of the north-south dimension of the lot to the south, measured along a line perpendicular to the protected solar building line; and
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 213 01/01/2005
60.45.10.3.B.
4. There is at least 45 feet between the protected solar building line and the northern edge of the buildable area of the lot, or habitable structures are situated so that at least 80 percent of their south-facing wall will not be shaded by structures or non-exempt vegetation.
C. Performance Option. In the alternative, a lot complies with this Section if:
1. Habitable structures built on that lot will have their long axis oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis and at least 80% of their ground floor south wall protected from shade by structures and non-exempt trees; or
2. Habitable structures built on that lot will have at least 32% of their glazing and 500 square feet of their roof area which faces within 30 degrees of south and is protected from shade by structures and non-exempt trees.
4. Exemptions from Design Standard. A development is exempt from this Section if the Director finds the applicant has shown that one or more of the following conditions apply to the site. A development is partially exempt from this Section to the extent the Director finds the applicant has shown that one or more of the following conditions apply to a corresponding portion of the site. If a partial exemption is granted for a given development, the remainder of the development shall comply with this Section.
A. Slopes. The site or a portion of the site for which the exemption is sought, is sloped 20 percent or more in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south, based on a topographic survey by a licensed professional land surveyor.
B. Off-Site Shade. The site, or a portion of the site for which the exemption is sought, is within the shadow pattern of off-site features, such as but not limited to structures, topography, or non-exempt vegetation, which will remain after development occurs on the site from which the shade is originating.
1. Shade from an existing or approved off-site dwelling in a single family residential zone and from topographic features is assumed to remain after development of the site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 214 01/01/2005
60.45.10.4.B.
2. Shade from an off-site structure in a zone other than a single family residential zone is assumed to be the shadow pattern of the existing or approved development thereon or the shadow pattern that would result from the largest structure allowed at the closest setback on adjoining land, whether or not that structure now exists.
3. Shade from off-site vegetation is assumed to remain after development of the site if: the trees that cause it are situated in a required setback; or they are part of a developed area, public park, or legally reserved open space; or they are in or separated from the developable remainder of a parcel by an undevelopable area or feature; or they are part of landscaping required pursuant to local law.
4. Shade from other off-site sources is assumed to be shade that exists or that will be cast by development for which applicable local permits have been approved on the date a complete application for the development is filed.
C. On-Site Shade. The site, or a portion of the site for which the exemption is requested, is:
1. Within the shadow pattern of on-site features such as, but not limited to structures and topography which will remain after the development occurs; or
2. Contains non-exempt trees at least 30 feet tall and more than 6 inches in diameter measured 4 feet above the ground which have a crown cover over at least 80% of the site or relevant portion. The applicant can show such crown cover exists using a scaled survey or an aerial photograph.
If granted, the exemption shall be approved subject to the condition that the applicant preserve at least 50% of the trees that cause the shade that warrants the exemption. The applicant shall file a note on the plat or other documents in the office of the County Recorder binding the applicant to comply with this requirement. The City of Beaverton shall be made a party of any covenant or restriction created to enforce any provision of this ordinance. The covenant or restriction shall not be amended without written City approval.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 215 06/01/2012
60.45.10.
5. Adjustments to Design Standard. The Director shall reduce the percentage of lots that must comply with this Section to the minimum extent necessary if it finds the applicant has shown one or more of the following site characteristics apply.
A. Density and Cost. If the design standard in this Section is applied, either the resulting density is less than that proposed, or on-site site development costs (e.g. grading, water, storm drainage and sanitary systems, and roads) and solar related off-site site development costs are at least 5% more per lot than if the standard is not applied. The following conditions, among others, could constrain the design of a development in such a way that compliance with this Section would reduce density or increase per lot costs in this manner. The applicant shall show which if any of these or other similar site characteristics apply in an application for a development.
1. The portion of the site for which the adjustment is sought has a natural grade that is sloped 10 percent or more and is oriented greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south based on a topographic survey of the site by a professional land surveyor.
2. There is a significant natural feature on the site, identified as such in the comprehensive plan that prevents given streets or lots from being oriented for solar access, and it will exist after the site is developed. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Existing road patterns must be continued through the site or must terminate on-site to comply with applicable road standards or public road plans in a way that prevents given streets or lots in the development from being oriented for solar access.
4. An existing public easement or right-of-way prevents given streets or lots in the development from being oriented for solar access. [ORD 4071; November 1999]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 216 01/01/2005
60.45.10.5.
B. Development Amenities. If the design standard in this Section applies to a given lot or lots, significant development amenities that would otherwise benefit the lot(s) will be lost or impaired. Evidence that a significant diminution in the market value of the lot(s) would result from having the lot(s) comply with this Section is relevant to whether a significant development amenity is lost or impaired.
C. Existing Shade. Non-exempt trees at least 30 feet tall and more than 6 inches in diameter measured 4 feet above the ground have a crown cover over at least 80% of the lot and at least 50% of the crown cover will remain after development of the lot. The applicant can show such crown cover exists using a scaled survey of non-exempt trees on the site or using an aerial photograph.
1. Shade from non-exempt trees is assumed to remain if: the trees are situated in a required setback; or they are part of an existing or proposed park, open space, or recreational amenity; or they are separated from the developable remainder of their parcel by an undevelopable area or feature; or they are part of landscaping required pursuant to local law; and they do not need to be removed for a driveway or other development.
2. Also, to the extent the shade is caused by on-site trees on land owned by the applicant, it is assumed to remain if the applicant files in the office of the County Recorder a covenant binding the applicant to retain the trees causing the shade on the affected lots.
6. Protection from Future Shade. Structures and non-exempt vegetation must comply with the Solar Balance Point requirements for existing lots (Section 60.45.15.) if located on a lot that is subject to the solar design standard in this Section, or if located on a lot south of and adjoining a lot that complies with this Section. The applicant shall file a note on the plat or other documents in the office of the County Recorder binding the applicant and subsequent purchasers to comply with the future shade protection
7. Process for Approval. Requirements for meeting the provisions of solar access protection shall be processed simultaneously with other application requirements as provided by this ordinance.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 217 06/01/2012
60.45.15. Solar Balance Point.
1. Purpose. The purposes of this ordinance are to promote the use of solar energy, to minimize shading of structures and accessory structures, and, where applicable, to minimize shading of structures by trees.
2. Applicability. This ordinance applies to an application for a building permit for all structures in R10, R7 and R5 zones, except to the extent the applicant has shown that one or more of the conditions listed in subsection .5. or .6., below, exists, and exemptions or adjustments provided for therein are warranted. In addition, non-exempt vegetation planted on lots subject to the provisions of Section 60.45.10.6. for new development shall comply with the shade point height standards as provided in subsections 4. and 5., below, of this ordinance. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
3. Solar Site Plan Required. An applicant for a building permit for a structure subject to this ordinance shall submit a site plan that shows the maximum shade point height allowed under subsection 4., below, and the allowed shade on the proposed structure's solar features as provided in subsection 7., below. If applicable, the site plan also shall show the solar balance point for the structure as provided in subsection 8., below.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 218 01/01/2005
60.45.15.
4. Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The height of the shade point shall comply with either subsection 4.A. or 4.B. below.
A. Basic Requirement. The height of the shade point shall be less than or equal to the height specified in Table A or computed using the following formula. If necessary, interpolate between the 5 foot dimensions listed in Table A.
H= (2 x SRL - N + 150)
5
Where: H = the maximum allowed height of the shade point (see Figure 4 and Figure 5);
SRL = shade reduction line (the distance between the shade point and the northern lot line, see Figure 6); and
N = the north-south lot dimension, provided that a north-south lot dimension more than 90 feet shall use a value of 90 feet for this section.
Provided, the maximum allowed height of the shade point may be increased one foot above the amount calculated using the formula or Table A for each foot that the average grade at the rear property line exceeds the average grade at the front property line.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 219 01/01/2005
60.45.15.4.
TABLE A
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SHADE POINT HEIGHT
(In Feet)
Distance to North-south lot dimension (in feet)
Shade 100+ 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40
Reduction Line
from northern
lot line (in feet)
70 40 40 40 41 42 43 44
65 38 38 38 39 40 41 42 43
60 36 36 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
55 34 34 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41
50 32 32 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
45 30 30 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40
40 28 28 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
35 26 26 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
30 24 24 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34
25 22 22 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
20 20 20 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
15 18 18 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
10 16 16 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
5 14 14 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
B. Performance Option. The proposed structure, or applicable non-exempt vegetation, will shade not more than 20 percent of the south-facing glazing of existing habitable structure(s), or, where applicable, the proposed structure or non-exempt vegetation comply with Section 60.45.10.3.B. or 60.45.10.3.C. of the solar access provisions for new development. If Section 60.45.10.3.B., Protected Solar Building Line Option, is used, non-exempt trees and the shade point of structures shall be set back from the protected solar building line 2.5 feet for every 1 foot of height of the structure or of the mature height of non-exempt vegetation over 2 feet.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 220 06/01/2012
60.45.15.
5. Exemption from the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The Director shall exempt a proposed structure or non-exempt vegetation from subsections 3. and 4., above, of this ordinance if the applicant shows that one or more of the conditions in this section exists, based on plot plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, suncharts or photographs or substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.
A. Exempt Lot. When created the lot was not required to comply with the provisions of Section 60.45.10. (Solar Access for New Development). [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. Pre-Existing Shade. The structure or applicable non-exempt vegetation will shade an area that is shaded by one or more of the following:
1. An existing or approved building or structure;
2. A topographic feature;
3. A non-exempt tree that will remain after development of the site. It is assumed a tree will remain after development if it: is situated in a building setback required by local ordinance; is part of a developed area or landscaping required by the City, a public park or landscape strip, or legally reserved open space; is in or separated from the developable remainder of a parcel by an undevelopable area or feature; or is on the applicant's property and not affected by the development. A duly executed covenant also can be used to preserve trees causing such shade.
C. Slope. The site has an average slope that exceeds 20 percent in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south based on a topographic survey by a licensed professional land surveyor.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 221 01/01/2005
60.45.15.5.
D. Insignificant Benefit. The proposed structure or non-exempt vegetation shades one or more of the following:
1. An undevelopable area; or
2. The wall of an unheated space, such as a typical garage; or
3. Less than 20 square feet of south-facing glazing.
E. Public Improvement. The proposed structure is a publicly owned improvement.
6. Adjustments to the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The Director shall increase the maximum permitted height of the shade point determined using subsection 4., above, to the extent it finds the applicant has shown one or more of the following conditions exist, based on plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, sun charts or photographs, or other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.
A. Physical Conditions. Physical conditions preclude development of the site in a manner that complies with subsection 4., above, due to such things as a lot size less than 3,000 square feet, unstable or wet soils, or a drainage way, public or private easement, or right of way.
B. Conflict between the Maximum Shade Point Height and Allowed Shade on the Solar Feature Standards. A proposed structure may be sited to meet the solar balance point standard described in subsection 8., below, or be sited as near to the solar balance point as allowed by subsection 8., below; if:
1. When the proposed structure is sited to meet the maximum shade point height standard determined using subsection 4., above, its solar feature will potentially be shaded as determined using subsection 7., below; and
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 222 01/01/2005
60.45.15.6.B.
2. The application includes a form provided by the City that:
a. Releases the applicant from complying with subsection 4., above, and agrees that the proposed structure may shade an area otherwise protected by subsection 4., above.
b. Releases the City from liability for damages resulting from the adjustment; and
c. Is signed by the owner(s) of the properties that would be shaded by the proposed structure more than allowed by the provisions of subsection 4., above.
3. Before the Building Official issues a permit for a proposed structure for which an adjustment has been granted pursuant to subsection 6.B., above, the applicant shall file the form provided for in subsection 6.B.2. above in the office of the County Recorder with the deeds to the affected properties.
7. Analysis of Allowed Shade on Solar Feature.
A. The applicant is exempt from this section if the lot(s) south of and adjoining the applicant's property is exempt from subsection 4., above, of this ordinance.
B. Applicants shall be encouraged to design and site a proposed habitable structure so that the lowest height of the solar feature(s) will not be shaded by buildings or non-exempt trees on lot(s) to the south. The applicant shall complete the following calculation procedure to determine if the solar feature(s) of the proposed structure will be shaded. To start, the applicant shall choose which of the following sources of shade originating from adjacent lot(s) to the south to use to calculate the maximum shade height at the north property line:
1. Existing structure(s) or non-exempt trees; or
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 223 01/01/2005
60.45.15.7.B.
2. The maximum shade that can be cast from future buildings or non-exempt trees, based on Table C. If the lot(s) to the south can be further divided, then the north-south dimension shall be assumed to be the minimum lot width required for a new lot in that zone.
C. The height of the lowest point of any solar feature of the proposed structure shall be calculated with respect to either the average elevation or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line of the lot to the south.
D. The applicant shall determine the height of the shadow that may be cast upon the applicant's solar feature by the source of shade selected in subsection b. by using the following formula or Table B.
SFSH = SH - (SGL/2.5)
Where: SFSH = The allowed shadow height on the solar feature (see Figure 8).
SH = the height of the shade at the northern lot line of lot(s) to the south as determined in subsection 7.b., above.
SGL = the solar gain line (the distance from the solar feature to the northern lot line of adjacent lot(s) to the south, see Figure 7).
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 224 01/01/2005
60.45.15.7.D.
TABLE B
MAXIMUM PERMITTED HEIGHT OF SHADOW AT SOLAR FEATURE
(In Feet)
Distance from
Solar Gain Allowed Shade Height at Northern Lot Line
Line to Lot of Adjacent Lot(s) to the South (In Feet)
Line (In Feet)
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
50
2
1
45
4
3
2
1
40
6
5
4
3
2
1
35
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
30
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
25
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
20
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
15
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
10
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
5
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
Table C may be used to determine (SH) in the above formula.
TABLE C
North-south lot dimension of adjacent lot(s) to the south
100 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40
Allowed
shade height
at the north 12 12 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
property line
of adjacent
lot(s) to south
E. If the allowed shade height on the solar feature calculated in subsection D. is higher than the lowest height of the solar feature calculated in subsection C., the applicant shall be encouraged to consider any changes to the house design or location which would make it practical to locate the solar feature so that it will not be shaded in the future.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 225 01/01/2005
60.45.15.
8. Solar Balance Point. If a structure does not comply with the maximum shade point height standard in subsection 4., above, and the allowed shade on a solar feature standard in subsection 7., above, then the solar balance point of the lot shall be calculated (see Figure 8). The solar balance point is the point on the lot where a structure would be the same from complying with both of these standards.
9. Yard Setback Adjustment. The City shall grant an adjustment to the side, front and/or rear yard setback requirement(s) by a maximum of 50% to build a proposed structure so it complies with either the shade point height standard in subsection 4., above, the allowed shade on a solar feature standard in subsection 7., above, or the solar balance point standard in subsection 8., above, as provided herein (see Figure 8). This adjustment shall apply only if necessary for a structure to comply with the applicable provisions of this ordinance and only so long as the adjustment does not conflict with specific conditions placed upon the property in question, such as easements. The following list illustrates yard adjustments permitted under this section: [ORD 3838; February 1993]
A. R5 Zone.
1. A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.
2. A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 10 feet.
3. A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than 3 feet.
B. R7 Zone.
1. A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.
2. A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 10 feet.
3. A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than 3 feet.
C. R10 Zone.
1. A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.
2. A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.
3. A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than 5 feet.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Solar Access Protection
Chapter 60 SR - 226 01/01/2005
60.45.15.
10. Application and Review Process. An application for a building permit shall include the information necessary to meet the provisions of this ordinance. The Building Official shall refer the plan to the Director for approval prior to issuing a building permit, or the Director may delegate this responsibility for review and approval to the Building Official. This review shall consist of determining compliance with those sections reference in subsection 9. above. [ORD 3838; February 1993]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 227 01/10/2008
60.50. SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS.
60.50.03. Accessory Dwelling Unit. [ORD 4048; July 1999]
1. Purpose. Accessory dwelling units are intended to increase the City’s housing stock while minimizing neighborhood impacts, respecting the scale and design of detached dwelling residential neighborhoods, and maintaining their character. At the same time, accessory dwelling units are not intended to apply toward any minimum density requirements in other sections of this Code. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
2. Design standards. The following design standards are specific to the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. The standards are intended to ensure that the accessory dwelling units are compatible in scale, architectural design, and accessory to the primary residence. Where development standards are absent in this section, the development standards of the underlying zone apply.
A. An accessory dwelling unit may be created in the following manner:
1. Conversion of existing living area, attic, basement or required parking;
2. Adding floor area, subject to the limitations of the zoning district in which it is located;
3. Constructing a new structure, attached structure, or manufactured home with an internal or detached accessory dwelling unit.
B. Parking.
1. Where the accessory dwelling unit is built on parking areas required for the primary dwelling, the required parking shall be replaced on site.
2. One additional parking space is required on site.
C. Location.
1. Accessory dwelling units must be attached by the floor, ceiling, wall, or portion thereof to the primary unit or must be separated by 8-feet from the primary unit.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 228 01/15/2009
60.50.03.2.C.
2 Accessory dwelling units shall be built in accordance with state and local codes.
[ORD 4224; August 2002]
60.50.05. Accessory Uses and Structures. (Other than Accessory Dwelling Units) [ORD 4048; July 1999]
1. Structures or uses incidental and subordinate to the uses allowed as Permitted and Conditional Uses in any zone are allowed as accessory uses and structures subject to the provisions of this section. [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4474; March 2008] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
2. All accessory buildings must comply with the following provisions:
A. Size. For lots ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less, the combined footprint of all accessory structures may not exceed five hundred (500) square feet. For lots greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the combined footprint may not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet. However, regardless of size, the lot coverage by all accessory structures shall be no more than twenty five (25) percent of a rear yard area; [ORD 4474; March 2008]
B. Height. Accessory structures shall not exceed one story and shall be no greater than fifteen (15) feet in height; [ORD 4474; March 2008]
C. They shall not be allowed in a required front yard;
D. They shall not be located within six (6) feet of main building for residential lots. Required separation distances for commercial, multiple use, and industrial zoned lots shall be determined by the applicable Building Code; [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4474; March 2008]
E. Setbacks. A structure with a height of eight feet or less shall be located no closer than three (3) feet to any lot line nor built over an easement. For each foot of height, or fraction thereof, in excess of eight feet, the accessory structure shall be set back one additional foot from all lot lines; [ORD 3293; November 1982]; [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4474; March 2008]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 229 03/27/2008
60.50.05.2.
F. They shall cause no encroachment upon or interference with the use of any adjoining property or public right-of-way;
G. Attached accessory structures. When an accessory structure is attached to the main structure, such accessory structure shall be considered as part of the main structure. Attached means wall-to-wall or any permanent attachment, as determined by the Director; [ORD 4474; March 2008]
H. They shall be built in accordance with the applicable building codes as determined by the Building Official. [ORD 3293; November 1982] [ORD 4474; March 2008]
3. Examples of residential accessory uses. The following types of accessory structures or similar structures as determined by the Planning Director shall be permitted in districts where residential use types are allowed:
A. A greenhouse or hothouse;
B. A guesthouse may be maintained accessory to a dwelling, provided there is no kitchen space or cooking facilities in the guesthouse;
C. Pools:
D. Children’s playhouses and structures;
E. Sheds;
F. Barns;
G. Gazebos;
H. Solar and wind energy systems;
I. Recreation room;
J. Laundry facilities;
K. Garage;
L. Accessory storage.
M. Pump House;
N. Fenced Dog Run;
O. Dog Houses;
P. Tennis and other game courts.
[ORD 4474; March 2008]
4. Non-residential accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily associated with the principal commercial or industrial use shall be permitted where these commercial and industrial use types are authorized. [ORD 4474; March 2008]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 230 06/01/2012
60.50.05.
5. A conflict of interpretation concerning whether a use or structure is an accessory use or structure shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.20.
6. A. The City Council may, by resolution, establish a list of uses found not to be accessory to specific Permitted Uses.
B. Prior to including a use on such list the City Council shall hold a public hearing and allow interested persons an opportunity to testify on the matter.
C. The City Council may delegate to the Planning Commission the authority to perform the functions authorized and required by this subsection.
[ORD 4474; March 2008]
60.50.10. Height Regulations. The height limitations contained in this Code do not apply to normal appurtenances placed on or extending above the roof level, such as spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, ventilators, elevator housing, or other structures; provided, however, that no structure shall be erected which fails to comply with any applicable state or federal law or regulation. Antennas for wireless communication facilities are not exempted by this section from the applicable height regulations as specified in this Code. [ORD 3293; November 1982] [ORD 4107; May 2000] [ORD 4248; May 2003] [ORD 4498; January 2009]
60.50.15. Projections into Required Yards and Public Right-of-Way. [ORD 3162; April 1980]
1. The following structures may project into required yards, but may not project into a utility easement without an encroachment permit, as issued by the City Attorney per the consent and approval of the City Engineer. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
:
A. Paved terraces may project into required front, side or rear yards provided that no structures placed thereon shall violate other requirements of this ordinance.
B. Unroofed landings and stairs may project into required front and rear yards only.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 231 06/01/2012
60.50.15.1.
C. Window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and similar incidental architectural features may project not more than 2 feet into any required yard.
D. Open fire escapes shall not project more than 4 feet, 6 inches into any required yard.
E. Chimneys shall not project more than 24" into any required yard.
F. Bay windows without a foundation may project into the front and rear yard setback by not more than 2 feet and may not occupy more than 50 percent of any one wall plane of a structure. [ORD 3739; September 1990] [ORD 4397; August 2006]
2. Buildings within any of the Regional Center zoning districts (RC-TO, RC-OT, RC-E zones) may have the following projections into the public right-of-way; [ORD 3352; January 1984] [ORD 4058; September 1999] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
A. Planters;
B. Awnings and Canopies; [ORD 4107; May 2000]
C. Ornamental and architectural features.
The type, size and other features of the projections may be approved by the appropriate decision making authority after receiving a recommendation from the Facilities Review Committee. The decision making authority may also impose reasonable conditions. [ORD 3162; April 1980] [ORD 4224; August 2002]
3. Except as Otherwise Permitted: [ORD 3293]
A. No person shall obstruct any public right-of-way or any portion thereof or place or cause to be placed therein or thereon anything whatsoever tending to obstruct or interfere with the full and free use of such public right-of-way or in any degree interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. No person shall erect, construct, build, raise, place or maintain any post, pole, sign, wall, fence, tree, building structure or any other object in or upon any public right-of-way, except trees planted in planter strips.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 232 06/01/2012
60.50.15.3.
C. No person in charge of property shall allow anything prohibited by this section or which otherwise restricts the public use of a sidewalk or parking strip abutting such property to remain there.
60.50.20. Fences. Fences in any district may be constructed at the lot line; provided, however, that fences shall comply with all applicable vision clearance standards established in the Engineering Design Manual. for setback and height limits. [ORD 3162; April 1980] [ORD 3287; October 1982] [ORD 4365; October 2005]
60.50.25. Uses Requiring Special Regulation. In addition to other standards and requirements by this ordinance, all uses included in this section shall comply with the provisions stated herein. Should a conflict arise between the requirements of this section and other requirements of this ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall control.
1. Kennels, Riding Academies and Stables. Kennels, riding academies and stables shall be located not less than 200 feet from any lot line. Applications for such use when required by this ordinance shall include information which describes the applicant's intended actions to ensure that odors, dust, noise, and drainage from the use will not create a nuisance, hazard or health problem to adjoining property uses. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. Animal Hospitals. An animal hospital shall not be located within 100 feet of a lot in any Residential district. The applicant shall provide information which describes the measures and controls to be taken that are intended to prevent offensive noise and odor. No incineration of refuse shall be permitted on the premises. [ORD 4332; January 2005]
3. Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum, Columbarium. A cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, or columbarium shall be located to have a principal access to site by way of a street with a Collector or higher designation as established by the Comprehensive Plan.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 233 10/20/2005
60.50.25.
4. Churches, Hospitals, or other Religious or Eleemosynary Institutions. In any residentially zoned property such uses shall be located on a street with a Collector or higher designation as established by the Comprehensive Plan. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from a side or rear property line abutting a Residential district. [ORD 3162; April 1980] [ORD 3739; September 1990]
5. Aircraft Landing Facilities. All aircraft landing facilities shall be so designed and so oriented, that the incidence of aircraft passing directly over dwellings during landing or take off is minimized. They shall be located so that traffic, both land and air, shall not severely impact neighboring uses. Applications shall describe the measures taken to prevent noise, vibrations, dust and glare. New aircraft landing facilities shall require a Conditional Use. Prior to obtaining approval for a landing facility, the applicant shall furnish proof of compliance with applicable State and Federal laws and regulations.
6. Natural Resource Extraction.
A. Any natural resource extraction operation shall require a Conditional Use. In addition to the information normally required for a Conditional Use application, the following shall also be supplied:
1. Graphic (and legal) description of the area.
2. Existing topographic contours (not more than 10 feet contour intervals).
3. Finished topographic contours when extraction is completed (not more than 10 feet contour intervals).
4. Existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site.
5. Principal access points which will be used by truck and equipment, ingress and egress points, internal circulation, and anticipated traffic volume.
6. Indication of the existing landscape features.
7. Location and nature of other operations, if any, which are proposed to take place on the site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 234 10/20/2005
60.50.25.6.
B. A narrative statement shall also be submitted with the application for a Conditional Use which shall set forth in detail the following information:
1. Method of drainage.
2. Method of fencing or barricading the petition area to prevent casual access.
3. Estimated amount of material to be removed from the site.
4. Estimated length of time necessary to complete the operation.
5. Description of operations or processing which will take place on the site during and after the time and material is extracted.
6. Plan or program of regarding and reshaping the land for future use.
7. Proposed hours of operation.
8. Other pertinent information that may pertain to the particular site.
9. Method to abate overloading of trucks and consequent spillage upon highways.
C. General requirements.
1. Principal access to the site shall minimize the use of residential streets, and access roads shall be treated in a manner so as to make them dust free; further, where access roads intersect Arterials, suitable traffic controls shall be established.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 235 10/20/2005
60.50.25.6.C.
2. A strip of land at the existing topographic level, and not less than 15 feet in width, shall be retained at the periphery of the site wherever the site abuts a public right-of-way. This periphery strip shall not be altered except for access points.
3. All banks shall be graded to a slope no steeper than two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical unless a soils report provides sufficient information to satisfy the City Engineer that a steeper slope would have long term stability. No concentrated drainage shall be directed onto any slope greater than 15 percent. Slope banks created at the working surface of the excavation shall be kept safe, but shall only need to conform to the above after work has ceased on that surface for a period of one year.
4. a. No alteration to drainage flow onto, or out of property shall be made except as in accordance with a grading and drainage plan approved by the City Engineer. No water shall be retained on site by a dam rising above the natural contour of the site without a plan approved by the City Engineer.
b. No pit shall be excavated to a depth which will intersect an imaginary line, extending from the property line, at an angle of 45 degrees from the horizontal downward into the earth. This condition may be waived by the owner of property abutting said property line or by submittal of a soils report demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, that the surcharge which could be generated by a structure on said adjacent property is fully supported by a lesser requirement.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 236 06/01/2012
60.50.25.
7. Child Care or Day Care Facilities. Child care or day care facilities shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor play areas with a minimum area of 100 square feet per 1/3 the total licensed capacity of children. The Director may approve reduction of this requirement if the facility cares only for infants up to 6 months in age. In all districts, a fence of at least five (5) feet but not more than six (6) feet in height shall be provided separating the outdoor play area from abutting lots. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Facilities licensed for 40 or more children may be required to have a driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children. The Facilities Review Committee may recommend whether the special driveway design is required, or not. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
If a Conditional Use is required, in addition to that normally required for a Conditional Use the following information shall also be supplied:
A. The maximum number of children the facility is proposed to be licensed to care for;
B. Ages of the children to be cared for;
C. List of any exceptions to the rules governing standards for day care facilities the applicant will be applying for to the Children's Services Division. [ORD 3181, July 1980]
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
8. Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utility or municipal or other governmental agencies of any electrical, gas, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal system, including poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings, shall be Permitted in any district [ORD 3293; November 1982] [ORD 4118; September 2000] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Special Use Regulations
Chapter 60 SR - 237 06/01/2012
60.50.25.
9. Drop Boxes. Recycling receptacles or charity drop boxes shall not be located in any Residential district or in any public right-of-way. Recycling receptacles or charity drop boxes are Permitted in any commercial or industrial zone.
10. Park and Ride Facilities. Approved off-street parking lots connected with a non-residential use may be used jointly as park and ride lots if, by determination of the Director after receiving a recommendation from the Facilities Review Committee, the park and ride use will not conflict with the parking needs of the site's principal use both in terms of traffic volume and hours of use, and as long as there are no specific conditions placed on the site by the Director, Planning Commission, or the City Council which would preclude such use. Park and ride lots as principal uses are Permitted in those zones allowing parking structures and surface parking lots. [ORD 3204; February 1981] [ORD 4224; August 2002]
11. Noise Levels. Noise levels shall meet the standards established by the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. [ORD 3293; November 1982]
12. Air Quality. Air quality shall meet the standards established by the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. [ORD 3293; November 1982]

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 238 08/10/2006
60.55. TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.
60.55.05. Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish design standards and performance requirements for all streets and other transportation facilities constructed or reconstructed within the City of Beaverton.
60.55.10. General Provisions. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
1. All transportation facilities shall be designed and improved in accordance with the standards of this code and the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings. In addition, when development abuts or impacts a transportation facility under the jurisdiction of one or more other governmental agencies, the City shall condition the development to obtain permits required by the other agencies.
2. In order to protect the public from potentially adverse impacts of the proposal, to fulfill an identified need for public services related to the development, or both, development shall provide traffic capacity, traffic safety, and transportation improvements in rough proportion to the identified impacts of the development. [ORD 4103; May 2000]
3. For applications that meet the threshold criteria of section 60.55.15. (Traffic Management Plan) or of section 60.55.20. (Traffic Impact Analysis), these analyses or limited elements thereof may be required.
4. The decision-making authority may impose development conditions of approval per Section 10.65.1. of this code. Conditions of approval may be based on the Traffic Management Plan and Traffic Impact Analysis. Additional street, bicycle, and pedestrian connections may also be required per 60.55.25. (Street and Bicycle and Pedestrian Connection Requirements).
5. Dedication of right-of-way shall be determined by the decision-making authority.
6. Traffic calming may be approved or required by the decision-making authority in a design of the proposed and/or existing streets within the Area of Influence or any additional locations identified by the City Engineer. Traffic calming measures shall be designed to City standards.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 239 05/19/2017
60.55.10.
7. Intersection performance shall be determined using the Highway Capacity Manual 2000 published by the Transportation Research Board. The City Engineer may approve a different intersection analysis method prior to use when the different method can be justified. Terms used in this subsection are defined in the Highway Capacity Manual 2000.
At a minimum, the impacts of development on a signalized intersection shall be mitigated to peak hour average control delay no greater than 65 seconds per vehicle using a signal cycle length not to exceed 120 seconds. The volume-to-capacity ratio for each lane group for each movement shall be identified and considered in the determination of intersection performance. The peak hour volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratio for each lane group shall be no greater than 0.98. Signal progression shall also be considered. If the intersection is under County or ODOT jurisdiction, the V/C ratio for each land group shall not exceed the V/C ratio imposed by that jurisdiction. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
At a minimum, the impacts of development on a two-way or an all-way stop-controlled intersection shall be mitigated to a peak hour average control delay of no greater than 45 seconds per vehicle.
If the existing control delay or volume-to-capacity ratio of an intersection is greater than the standards of this subsection, the impacts of development shall be mitigated to maintain or reduce the respective control delay or volume-to-capacity ratio.
60.55.15. Traffic Management Plan. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Where development will add 20 or more trips in any hour on a residential street, a Traffic Management Plan acceptable to the City Engineer shall be submitted in order to complete the application. A residential street is any portion of a street classified as a Local Street or Neighborhood Route and having abutting property zoned R2, R4, R5, R7, or R10. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
1. For each development application that requires a Traffic Management Plan, the Plan shall identify:
A. The hours when the added trips from the development will be 20 or more vehicles per hour.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 240 05/19/2017
60.55.15.1.
B. The existing volume of trips on the residential street during each of those same hours.
C. The volume of trips that the development will add on the residential street during each of those same hours.
D. Recommended traffic management strategies designed to City standards to mitigate the impacts of the increased trips attributed to the development. Potential traffic management strategies include, but are not limited to, any combination of speed humps, curb extensions, intersection treatments, and traffic control devices.
2. The Traffic Management Plan shall discuss whether the recommended improvements both on-site and off-site are justified, reasonably related to, and roughly proportional to the impacts of the proposed development and shall include information sufficient for the City to assess whether the proposed mitigation strategies are reasonably related and roughly proportional to the level of impact. [ORD 4103; May 2000]
60.55.20. Traffic Impact Analysis. [ORD 4103; May 2000] [ORD 4302; June 2004] For each development proposal that exceeds the Analysis Threshold of 60.55.20.2, the application for land use or design review approval shall include a Traffic Impact Analysis as required by this code. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall be based on the type and intensity of the proposed land use change or development and its estimated level of impact to the existing and future local and regional transportation systems.
1. Engineer Certification. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall be prepared and certified by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed in the State of Oregon.
2. Analysis Threshold.
A. A Traffic Impact Analysis is required when the proposed land use change or development will generate 300 vehicles or more per day (vpd) in average weekday trips as determined by the City Engineer. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 241 05/19/2017
60.55.20.2.
B. A Traffic Impact Analysis or some elements of a Traffic Impact Analysis may be required when the volume threshold under subsection A. of this section is not met but the City Engineer finds that the traffic impacts attributable to the development have the potential to significantly impact the safe and efficient operation of the existing public transportation system.
3. Study Area. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall evaluate the Area of Influence of the proposed development and all segments of the surrounding transportation system where users are likely to experience a change in the quality of traffic flow. The City Engineer may identify additional locations for study if existing traffic operation, safety, or performance is marginal or substandard. Prior to report preparation, the applicant shall submit the proposed scope and analysis assumptions of the Traffic Impact Analysis. The City Engineer shall determine whether the scope and analysis assumptions are adequate.
4. Contents of the Traffic Impact Analysis Report. The Traffic Impact Analysis report shall contain the following information organized in a logical format:
A. Executive Summary
B. Description of Proposed Development
C. Existing Conditions
D. Traffic Forecasts
E. Traffic Impacts
F. Mitigation Identification
G. Recommendations
A. Executive Summary. An Executive Summary of no more than three single-sided pages shall be included at the beginning of the Traffic Impact Analysis report. The Executive Summary shall summarize the analysis and conclusions and identify recommended transportation improvements.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 242 05/19/2017
60.55.20.4.
B. Description of Proposed Development. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall provide a comprehensive project description including but not limited to the following:
1. Vicinity map.
2. Site plan.
3. Project phasing.
4. Time schedule.
5. Intended use of the site, including the range of uses allowed without additional land-use approvals.
6. Intensity of use.
C. Existing Conditions. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall provide a complete evaluation of existing conditions and include maps and/or tables displaying the following information for the Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Engineer:
1. Street system including street names and functional classifications.
2. Pavement and shoulder widths.
3. Striping and channelization.
4. Driveways.
5. Freight access and loading areas.
6. Intersections.
7. Traffic volumes.
a. Existing traffic shall be measured within the previous twelve months.
b. Traffic volumes shall be based on data from a minimum of two typical weekdays (Tuesday through Thursday). In addition, data shall be provided for weekends if weekends are the peak traffic period for either the existing street or the proposed development. [ORD 4706; May 2017]
c. Seasonal variations in traffic volumes shall be considered.
8. Existing intersection performance indicators including volume-to-capacity ratio and control delay.
9. Transit information including stop and shelter locations, route numbers, headways, passenger loading, pull outs, and times of service.
10. Bicycle ways, sidewalks, and accessways.
11. Collision data for the most recent three-year period for which collision data is available.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 243 05/19/2017
60.55.20.4.
D. Traffic Forecasts. The Traffic Impact Analysis report shall provide forecasts of future traffic within the Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Engineer. Traffic forecasts shall be provided for both the Buildout Year and the Long-Range Forecast Year. The report shall include complete documentation of trip generation calculations including Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation (latest published edition) use code(s) or an alternative basis of trip generation and the rationale for using the alternative.
1. Buildout Year Analysis. Buildout Year forecasts shall be Total Traffic at the time of anticipated completion and occupancy of each phase of the development and at the time of completion and occupancy of the entire development. The City shall provide traffic information on other developments to consider in the calculation of Added Traffic.
2. Long-Range Forecast Year Analysis. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall include an analysis of the potential worst-case long-range impacts to the local transportation system identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element and the regional transportation system identified in Metro’s Regional Transportation Plan. The forecast year shall be the forecast year of the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element or an alternate year approved by the City Engineer. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall include a prediction of whether any phase of the proposed development will change the long-range transportation needs identified in the Comprehensive Plan and the extent to which traffic from the proposed development contributes to the long-range improvement needs.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 244 05/19/2017
60.55.20.4.D.
3. Traffic Forecast Analysis Assumptions.
a. Trip generation. Estimates of the proposed development’s trip generation shall be made for peak period traffic. Selection of the peak period used in the analysis shall be justified and shall consider, at a minimum, the peak period for the proposed development and the peak period for surrounding streets. The City Engineer may require review of other time periods based on known or anticipated marginal or substandard traffic capacity or traffic safety. Trip generation estimates shall be based on ITE’s Trip Generation (latest published edition). The City Engineer may approve different trip generation rates when trip generation rates are not available in ITE’s Trip Generation or different rates are justified.
b. Trip distribution and assignment. Traffic generated by the proposed development shall be logically distributed and assigned to the street system within the Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Engineer. Trip distribution and assignment shall be based on trip distribution information from Washington County, ODOT, or Metro, on analysis of local traffic patterns based on data less than 12 months old, or on alternative data approved by the City Engineer.
4. Intersection and Highway Interchange Analysis. Intersection and highway interchange analysis shall conform to the method for operations analysis described in the Highway Capacity Manual 2000 published by the Transportation Research Board. The City Engineer may approve an alternative analysis method. The analysis shall document that the impacts of queuing from adjacent intersections or traffic restrictions has been addressed.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 245 05/19/2017
60.55.20.4.
E. Traffic Impacts. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall evaluate access, safety, operation, capacity, circulation, level of service, and performance of the transportation system within the proposed development’s Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Engineer for both the Buildout Year and any phases thereof, and the Long-Range Forecast Year.
Performance analysis shall be based on the standards of Section 60.55.10.7.
1. Safety considerations shall be evaluated. Potential safety problems resulting from conflicting turning movements between and among driveways, intersections, and internal traffic shall be addressed. Distance to the nearest driveways on both sides of streets fronting the site and in both directions from site access points shall be shown. On-Site driveway stacking and queuing impacts shall be assessed. The potential for shared access with adjacent development shall be assessed.
2. Geometric design and operational improvements including but not limited to acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, turning lanes, traffic signals, and channelization shall be considered, evaluated, and recommended when determined necessary by standards and practices adopted by ODOT, Washington County, the City or approved by the City Engineer.
3. Adequacy of sight distance shall be addressed at the proposed road access point(s) for both the existing road configuration and for the ultimate road configuration based on improvements planned for the development and improvements identified in the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element. Sight distance shall meet City standards.
4. The analysis shall also identify and evaluate related impacts on bicycle, pedestrian, and transit access, circulation, and facilities.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 246 02/22/2007
60.55.20.4.E.
5. Other, operational, circulation, safety, and capacity issues shall be evaluated and addressed as required by this code and by the City Engineer.
F. Mitigation Identification. In order to protect the public transportation system from potentially adverse impacts of the proposal, to fulfill an identified need for public services within the impacted area related to the development, or both, the Traffic Impact Analysis shall identify methods of mitigating on-site and off-site deficiencies for present and proposed phases of the development. The analysis shall make recommendations for improvements necessary for safe and efficient traffic flow and bicycle, pedestrian, and transit movement and access based on and roughly proportional to the identified impacts. Buildout Year, Long-Range Forecast Year, and project phasing impacts shall be considered. [ORD 4418, February 2007]
The traffic impact analysis shall discuss the estimated levels of impact, improvements, and mitigations, and shall demonstrate how the recommended mitigations are roughly proportional to the identified impacts. [ORD 4418, February 2007]
Mitigation shall be consistent with improvements identified in the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element. At a minimum, the Traffic Impact Analysis shall consider ultimate rights-of-way and additional streets, bicycle, and pedestrian connections and extensions and intersection improvements that are identified in the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element Figures 6.1 through 6.23 and Tables 6.1 through 6.6 and connections required by Section 60.55.25. of this code. Mitigation measures may also include, but are not limited to, additional street connections and street extensions, turn lanes, signalization, signal modifications, installation of medians, shared access and other access management strategies, geometric improvements such as lane geometry improvements, and intersection realignments.
Where stop-controlled intersections do not meet the minimum performance standard of Section 60.55.10.7., an additional street connection or a street extension shall be considered as a potential mitigation measure.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 247 02/22/2007
60.55.20.4.
G. Recommendations. The Traffic Impact Analysis report shall clearly state the mitigation measures recommended by the analysis and shall summarize how the recommende3d mitigations are roughly proportional to the identified impacts. The recommended street and highway mitigation measures shall be shown on a scaled drawing that depicts existing and recommended improvements. [ORD 4418, February 2007]
60.55.25. Street and Bicycle and Pedestrian Connection Requirements. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
1. All streets shall provide for safe and efficient circulation and access for motor vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, and transit. Bicycle and pedestrian connections shall provide for safe and efficient circulation and access for bicycles and pedestrians.
2. The Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element Figures 6.1 through 6.23 and Tables 6.1 through 6.6 shall be used to identify ultimate right-of-way width and future potential street, bicycle, and pedestrian connections in order to provide adequate multi-modal access to land uses, improve area circulation, and reduce out-of-direction travel.
3. Where a future street or bicycle and pedestrian connection location is not identified in the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element, where abutting properties are undeveloped or can be expected to be redeveloped in the near term, and where a street or bicycle and pedestrian connection is necessary to enable reasonably direct access between and among neighboring properties, the applicant shall submit as part of a complete application, a future connections plan showing the potential arrangement of streets and bicycle and pedestrian connections that shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of these connections into surrounding areas.
4. Streets and bicycle and pedestrian connections shall extend to the boundary of the parcel under development and shall be designed to connect the proposed development’s streets, bicycle connections, and pedestrian connections to existing and future streets, bicycle connections, and pedestrian connections. A closed-end street, bicycle connection, or pedestrian connection may be approved with a temporary design.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 248 12/02/2016
60.55.25.
5. Whenever existing streets and bicycle and pedestrian connections adjacent to or within a parcel of land are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way may be required by the decision-making authority.
6. Where possible, bicycle and pedestrian connections shall converge with streets at traffic-controlled intersections for safe crossing.
7. Bicycle and pedestrian connections shall connect the on-site circulation system to existing or proposed streets, to adjacent bicycle and pedestrian connections, and to driveways open to the public that abut the property. Connections may approach parking lots on adjoining properties if the adjoining property used for such connection is open to public pedestrian and bicycle use, is paved, and is unobstructed.
8. To preserve the ability to provide transportation capacity, safety, and improvements, a special setback line may be established by the City for existing and future streets, street widths, and bicycle and pedestrian connections for which an alignment, improvement, or standard has been defined by the City. The special setback area shall be recorded on the plat.
9. Accessways are one or more connections that provide bicycle and pedestrian passage between streets or a street and a destination. Accessways shall be provided as required by this code and where full street connections are not possible due to the conditions described in Section 60.55.25.14. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
An accessway will not be required where the impacts from development, redevelopment, or both are low and do not provide reasonable justification for the estimated costs of such accessway.
A. Accessways shall be provided as follows:
1. In any block that is longer than 600 feet as measured from the near side right-of-way line of the subject street to the near side right-of-way line of the adjacent street, an accessway shall be required through and near the middle of the block.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 249 12/02/2016
60.55.25.9.A.
2. If any of the conditions described in Section 60.55.25.14. result in block lengths longer than 1200 feet as measured from the near side right-of-way line of the subject street to the near side right-of-way line of the adjacent street, then two or more accessways may be required through the block. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
3. Where a street connection is not feasible due to conditions described in Section 60.55.25.14., one or more new accessways to any or all of the following shall be provided as a component of the development if the accessway is reasonably direct: an existing transit stop, a planned transit route as identified by TriMet and the City, a school, a shopping center, or a neighborhood park. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
4. The City may require an accessway to connect from one cul-de-sac to an adjacent cul-de-sac or street.
5. In a proposed development or where redevelopment potential exists and a street connection is not proposed, one or more accessways may be required to connect a cul-de-sac to public streets, to other accessways, or to the project boundary to allow for future connections.
6. Within the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area, the City may require an accessway to connect from multi-use paths or trails to streets, multi-use paths, or trails. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
B. Accessway Design Standards.
1. Accessways shall be as short as possible and wherever practical, straight enough to allow one end of the path to be visible from the other.
2. Accessways shall be located to provide a reasonably direct connection between likely pedestrian and bicycle destinations. [ORD 4332; January 2005]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 250 08/20/2008
60.55.25.
10. Pedestrian Circulation. [ORD 4487; August 2008]
A. Walkways are required between parts of a development where the public is invited or allowed to walk.
B. A walkway into the development shall be provided for every 300 feet of street frontage. A walkway shall also be provided to any accessway abutting the development.
C. Walkways shall connect building entrances to one another and from building entrances to adjacent public streets and existing or planned transit stops. Walkways shall connect the development to walkways, sidewalks, bicycle facilities, alleyways and other bicycle or pedestrian connections on adjacent properties used or planned for commercial, multifamily, institution or park use. The City may require connections to be constructed and extended to the property line at the time of development.
D. Walkways shall be reasonably direct between pedestrian destinations and minimize crossings where vehicles operate.
E. Walkways shall be paved and shall maintain at least four feet of unobstructed width. Walkways bordering parking spaces shall be at least seven feet wide unless concrete wheel stops, bollards, curbing, landscaping, or other similar improvements are provided which prevent parked vehicles from obstructing the walkway. Stairs or ramps shall be provided where necessary to provide a reasonably direct route. The slope of walkways without stairs shall conform to City standards.
F. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) contains different and stricter standards for some walkways. The ADA applies to the walkway that is the principal building entrance and walkways that connect transit stops and parking areas to building entrances. Where the ADA applies to a walkway, the stricter standards of ADA shall apply.
G. On-site walkways shall be lighted to 0.5 foot-candle level at initial luminance. Lighting shall have cut-off fixtures so that illumination does not exceed 0.5 foot-candle more than five (5) feet beyond the property line.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 251 08/20/2008
60.55.25.
11. Pedestrian Connections at Major Transit Stops. Commercial and institution buildings at or near major transit stops shall provide for pedestrian access to transit through the following measures:
A. For development within 200 feet of a Major Transit Stop:
1. Either locate buildings within 20 feet of the property line closest to the transit stop, a transit route or an intersecting street, or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop or a street intersection;
2. Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to persons with disabilities if required by TriMet and the City;
3. Provide a reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the transit stop and building entrances on the site;
4. Where substantial evidence of projected transit ridership or other transit impacts is presented to conclude both that a nexus exists between the proposed development and public transit and that the degree of impact provides reasonable justification, the City may require the developer to grant a public easement or dedicate a portion of the parcel for transit passenger bench(es), shelter, or both, and, if appropriate, the construction of a transit passenger bench, shelter, or both; and,
5. Provide lighting at the transit stop to City standards.
B. Except as otherwise provided in subsection A. of this section, for development within 300 feet of a Major Transit Stop, provide walkways connecting building entrances and streets adjoining the site, and pedestrian connections to adjoining properties, except where such a connection is impracticable pursuant to subsection 14. of this section.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 252 08/10/2006
60.55.25.
12. Assessment, review, and mitigation measures (including best management practices adopted by local agencies) shall be completed for bicycle and pedestrian connections located within the following areas: wetlands, streams, areas noted as Significant Natural Resources Overlay Zones, Significant Wetlands and Wetlands of Special Protection, and Significant Riparian Corridors within Volume III of the Comprehensive Plan Statewide Planning Goal 5 Resource Inventory Documents and Significant Natural Resources Map, and areas identified in regional and/or intergovernmental resource protection programs.
“Assessment” for the purposes of this section means to assess the site-specific development compatibility issues. Site-specific compatibility issues include but are not limited to lighting, construction methods, design elements, rare plants, and human/pet impacts on the resource. “Review” for the purposes of this section includes but is not limited to obtaining appropriate permits from appropriate resource agencies. Mitigation measures, including appropriate use restrictions, required by local, state, and federal agencies shall be completed as part of the construction project. If the project will irreparably destroy the resource, then the resource will take precedence over the proposed bicycle and pedestrian connection.
13. New construction of bicycle and pedestrian connections along residential rear lot lines is discouraged unless no comparable substitute alignment is possible in the effort to connect common trip origins and destinations or existing segment links.
14. Street and Bicycle and Pedestrian Connection Hindrances. Street, bicycle, and/or pedestrian connections are not required where one or more of the following conditions exist:
A. Physical or topographic conditions make a general street, bicycle, or pedestrian connection impracticable. Such conditions include but are not limited to the alignments of existing connecting streets, freeways, railroads, slopes in excess of City standards for maximum slopes, wetlands or other bodies of water where a connection could not reasonably be provided;
B. Existing buildings or other development on adjacent lands physically preclude a connection now and in the future, considering the potential for redevelopment; or,
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 253 06/01/2012
60.55.25.14.
C. Where streets, bicycle, or pedestrian connections would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, or restrictions written and recorded as of May 1, 1995, which preclude a required street, bicycle, or pedestrian connection.
60.55.30. Minimum Street Widths. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Minimum street widths are depicted in the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4418; February 2007]
1. Any project-specific modifications of the standards contained in the Engineering Design Manual regarding the widths of features relating to the movement of vehicles, including but not limited to rights of way, travel lanes, parking lanes, bike lanes, driveway aprons, curb radii, or other such features shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in the Section 145 Design Modifications of the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4418; February 2007]
2. Any project-specific modifications of the standards of the Engineering Design Manual relating to the location and dimensions of required street landscaping and pedestrian features including, but not limited to, sidewalks, planter strips, street trees, street tree wells, street tree easements, or street furniture are subject to the procedures contained in Chapter 40 (Applications). The required application will depend on the scope of the proposed project and the type of application filed with the City. [ORD 4418; February 2007]
60.55.35. Access Standards. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
1. The development plan shall include street plans that demonstrate how safe access to and from the proposed development and the street system will be provided. The applicant shall also show how public and private access to, from, and within the proposed development will be preserved
2. No more than 25 dwelling units may have access onto a closed-end street system unless the decision-making authority finds that identified physical constraints preclude compliance with the standard and the proposed development is still found to be in compliance with the Facilities Review criteria of Section 40.03. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 254 06/01/2012
60.55.35.3.
3. Intersection Standards.
A. Visibility at Intersections. All work adjacent to public streets and accessways shall comply with the standards of the Engineering Design Manual except in Regional and Town Centers. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
1. The sight clearance area requirements for Town Centers and Regional Centers shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the decision-making authority. In making its determination, the decision-making authority shall consider the safety of the users of the intersection (including pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists), design speeds, the intersection sight distance standards of the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings, and other applicable criteria. [ORD 4111; July 2000]
2. The requirements specified in 60.55.35.3.A. may be lessened or waived by the decision-making authority if the project will not result in an unsafe traffic situation. In making its determination, the decision-making authority shall consider the safety of the users of the intersection (including pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists), design speeds, the intersection sight distance standards of the Engineering Design Manual, and other applicable criteria.
B. Intersection angles and alignment and intersection spacing along streets shall meet the standards of the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings.
1. Local street connections at intervals of no more than 330 feet should apply in areas planned for the highest density multiple use development. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
2. When a highway interchange within the City is constructed or reconstructed, a park and ride lot shall be considered.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60
06/01/2012
SR - 255
60.55.35.3.
C. Driveways.
1. Corner Clearance for Driveways. Corner clearance at signalized intersections and stop-controlled intersections, and spacing between driveways shall meet the standards of the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings.
2. Shared Driveway Access. Whenever practical, access to Arterials and Collectors shall serve more than one site through the use of driveways common to more than one development or to an on-site private circulation design that furthers this requirement.
Consideration of shared access shall take into account at a minimum property ownership, surrounding land uses, and physical characteristics of the area.
Where two or more lots share a common driveway, reciprocal access easements between adjacent lots may be required.
3. No new driveways for detached dwellings shall be permitted to have direct access onto an Arterial or Collector street except in unusual circumstances where emergency access or an alternative access does not exist. Where detached dwelling access to a local residential street or Neighborhood Route is not practicable, the decision-making authority may approve access from a detached dwelling to an Arterial or Collector.
60.55.40. Transit Facilities. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Transit routes and transit facilities shall be designed to support transit use through provision of transit improvements. These improvements shall include passenger landing pads, accessways to the transit stop location, or some combination thereof, as required by TriMet and the City, and may also include shelters or a pad for a shelter. In addition, when required by TriMet and the City, major industrial, institution, retail, and office developments shall provide either a transit stop on site or a pedestrian connection to a transit stop adjacent to the site.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Transportation Facilities
Chapter 60
06/01/2012
SR - 256
60.55.40.1.
1. Transit Shelters. [ORD 4332; January 2005] All transit shelters and sidewalk furniture shall meet the following standards.
A. The proposal is located entirely within the existing public right-of-way, public access easement, or property owned by a public agency.
B. The proposal maintains an unobstructed path of travel of no less than six feet (6’) unless a greater unobstructed path is required by this code for a specific sidewalk.
C. The proposal is not located within eight feet (8’) of a point of ingress or egress of an existing structure.
D. The proposal is not located within a vision clearance area for a street, driveway, or other facility where vehicles regularly travel.
E. The proposal is not located within twelve feet (12’) of a window display area.
F. The proposal does not consist of solid panels other than what is required to post transit schedules.

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 5 7 05/19/2015
60.60. TREES AND VEGETATION. [ORD 4224; August 2002] [ORD 4348; May 2005]
60.60.05. Purpose.
Healthy trees and urban forests provide a variety of natural resource and community benefits for the City of Beaverton. Primary among those benefits is the aesthetic contribution to the increasingly urban landscape. Tree resource protection focuses on the aesthetic benefits of the resource. In conjunction with processes set forth in Section 40.90. of this Code, this section is intended to help manage changes to the City’s urban forest by establishing regulations and standards for the protection, pruning, removal, replacement, and mitigation for removal of Protected Trees (Significant Individual Trees, Historic Trees, Mitigation Trees and trees within a Significant Natural Resource Area (SNRA) or Significant Grove), Landscape Trees, and Community Trees. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
60.60.07. Enforcement.
A person found responsible for causing the removal or pruning of a protected tree in violation of the standards set forth in Section 60.60., unless exempt, shall be subject to monetary penalties. In cases of unlawful removal the person must also mitigate the removal as set forth in the mitigation requirements of Section 60.60.25.
Monetary penalties imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction upon conviction for violating any provision of Chapter 60 Section 60 of this Ordinance, shall be deposited into the City’s Tree Mitigation Fund.
60.60.10. Types of Trees and Vegetation Regulated.
Actions regarding trees and vegetation addressed by this section shall be performed in accordance with the regulations established herein and in Section 40.90. of this Code. The City finds that the following types of trees and vegetation are worthy of special protection:
1. Significant Individual Trees.
2. Historic Tree.
3. Trees within Significant Natural Resource Areas.
4. Trees within Significant Groves.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 5 8 05/19/2015
60.60.10.
5. Landscape Trees.
6. Community Trees.
7. Mitigation Trees.
60.60.15. Pruning, Removal, and Preservation Standards.
1. Pruning Standards.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or prune to remove a tree’s canopy or disturb the root zone of any Protected Tree, except in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
B. All pruning of Protected Trees shall be done in accordance with the standards set forth in this section and the City’s adopted Tree Planting and Maintenance Policy, also known as Resolution 3391.
2. Removal and Preservation Standards.
A. All removal of Protected Trees shall be done in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.
B. Removal of Landscape Trees and Protected Trees shall be mitigated, as set forth in section 60.60.25.
C. For SNRAs and Significant Groves, the following additional standards shall apply:
1. The minimum DBH of non-exempt surveyed trees that must be preserved on a site is as follows:
a) Multiple Use zoning districts: Fifteen percent (15%) of the DBH of non-exempt surveyed trees found on a project site.
b) Residential, Commercial, or Industrial zoning district: Twenty five percent (25%) of the DBH of non-exempt surveyed trees found on a project site
2. DBH to be retained shall be preserved in cohesive areas, termed Preservation Areas, when development is proposed in SNRAs or Significant Groves.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 5 9 05/19/2015
60.60.15.2.C.
3. Native understory vegetation and trees shall be preserved in Preservation Areas.
4. Preservation Areas, conditioned for protection through the Development Review process, shall be preserved in clusters that are natural in appearance rather than in linear strips. Preservation Areas should connect with adjoining portions of the Significant Grove or SNRA on other sites.
5. Preservation Areas, conditioned for protection through the Design Review process, shall be set aside in conservation easements and recorded with a deed restriction with Washington County, unless otherwise approved by the City. The deed restriction shall prohibit future development and specify the conditions for maintenance if the property is not dedicated to a public agency.
6. Preservation Areas, conditioned for protection through the Land Division process, shall be set aside in tracts and recorded with a deed restriction with Washington County, unless otherwise approved by the City. The deed restriction shall prohibit future development and specify the conditions for maintenance if the property is not dedicated to a public agency.
7. Within the development review process, where a person is presented with a particular decision whether to retain a native or non-native tree, the native species shall be retained provided all other considerations between the two categories of trees remain equal.
Non-native tree species may also be retained for aesthetic, unique condition, size, and wildlife habitat purposes.
8. Hazardous and dead trees within Significant Groves and SNRAs should be fallen only for safety and left at the resource site to serve as habitat for wildlife, unless the tree has been diagnosed with a disease and must be removed from the area to protect the remaining trees.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 0 05/19/2015
60.60.20. Tree Protection Standards during Development.
1. Trees classified as Protected Trees under this Code shall be protected during development in compliance with the following:
A. A construction fence must be placed around a tree or grove beyond the edge of the root zone. The fence shall be placed before physical development starts and remain in place until physical development is complete. The fence shall meet the following:
1. The fence shall be a four foot (4’) tall orange plastic or snow fence, secured to six foot (6’) tall metal posts, driven two feet (2’) into the ground. Heavy 12 gauge wire shall be strung between each post and attached to the top and midpoint of each post. Colored tree flagging indicating that this area is a tree protection zone is to be placed every five (5) linear feet on the fence to alert construction crews of the sensitive nature of the area.
2. Other City approved protection measures that provide equal or greater protection may be permitted, and may be required as a condition of approval.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 1 05/19/2015
60.60.20.1.
B. Within the protected root zone of each tree, the following development shall not be permitted:
1. Construction or placement of new buildings.
2. Grade change or cut and fill, except where hand excavation is approved with the submittal of an arborist’s report, as part of application approval.
3. New impervious surfaces.
4. Trenching for utilities, irrigation, or drainage.
5. Staging or storage of any kind.
6. Vehicle maneuvering or parking
60.60.25. Mitigation Requirements.
1. The following standards shall apply to mitigation for the removal of Significant Individual Trees or trees within Significant Groves or SNRAs.
A. All mitigation tree planting shall take place in conformance with accepted arboricultural practices and shall be spaced a minimum of ten (10) feet apart.
B. As of May 19, 2005, all trees planted for the purpose of tree removal mitigation shall be maintained in accordance with the approved mitigation plan. Monitoring of mitigation planting shall be the ongoing responsibility of the property owner where mitigation trees are located, unless otherwise approved through Development Review. Monitoring shall take place for a period of two (2) years. Trees that die shall be replaced in accordance with the tree replacement standards of this section.
C. As of May 19, 2005, all trees planted for the purpose of tree removal mitigation shall be set aside in a conservation easement or a separate tract and shall be designated as “Mitigation Trees” and recorded with a deed restriction identifying the trees as “Mitigation Trees”.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 2 05/19/2015
60.60.25.1.
D. Each Mitigation Tree planted shall be insured through a performance security, equal to 110 percent of the cost of the landscaping, filed with the City for a period of two (2) years to ensure establishment of the mitigation planting.
E. Street trees shall not be counted as providing mitigation of a SNRA or Significant Grove.
F. Transplanting trees within the project site is not subject to mitigation. However, a performance security is required for transplanted tree(s) to insure that the tree(s) will be replaced if the tree(s) is dead or dying at the end of two (2) years.
2. Mitigation for the removal of trees from Significant Groves or SNRAs shall be required as follows:
A. Calculate the total DBH of the trees to be removed. Denote both deciduous and coniferous trees in separate tables; however, both tables will result in the sum total of the DBH to be removed.
B. If the total DBH of trees to be removed is less than or equal to 50% of the total DBH of surveyed trees on the site, then no mitigation is required for the trees to be removed.
C. If the total DBH of trees to be removed is greater than 50% of the total DBH of surveyed trees on site, then mitigation is required for the amount of DBH to be removed that exceeds 50% of the total DBH of surveyed trees on site.
For example, if 75 inches is the total amount of DBH to be removed from a site and 60 inches of DBH represents 50% of the total surveyed DBH, then 15 inches of DBH is the total required amount of mitigation.
3. In addition to the requirements listed in Section 60.60.25.1. Mitigation Requirements, the following mitigation requirements shall apply for the removal of trees from Significant Groves or SNRAs.
A. Dead or dying trees within a Significant Grove or SNRA shall be fallen when required for safety. Such tree falling shall not require mitigation. However, the fallen log should remain in the Significant Grove or SNRA, to serve as habitat for wildlife, unless the tree has been diagnosed with a disease and the log must be removed from the area to protect the remaining trees.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 3 05/19/2015
60.60.25.1.
B. All trees planted for mitigation must meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Deciduous trees shall be replaced with native deciduous trees that are no less than two caliper inches (2”) in diameter.
2. Coniferous trees shall be replaced with native coniferous trees that are no less than three feet (3’) in height and no more than four feet (4’) in height. A three foot (3’) mitigation tree shall equate to 2” DBH and four foot (4’) mitigation tree will equate to 3” DBH.
3. The total linear DBH measurement of the trees to be removed shall be mitigated with the necessary number of trees at least two caliper inches (2”) in diameter.
4. Significant Grove or SNRA on-site mitigation, 2:1 planting ratio.
A. Residential, Commercial, or Industrial zoning districts: For tree removal proposals which remove more than 50% and up to and including 75% of the surveyed non-exempt DBH, if all mitigation tree planting is to occur on-site, the ratio for planting shall be on a 2:1 basis.
For example, if 20 inches of DBH is the total amount of required mitigation, if all the mitigation planting occurs on the site where the removal is to occur, then only 10 inches of DBH is required to be planted.
B. Multiple Use zoning districts: For tree removal proposals which remove more than 50% and up to and including 85% of the surveyed non-exempt DBH, if all mitigation tree planting is to occur on-site, the ratio for planting shall be on a 2:1 basis.
For example, if 20 inches DBH is the total amount of required mitigation, if all the mitigation planting occurs on the site where the removal is to occur, then only 10 inches of DBH is required to be planted.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 4 05/19/2015
60.60.25.
5. Significant Grove or SNRA off-site mitigation, 1:1 planting ratio.
A. Residential, Commercial, or Industrial zoning districts: For tree removal proposals which remove more than 50% and up to and including 75% of the surveyed non-exempt DBH, if mitigation tree planting is to occur off-site, the ratio for planting shall be on a 1:1 basis.
B. Multiple Use zoning districts: For tree removal proposals which remove more than 50% and up to and including 85% of the surveyed non-exempt DBH in Multiple Use zones, if mitigation tree planting is to occur off-site, the ratio for planting shall be on a 1:1 basis.
6. Significant Grove or SNRA Tree Plan 3 mitigation, 1:1 planting ratio.
A. Residential, Commercial, or Industrial zoning districts: For tree removal proposals which remove more than 75% and up to and including 100% of the surveyed non-exempt DBH, all of the required mitigation tree planting shall be on a 1:1 basis whether planted on-site or off-site.
B. Multiple Use Zoning Districts: For tree removal proposals which remove more than 85% and up to and including 100% of the surveyed non-exempt DBH, all of the required mitigation tree planting shall be on a 1:1 basis whether planted on-site or off-site.
7. In-Lieu fee. If the total caliper inch on-site- or off-site tree planting mitigation does not equal the DBH inch removal or if no tree planting mitigation is proposed, the remaining or total caliper inch tree planting mitigation shall be provided as a fee in-lieu payment. The in-lieu fee shall be specified in the Community Development In-Lieu Fee schedule. Fee revenues shall be deposited in the City’s Tree Mitigation Fund.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 5 06/01/2012
60.60.25.7.
The following two tables illustrate how required mitigation will be calculated:
[ORD 4584; June 2012]
Mitigation Example for Multiple Use Zones – SAMPLE SITE* DBH of Surveyed Trees 1318.00 DBH Proposed for Removal (MAXIMUM removal allowed is 85% Surveyed Tree DBH) 1120.00 Mitigation Threshold (50% Surveyed Tree DBH) 659.00 DBH to be Mitigated (85% DBH Removal – 50% DBH Threshold = 25% Surveyed DBH) 461.00
On Site Mitigation (50% of the DBH to be mitigated)
230.50
Off Site OR Partial Off Site Mitigation (100% of the DBH to be mitigated)
461.00
*Please note: This “Sample Site” is fictional and is only meant to be a representation of how the regulations of Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation) could be applied to a site.
Mitigation Example for All Other Zones – SITE SAMPLE* DBH of Surveyed Trees 1318.00 DBH Proposed for Removal (MAXIMUM removal allowed is 75% Surveyed Tree DBH) 988.00 Mitigation Threshold (50% Surveyed Tree DBH) 659.00 DBH to be Mitigated (75% DBH Removal – 50% DBH Threshold = 25% Surveyed DBH) 329.00
On Site Mitigation (50% of the DBH to be mitigated)
164.50
Off Site OR Partial Off Site Mitigation (100% of the DBH to be mitigated)
329.00
*Please note: This “Sample Site” is fictional and is only meant to be a representation of how the regulations of Section 60.60. (Trees and Vegetation) could be applied to a site.
8. In addition to the standards in Mitigation Standards 1, the following standards shall apply to mitigation for the removal of a Significant Individual Tree:
A. A replacement tree shall be a substantially similar species or a tree approved by the City considering site characteristics.
B. Mitigation for the removal of a Significant Individual Tree shall be the required replacement of each tree on based on the total linear DBH measurement. Replacement of trees shall be as follows:
Replacement Table for
Significant Deciduous Trees
Caliper-inches removed
Minimum total caliper-inches of replacement trees
6-12”
4”
13-18”
6”
19-24”
8”
Over 25”
9”
Minimum replacement tree size is 2 caliper-inches for deciduous trees.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Trees and Vegetation
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 6 06/01/2012
60.60.25.8.B.
Replacement Table for
Significant Coniferous Trees
Caliper-inches removed
Minimum number of replacement Trees
6-12”
1
13-24”
2
Over 25”
3
Minimum replacement tree size is 3-feet minimum height for coniferous trees. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
9. The following standards apply to the replacement of a Landscape Tree:
A. A replacement tree shall be a substantially similar species or a tree approved by the City considering site characteristics.
B. If a replacement tree of the species of the tree removed or damaged is not reasonably available, the City may allow replacement with a different species.
C. Replacement of a Landscape Tree shall be based on total linear DBH calculations at a one-to-one ratio depending upon the capacity of the site to accommodate replacement tree or unless otherwise specified through development review. Replacement of tree on a one-to-one basis shall be as follows:
1. Calculate the sum of the total linear DBH measurement of the tree to be removed.
2. The total linear DBH measurement of the tree to be removed shall be replaced with tree at least 1.5 caliper inches in diameter. The total caliper inches of the replacement tree shall be at least equal to the sum total of the linear DBH measurement of the removed tree.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Utility Undergrounding
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 7 12/02/2016
60.65. UTILITY UNDERGROUNDING. [ORD 4118; September 2000]
60.65.05. Purpose. The purposes and objectives of locating existing and proposed private utilities underground are to:
1. Implement the policies, goals, and standards of the City Council and the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Beaverton.
2. Improve aesthetics of the community by reducing the number of utility poles and above ground wires.
3. Provide consistency in management of the City’s rights-of-way.
4. Protect essential public services from natural and manmade accidental disruptions.
5. Improve public safety by reducing the possibility for injury from downed lines.
6. Allow fewer fixed obstructions in the public right-of-way.
60.65.10. Authority. The provisions of private utility undergrounding shall pertain to all activities subject to Design Review (Section 40.20.), as well as Land Divisions (Section 40.45.).
60.65.15. Regulation. All existing and proposed utility lines within and contiguous to the subject property, including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, and cable television services and related facilities shall be placed underground as specified herein. The utilities required to be placed underground shall be those existing overhead utilities which are impacted by the proposed development and those utilities that are required to be installed as a result of the proposed development.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Utility Undergrounding
Chapter 60 S R - 2 6 8 12/02/2016
60.65.15.
1. At the option of the applicant and subject to rules promulgated by the Oregon Public Utility Commission (PUC), this requirement does not apply to surface mounted transformers, surface mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets, which may be placed above ground, temporary utility service facilities during construction, high capacity electric lines operating at 50,000 volts or above, and that portion of a project where undergrounding will require boring under a Collector or Arterial roadway, and City funded roadway projects which the City Council has specifically considered and declined to fund utility undergrounding as a component of the roadway project, Washington County funded roadway projects, such as MSTIP projects, and Oregon Department of Transportation funded roadway projects. [ORD 4343; April 2005] [ORD 4363; September 2005]
2. The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving private utility to cause the utility service(s) to be placed underground;
3. The City reserves the right to approve surface mounted facilities;
4. All underground public and private utilities shall be constructed or installed prior to the final surfacing of the streets; and
5. Stubs for service connections and other anticipated private extensions at street intersections shall be long enough to avoid disturbing street surfaces and right-of-way improvements such as sidewalks and landscaping areas when service connections are made.
6. Unless otherwise specifically required in an existing franchise between the City and the particular private utility, or PUC rule, the applicant or developer responsible for initiating the requirement for placing overhead utilities underground is responsible for the cost of converting all existing customer equipment and private utilities on private or public property, or both to meet utility undergrounding requirements.
7. If the private utility service provider requires an applicant, as a component of the applicant’s placing private utilities underground, to install facilities to accommodate extra capacity beyond those necessitated by the proposed development, the private utility service provider shall be financially responsible for providing the means to provide such extra capacity.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Utility Undergrounding
Chapter 60 SR - 269 01/01/2005
60.65.20. Information on Plans. The applicant for a development subject to design review, subdivision, partition, or site development permit approval shall show, on the proposed plan or in the explanatory information, the following:
1. Easements for all public and private utility facilities;
2. The location of all existing above ground and underground public and private utilities within 100 feet of the site;
3. The proposed relocation of existing above ground utilities to underground; and
3. That above ground public or private utility facilities do not obstruct vision clearance areas pursuant to Section 60.55.35.3 of this Code.
60.65.25. Optional Fee In Lieu of the Undergrounding Requirement. If any of the following criteria are met as determined by the City, after receiving a recommendation from the Facilities Review Committee, at the applicant’s option, applicant shall either immediately place the private utilities underground or pay a fee to the City toward future undergrounding in lieu of immediately placing private utilities underground. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
Criteria. An applicant may request an optional fee in-lieu of the undergrounding requirement by submitting a written request to the Director that addresses how one or more of the following criteria are met. The written request shall include the information required in Sections 60.65.20.2. and 3., shall identify the segment of the required utility undergrounding that meet the criteria below, and shall explain in narrative and graphic form how one or more of the criteria are met. [ORD 4224; August 2002]
1. Placement of private utilities underground would conflict with the current City of Beaverton Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings or the Clean Water Service’s Design and Construction Manual, as applicable;
2. An improvement project(s), which would include placement of said private utilities underground, other than as a part of the proposed development, are funded in the City’s or another public agency’s current fiscal year budget, are under design, or are under construction, and the City has determined that utility undergrounding can be accomplished more efficiently as part of such other improvement project(s).
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Utility Undergrounding
Chapter 60 SR - 270 01/01/2005
60.65.25
3. Excluding service connection(s) of private utility(s) to structure(s), the length of any one of the three private utilities within or contiguous to the subject property to be placed underground is less than the corresponding threshold distance outlined in Table 60.65.25.3. If any of the existing or proposed utilities meets the corresponding threshold, as specified in this criterion, then, at the option of the applicant, the applicant shall either pay a fee in-lieu for undergrounding all of said utilities that are not already underground or place all of said utilities underground. If any of the utilities exist and are deemed exempt from the undergrounding requirement, as specified in Section 60.65.15.1., only that exempt utility shall not be required to pay an in-lieu fee. All other existing utilities that share the location of the exempt utility shall either pay an in-lieu fee or be placed underground.
Table 60.65.25.3.
Threshold
Electric
Telephone
Cable Television
A.
500 feet
Tap lines with at least 2 poles
Class 1
(0 to 300 conductors)
Service drops
B.
600 feet
Sub-feeder with at least 3 poles
Class 2
(301 to 600 conductors)
Feeder
C.
800 feet
Feeder with at least 5 poles
Class 3 (601+ conductors or fiber optic)
Trunk or fiber optic
60.65.30. Fees to be Paid In-Lieu of Undergrounding.
1. Applicants subject to the undergrounding in-lieu fee shall pay to the City an amount per linear foot of each private utility that is subject to underground relocation which is not placed underground. The amount of the fee shall be established by the City Council by resolution and shall be based on average costs of undergrounding by the private utility providers.
2. All in-lieu fees paid to the City shall be dedicated to future private utility undergrounding projects in which the City takes part. Any in-lieu fees paid on behalf of a particular property shall not have such property subject to future assessment or other City charge for the same work unless a credit is given for the fee having been paid.
3. By accepting an in-lieu fee, the City is not thereby assuming responsibility for placing overhead private utilities underground. In the event that an in-lieu fee has been paid to the City, the City shall credit all properties as to which the owner has paid in-lieu fees for undergrounding private overhead utilities against any future public
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Utility Undergrounding
Chapter 60 SR - 271 01/01/2005
60.65.30.4
assessment(s) or charge(s) in connection with such private utility undergrounding project(s).
4. All in-lieu fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a Site Development Permit.
60.65.35. City to Establish Priorities. Any funds collected from the in-lieu undergrounding fees may be used by the City to offset the costs of undergrounding any private utilities as part of any project listed in the CIP, subject to the following priorities:
1. Collected in-lieu fees shall be used for private utility undergrounding project(s) that are within 2,500 feet of the site that paid the in-lieu fee
2. Private utility undergrounding project(s) that are within the 2,500 feet of sites where fees have been collected and where other public construction project(s), such as road improvements or other utility work have been identified, shall be ranked higher than projects where no in-lieu fees have been collected and no construction projects have been identified for inclusion in the CIP.
3. Private utility undergrounding project(s) that are within the 2,500 feet of sites where fees have been collected for private utility undergrounding shall be ranked higher in priority than those where no in-lieu fees have been collected.

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Significant Natural Resources
Chapter 60 SR -272 07/10/2015
60.67. SIGNIFICANT NATURAL RESOURCES. [ORD 4157; May 2001]
60.67.05. Local Wetland Inventory. Prior to issuing a development permit, the Local Wetland Inventory map shall be reviewed to determine if the site proposed for development is identified as the location of a significant wetland.
1. Development activities and uses permitted on a proposed development site identified as the possible location of a significant natural resource, including significant wetlands shall be subject to relevant procedures and requirements specified in Chapter 50, of this ordinance.
2. Upon City’s determination that a site contains wetland as identified on the Local Wetland Inventory map, notice of the proposed development shall be provided to the Division of State Lands (DSL) in a manner and form prescribed by DSL pursuant to ORS requirements.
60.67.10. Significant Riparian Corridors. Prior to issuing a development permit, the list of Significant Riparian Corridors shall be reviewed to determine if the site proposed for development is identified as being listed corridor.
1. Development activities and uses permitted on a proposed development site identified as the possible location of a significant natural resource, including significant riparian corridors, shall be subject to relevant procedures and requirements specified in Chapter 50 of this ordinance. [ORD 4659; June 2015]

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 273 02/14/2013
60.70. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. [ORD 4248; May 2003]
60.70.05. Purpose.
1. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that Wireless Communications Facilities (WCF) are regulated in a manner that:
A. Conforms to the current federal, state, local laws and with FCC Declaratory Rulings to date. [ORD 4596; February 2013]
B. Promotes universal communication service to all City residents, businesses and visitors.
C. Establishes clear and objective standards for the placement, design and continuing maintenance of WCF.
D. Minimizes the adverse visual, aesthetic and structural safety impacts of WCF on residential neighborhoods and on the community as a whole.
E. Encourages the design of WCF to be as aesthetically and architecturally compatible as possible with the surrounding natural and built environments.
F. Encourages collocation of WCF on existing support structures to minimize the number of new facilities required.
G. Ensures that regulations do not constitute a barrier to entry and apply to providers on a competitively neutral basis.
60.70.10. Applicability.
1. The regulations contained within this section shall apply to the construction or installation or modification of Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF) within the municipal limits of the City of Beaverton.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR -274 05/19/2005
60.70.10.
2. Regulations contained in this section shall apply to wireless communication facilities used for essential public communication services conducted by police, fire, and other public safety or emergency networks.
3. Compliance with the regulations contained within this section shall be required in addition to any other applicable standards and regulations contained within the Code.
60.70.15. Federal and State Compliance.
1. In addition to compliance with the regulations in this section, the applicant shall be responsible for the identification of and compliance with all applicable federal and state regulations pertaining to WCF.
2. Permanent alterations to previously City reviewed and approved WCF resulting from the adoption of new or updated federal and/or state regulations shall be reviewed through the City’s development review process prior to the making of such alterations, unless local review and approval is exempted by federal or state statute.
60.70.20. Exemptions.
1. All of the following are exempt from the regulations contained in this section of the Code:
A. Emergency or routine repairs, or maintenance of existing facilities and of transmitters, antennas or other components of existing facilities that do not increase the size, footprint, or bulk of such facilities, and which otherwise comply with City, state and federal regulations.
B. Federally-authorized industrial, scientific and medical equipment operating at frequencies designated for that purpose by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in Part 18 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR -275 06/01/2012
60.70.20.1.
C. Amateur radio facility antennas, or a combination of antennas and support structures seventy (70) feet or less in height as measured from the base of the support structure consistent with ORS 221.295. This includes antennas attached to towers capable of telescoping or otherwise being extended by mechanical device to a height greater than 70 feet so long as the amateur radio facility is capable of being lowered to 70 feet or less. This exemption applies only to the Beaverton Development Code and does not apply to other applicable city, state, and federal regulations. Amateur radio facilities not meeting the requirements of this exemption are considered non-exempt, and must comply with Section 60.70.45.
D. Military and civilian radar equipment, operating within the regulated frequency ranges, for the purpose of national, state or local defense or aircraft safety.
E. Antennas and associated equipment completely located within the interior of an existing or proposed structure with no associated exterior equipment, the purpose of which is to enhance or facilitate communication functions within the structure or other structures on the site.
F. Satellite antennas up to and including two (2) meters in diameter in Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
G. Direct-to-home satellite service and satellite antennas up to and including one (1) meter in diameter located in Residential zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
H. AM or FM radio broadcast towers and equipment, or television broadcast towers and equipment, as regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
I. Antennas installed by a public agency for the purpose of emergency communications that are less the 30-inches in diameter affixed to existing structures with associated equipment completely located within the interior of an existing or proposed structure. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 276 02/14/2013
60.70.25. Nonconforming Use Status for Existing Wireless Communication Facilities.
1. WCF and associated equipment and site improvements in existence as of May 8, 2003 that are nonconforming as to the use or development standards contained in this Code section shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 30 (Nonconforming Uses) except:
A. A proposal to collocate new antennas on existing nonconforming structures shall comply with the standards of this Section.
B. Abandoned facilities shall not be considered nonconforming uses and shall comply with Section 60.70.65.
C. If the owner, operator or both propose a permanent alteration of an existing nonconforming WCF, the use, structure, or both shall lose its nonconforming status and shall comply with the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this Code, a permanent alteration shall consist of the removal of an existing tower support structure, except as modified by Section 60.70.25.1.D.-.E.
D. For purposes of collocation, or routine maintenance, the removal and replacement of existing transmitters, existing antennas, existing equipment shelters, and existing on-site improvements, including but not limited to, landscaping, fencing, paving, shall not be considered permanent alterations unless the removal and replacement of any or all of the above results in a substantial increase, as defined under Chapter 90 of this Code, existing on-site developed area beyond the previous land use approval. The expansion of previously approved existing on-site developed area shall result in the loss of nonconforming status and shall require compliance with the provisions of this Section. [ORD 4596; Feb 2103]
E. For satellite antennas not exempted by this Code, the removal and replacement of these stations shall not be considered a permanent alteration, provided that the diameter of the replacement satellite antennas shall be no more than fifty (50) percent greater or four (4) meters greater, whichever is less, of the existing diameter of the satellite antenna. The installation of replacement satellite antennas greater than fifty (50) percent or more than four (4) meters of the existing station diameter shall result in the loss of nonconforming status and shall require compliance with the provisions of this Section.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 277 02/14/2013
60.70.25.1.
F. The addition of new WCF antennas, or equipment shelters, or on-site improvements shall not be considered permanent alterations to an existing nonconforming WCF, but shall be reviewed under applicable provisions of this Section.
60.70.30. Permit Process. Applicants shall refer to Chapter 20 (Land Uses) of this Code to determine whether a proposed WCF is a Permitted Use, a Conditional Use or a Prohibited Use within a specific underlying zoning district. The different permit types and associated thresholds are specified in Chapter 40 (Applications). The procedures for the review and approval of applications are contained in Chapter 50 (Procedures) of this Code.
60.70.35. Development Standards for WCF. Development standards applicable to all zoning districts. Except as noted in Section 60.70.35.18., the following development standards shall apply to all wireless communication facilities (WCF), excluding satellite antennas in all zoning districts. Refer to Section 60.70.40. for development standards for satellite antennas:
1. General.
A. Lattice tower support structures are prohibited.
B. Guyed tower support structures are prohibited.
C. “Top hat” antenna arrays are prohibited.
D. Collocation of new WCF antennas on existing lattice tower support structures, or guyed tower support structures is allowed.
E. The attachment of WCF and associated equipment to any tree is prohibited.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 278 07/10/2015
60.70.35.
2. Height.
A. The maximum height of any new WCF tower, WCF antenna collocation, or both shall conform to the maximum height standards specified in the site development requirements in Chapter 20 (Land Uses) for Residential, Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
B. The height of any type of WCF shall include the support structure and any attached antennas. A lightning rod that is up to and including ten (10) feet tall and any required lighting by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) shall not be included within the calculation of the maximum height.
3. Lighting. The installation of light fixtures to a WCF tower is prohibited except for lighting required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Oregon Department of Aviation (ODA). A maximum of one (1) motion-sensitive or permanently shielded light fixture attached at or near the entrance door to the at-grade equipment shelter shall be allowed.
4. Signage.
A. For new WCF towers and/or proposed collocation of WCF on existing towers one (1) non-illuminated sign having a maximum sign face of three (3) square feet and comprised of a white background with black lettering shall be provided and shall be permanently affixed to the entrance gate of the required fence. The sign shall identify the name of the WCF provider(s) and shall specify an emergency contact telephone number. For proposed collocation actions, the applicant for collocation shall be responsible for the production and installation of a required sign for the existing WCF service provider(s) if not already present at the site.
B. No additional signage including logos and advertisements shall be allowed on any new or existing WCF towers, at grade equipment shelters or required fencing.
5. At-Grade Equipment Screening. All at-grade equipment shall be fully screened from the public view. Screening shall be accomplished by the following methods:
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 279 07/10/2015
60.70.35.5.
A. Sight Obscuring Fencing. A sight-obscuring fence that is a minimum of six (6) feet high shall prohibit public access to WCF towers, or shall screen all at grade equipment shelters, or both. Sigh-obscuring fencing shall consist of chain link with slats, vinyl, wood, masonry, or brick.
B. Equipment Shelters. All at-grade equipment shall be enclosed within equipment shelters constructed of wood, metal, or masonry. Building materials shall be stained or painted in a color that is consistent and compatible with surrounding development and then sealed for weather protection. Roofing and other architectural treatments proposed for the material shall also be consistent compatible with surrounding development
C. Screening Landscaping. At-grade equipment shelters shall be screened with evergreen shrubs installed immediately outside of the required fencing on all sides. The portion of the fenced enclosure used as an access gate shall feature wooden slats or other sight-obscuring material in lieu of landscaping. Evergreen shrubs shall:
1. Be planted with a minimum height of four (4) feet.
2. Be spaced evenly apart to create adequate screening density, provided that the maximum spacing shall be thirty-six (36) inches on center.
3. Be of a species that attains a minimum mature height of ten (10) feet.
4. Be comprised of a minimum of three (3) varieties of evergreen shrub species.
[ORD 4596; February 2013]
6. Evergreen Trees. In addition to the at grade equipment screening landscaping requirements specified in Section 60.70.35.5.C, the decision-making authority may require the planting of evergreen trees when a new WCF tower is located on property within or immediately abutting Residential or Multiple Use zoning districts. When required, evergreen trees shall: [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 280 07/10/2015
60.70.35.6.
A. Be placed immediately outside of a required fenced enclosure on all sides within or abutting the same planting area for the required evergreen shrubs.
B. Be planted with a minimum height of ten (10) feet.
C. Be planted a maximum of thirty (30) feet on center.
[ORD 4596; February 2013]
7. Required Plantings. Required landscaping shall be planted and maintained in a manner to achieve 100% survival rate within the first year of planting. All landscaped areas shall be:
A. Irrigated by a sprinkler, drip irrigation system or hand watered throughout the landscape establishment period.
B. Demonstrate a regular scheduled watering and maintenance program which will be provided throughout the landscape establishment period after the first year of planting through a signed maintenance agreement by the property owner or authorized individual.
C. Maintained by regular weeding and pruning.
D. Replaced if dead or dying.
[ORD 4596; February 2013]
8. Visual Impacts. The decision-making authority shall identify whether new WCF towers shall either be left in a non-reflective metal finish or shall be painted based on the characteristics of the surrounding terrain in which the parent parcel is located, unless required by the FAA to be painted in an alternating red-and-white striped pattern.
9. Noise. Noise-generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means of baffling or structural barriers to reduce the sound level measured at the property line abutting Residential or Multiple Use zoning districts. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 281 07/10/2015
60.70.35.
10. Stealth Design. Specific WCF threshold in Chapter 40 of this Code provide for stealth design to be utilized. Chapter 90 of this Code defines stealth design. The purpose of stealth design is to minimize the visibility of wireless communications facilities by disguising, concealing, or camouflaging these facilities. Acceptable methods of stealth design include, but are not limited to:
A. Disguised as Other Structures or Elements of Physical Environment. WCF support structures, antennas and associated equipment that are disguised to look like another structure including but not limited to a flagpole or church cross or are made to appear part of the natural environment such as an evergreen tree. Disguised WCF facilities shall not contain any visible exterior attributes of a WCF support structure, antenna and associated equipment.
B. Concealed Roof-Mounted Antennas. WCF antenna array installed on a building roof shall be concealed from the ground level of abutting public streets and adjacent properties. Acceptable types of screening are placement behind the roof parapet, within or on the mechanical penthouse or on a roof-mounted building element such as a chimney, exhaust pipe, cupola, bell tower or flagpole.
C. Camouflaged Roof-Mounted Equipment Shelters. Roof-mounted equipment shelters shall be camouflaged from the ground level of abutting public streets and adjacent properties. Acceptable types of screening are placement within the interior of the building or the structure, behind the roof parapet, within a mechanical penthouse or completely within a roof-mounted element such as a chimney, exhaust pipe, cupola or bell tower.
11. Allowable Height for Building-Roof-Mounted Antennas. Antennas mounted on building roofs shall not extend beyond the maximum height for buildings of the underlying zoning district or in the case of existing buildings which are non-conforming in height, shall not extend beyond the existing height of the building. The antenna height shall be measured from the existing height of the building roofline. All roof-mounted antennas shall comply with the stealth design requirements of Section 60.70.35.10. [ORD 4596; Feb. 2013]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 282 07/10/2015
60.70.35.
12. Building-Wall-Mounted Antennas. Any WCF antennas mounted to the roof edge or sidewall elevation of a building shall be completely covered with the same exterior finish and painted the same color as the exterior of the building or structure.
13. Structure-Mounted Antennas. Any WCF antennas mounted to a structure that is not a building shall comply with the following standards:
A. Antennas shall not extend beyond the maximum height for structures of the underlying zoning district.
B. Antennas on existing tower structures or pole structures, other than those used for cellular phone service shall extend a maximum of ten (10) feet above the existing structure height as measured from its tallest point.
C. Antennas on water reservoir tanks shall extend a maximum of five (5) feet above the existing structure height as measured from its tallest point.
D. Antennas on structures shall be painted the same color as the structure. [ORD 4596; February 2013]
14. Setbacks. All new WCF towers, antenna arrays, and ground and/or roof-mounted equipment shelters shall comply with the setbacks established in the underlying zoning district. These standards shall also apply to WCF collocation proposals:
A. In all underlying zoning districts, building wall-mounted antennas and at-grade equipment shelters shall comply with all setbacks contained in the underlying zoning district. For the purposes of this Code, the setback shall be measured from the portion of the at-grade equipment shelter or building wall-mounted antennas that extend outward towards the property line to the greatest extent.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 283 01/03/2017
60.70.35.14.
B. New WCF towers shall be set back from all property lines by a distance equal to the height of the tower plus five (5) additional lineal feet, except that the decision-making authority may authorize an Adjustment or Variance to this standard, if the applicant can demonstrate that such an Adjustment or Variance would reduce the visual impacts of the tower on adjacent property because of vegetation, topography, intervening buildings, or other site-specific factors. Adjustments and Variances shall be authorized through the Adjustment and Variance provisions specified in Chapter 40 (Applications).
C. New WCF towers located on commercially or industrially zoned property shall meet the setback of the underlying zone where the new WCF tower is more than the height of the tower plus five (5) feet from a Residential or Multiple Use zoning district. The decision-making authority may authorize an Adjustment or Variance to this standard, if the applicant can demonstrate that such an Adjustment or Variance would reduce the visual impacts of the tower on adjacent property because of vegetation, topography, intervening buildings, or other site-specific factors. Adjustments and Variances shall be authorized through the Adjustment and Variance provisions specified in Chapter 40 (Applications). [ORD 4659; June 2015]
15. Parking. A minimum of one (1) readily accessible parking space shall be provided to serve new WCF towers or collocated WCF for the purpose of regular maintenance or emergency repairs. The decision-making authority may waive the minimum-parking requirement. Waivers may be authorized if the applicant can demonstrate that there is existing on-site parking, on-street parking, leased parking, or parking on separate adjacent property authorized for use by a written agreement.
16. Clustering of Towers. Clustering of towers shall be prohibited in all Residential and Multiple Use zoning districts. Proposals for the clustering of towers in Commercial and Industrial zoning districts shall comply with all development standards of this Section, and other applicable sections of the Development Code.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 284 01/03/2017
60.70.35.17.
17. Collocation Capacity. New WCF towers and associated site area shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of one (1) additional future service. Collocation capacity shall be reserved through all of the following methods:
A. Construction of a tower of sufficient height to accommodate a minimum of two (2) antenna arrays; and,
B. Installation of a foundation of adequate size and structural bearing capacity to accommodate a tower with a minimum of two (2) antenna arrays; and,
C. Provision of a fenced enclosure of sufficient size to accommodate the equipment shelters for a minimum of two (2) antenna arrays.
18. Specific Development Standards in Multiple Use Zoning Districts. The following standards are specific to WCF on lots in Multiple Use zoning districts and are in addition to the other development standards specified in this section of the Code:
A. Equipment for new WCF towers or new attached WCF or incorporated WCF shall either be placed underground, entirely within an existing building, on a screened rooftop, or entirely within a new above ground structure constructed solely for the purpose of housing this equipment. This enclosed building shall be architecturally treated to blend in with the surrounding built environment. Acceptable types of architectural treatments include but are not limited to painted metal roofs, faux windows, awnings, canopies, brick, or colored or textured masonry.
B. Cables and other connection devices between equipment shelters and new WCF towers or new attached WCF or incorporated WCF shall be placed entirely underground, or shall be placed above-ground in a completely enclosed structure. If placed above-ground, the completely enclosed structure shall be compatible in scale, design, and materials to the above-ground equipment shelter, and the surrounding built environment.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 285 01/03/2017
60.70.35.18.C
C. For new WCF towers located on a lot that because of physical site constraints, tower related site design, or lease or ownership restrictions cannot be developed for any other Permitted Use while the tower is in operation, property perimeter structural bearing walls having a minimum height of ten (10) feet and composed of brick or colored and textured masonry or a combination of brick and colored and textured masonry shall be installed along all property lines for the portion of the lot being developed for WCF, abutting public streets. Required perimeter walls shall have architectural treatments including but not limited to faux windows, or awnings, covering a minimum of fifty (50) percent of each wall elevation; provided, the Director may determine a different type of perimeter treatment along property lines not abutting public streets for compatibility with the current uses of abutting properties.
D. For new WCF towers located on property that could be developed for another use concurrent with the tower operation, the tower and, if applicable, above-ground equipment building shall be placed on the lot so as to not preclude future development of the remaining portion of the site and to allow for conformance to site design, parking and other applicable standards. Any lot area not proposed for WCF development that is disturbed by site development activity shall be landscaped. The decision-making authority shall determine the type of landscaping based on the existing landscaped nature of the lot and abutting lots.
D. For WCF towers located on property occupied by an existing use, the tower and, if applicable, above grade equipment building, shall be located on the site so as to not preclude future redevelopment of the remaining portion of the site or future compliance with code requirements for a different use of the site. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 286 01/03/2017
60.70.35.19
19. Specific Development Standards for WCF in Public Road Right-of-Way. The following standards are specific to the installation of New or Collocation of WCF within the right-of-way and are in addition to the other applicable development standards specified in the Beaverton Development Code: [ORD 4702; January 2017]
A. Installation of WCF on structures within the public road right-of-way shall not jeopardize the physical integrity or shorten the lifespan of these structures.
B. Antennas shall be Stealth Design, interior mounted, flush-mounted or otherwise designed not exceed the existing diameter of the structure at the mounting point for the antennas. No mounted arm antennas are permitted.
C. Antennas mounted on a structure shall not extend beyond the permitted height of the underlying zoning district.
D. Collocates to poles that existed on or before the date of adoption of this text amendment or replacement of poles, inclusive of antennas and any mounting devices, may extend above the maximum permitted height listed under Sections 20.05.15, 20.10.15, 20.15.15 and 20.20.15, up to and including ten (10) feet above the height of the existing pole unless separately authorized through an adjustment or variance application.
E. Antennas shall be painted to match the color of the structure.
F. Noise Levels. Noise levels shall meet the numerical standards established by the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, measured to property lines abutting or within 500 feet of Residential or Multiple Use zoning districts, as stated in Section 60.50.25.11 and 60.70.35.9.
G. Vibration. No vibration discernible without instruments at the nearest property line, other than that caused by highway vehicles, trains and/or aircraft, shall be permitted.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 287 01/03/2017
60.70.35.19.H
H. Odors. Emission of odorous gasses or matter that is readily detectable at the nearest property line is prohibited. Measures and controls shall be taken that are intended to prevent offensive fumes and odor. Air quality shall also meet the standards established by the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality as stated in Section 60.50.25.12.
I. Replacement of the existing structure, tower or pole may be authorized, provided that the replacement structure fully contains antennas and associated equipment and no higher than permitted under Sections 20.05.15, 20.10.15, 20.15.15 and 20.20.15.
J. The maximum diameter of any new or replacement tower or pole shall be 24-inches.
K. Attachments to historic or ornamental streetlight poles shall not be permitted.
L. Attachments to traffic signal poles shall not be permitted.
M. Equipment cabinets shall be placed completely within underground vaults. No at-grade or pole-mounted equipment cabinets, equipment in the public right-of-way, or on any equipment on private property (above or below grade) abutting the structure is permitted. The mounting of equipment to the structures shall conform to the following:
1. The smallest antennas, equipment, and equipment cabinets to satisfy engineering requirements and service objectives shall be utilized.
2. All cabling and wiring shall be placed completely underground or on the in interior of the structure, tower or pole. Collocates to poles that existed on or before the date of adoption of this text amendment, that cannot accommodate cabling run on the interior, may have cables attached to the exterior, provided that they are painted to match the color of the structure.
3. Mounting hardware and accessory equipment shall be painted to match the color of the structure, tower or pole.
[ORD 4702; January 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 288 01/03/2017
60.70.40. Development Standards for Satellite Antennas. The following development standards shall apply to all satellite antennas in all zoning districts, except for satellite antennas and direct-to-home satellite services exempted by Section 60.70.20.1.F.-.G.:
1. New satellite antennas shall be mounted on the ground or on building roofs only.
2. New satellite antennas shall not be mounted on lattice towers or guyed tower support structures.
3. New ground-mounted satellite antennas shall be screened from view from abutting properties, or public right-of-way, or both in a manner that does not detract from the function of the antennas. Screening shall be done through one of more methods listed in Sections 60.70.35.5-7 on all directions, except for the direction that the antenna is oriented for sending, receiving, or both. The decision-making authority shall determine the appropriate type and height of screening based on the area proposed for development, the nature of the surrounding development, and the proximity of the development area to this surrounding development. [ORD 4596; February 2013]
4. New building roof-mounted satellite antennas shall be screened from view from abutting properties, or public right-of-way, or both in a manner that does not detract from the function of the antennas. Screening shall be done through the placement of the antennas behind parapet walls or other permanent architectural features.
4. Satellite antennas mounted on building roofs shall not extend beyond the maximum height for buildings of the underlying zoning district or, in the case of existing buildings which are non-conforming in height, shall not extend beyond the existing height of the building. The satellite antenna height shall be measured from the height of the building roofline. [ORD 4596; February 2013]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 289 01/03/2017
60.70.45. Requirements for Non-Exempt Amateur Radio Facilities.
1. Non-exempt amateur radio facilities may not be erected until a valid building permit has been obtained from the City of Beaverton.
2. Notwithstanding Chapter 30 of the Development Code, the following rules apply to non-exempt amateur radio facilities in existence on or before May 8, 2003:
A. Facilities constructed before May 8, 2003 under building permits validly issued on the date of construction are not subject to these regulations.
B. Exempt facilities that are proposed to be modified to become a non-exempt facility, shall acquire a new building permit from the City.
C. Facilities without permits from the City of Beaverton, Washington County, or Multnomah County shall acquire a building permit from the City.
60.70.50. Required Studies and Information. The following requirements for studies and information shall be provided in addition to the submittal requirements specified in the application checklist to be provided by the Director: [ORD 4702; January 2017]
1. For new WCF towers or poles, the following information is required to be submitted at time of application:
A. A visual impact report prepared by an Oregon licensed engineer or Oregon licensed architect shall be submitted. For purposes of this section of the Code, the extent of the adjacent area to be analyzed in this report shall be determined by the Director at the time of pre-application based on the type of tower proposed and the nature of the surrounding development. The visual impact report shall be comprised of:
1. A written summary of the findings of the visual impact analysis.
2. A to-scale (engineer scale measurement) vicinity map identifying in plan-view the location of the proposed WCF tower.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 290 01/03/2017
60.70.50.1.
3. A to-scale (engineer scale measurement) aerial plan showing in plan view the location of the proposed WCF tower and the location and type of adjacent development.
4. A to-scale (engineer scale measurement) elevation drawing indicating the height, dimensions, type, design, materials and color of the tower and any on-ground associated equipment.
5. A visual graphic (photo) simulation of the proposed WCF tower from northern, southern, western and eastern orientations inclusive of adjacent buildings, structures, natural features and public or private streets.
6. Recommended methods to mitigate the visual impacts of the proposed WCF tower on adjacent properties.
B. For a new WCF tower, a coverage analysis report prepared by an Oregon licensed professional engineer with demonstrated experience in the preparation of coverage analysis reports specifying the search ring within which service is proposed inclusive of the location, height and frequency of existing and approved WCF, and addressing the quality of existing wireless service and new wireless service within the search ring.
C. All WCF applications abutting or within Residential, or Multiple Use zoning districts proposing exterior at-grade equipment shelters shall be accompanied by the equipment manufacturer’s written noise specifications if these specifications are proposed to be followed. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
D. Copy of the license application or received license from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or documentation that a license is not required. A copy of an approved license, or evidence of exemption shall be provided to the Planning Division prior to the issuance of a building permit.
E. Copy of the permit application or received permit from the Federal Aeronautics Administration (FAA), if applicable. A copy of an approved permit shall be provided to the Planning Division prior to the issuance of a building permit.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 291 01/03/2017
60.70.50.1.F
F. Copy of written authorization from the Oregon Department of Aviation, if applicable. A copy of the written authorization, if applicable, shall be provided to the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of a building permit.
G. Copies of all environmental reports and assessments required to be submitted to the FCC or FAA for proposed WCF shall be provided to the City at their time of filing with these agencies. It is the applicant’s responsibility to conform to all requirements of these agencies resulting from the submittal of the environmental assessments.
H. Copy of an approved and signed City of Beaverton franchise/utility license.
I. Noise Study: If applicable, provide a noise study prepared by a licensed Oregon acoustical engineer in accordance with Section 60.50.25.11
J. For all WCF located within the right-of-way, proposed to replace a street light pole, provide plans for LED street lights. (Illumination levels to be evaluated per Section 450.4 of the City Engineering Design Manual, Option C requirements unless otherwise approved by the City Public Works Director).
K. For all City owned poles within the right-of-way any studies requested by the Public Works Director required to ensure the safety and integrity of city owned and maintained property, including but not limited to structural calculations.
L. New poles located within 10-feet of a roadway without a curb and gutter shall include a vehicle impact study and protective devices such as bollards.
M. For all WCF located within the right-of-way, signed approval from the Public Works Director.
[ORD 4702; January 2017]
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 292 01/03/2017
60.70.55. Temporary Uses.
1. The Director may authorize a temporary WCF inclusive of needed equipment shelters and on-site improvements to facilitate continuity in service during the initial construction, repair, maintenance and/or replacement of permanent equipment. Temporary WCF shall be authorized through temporary use permit provisions specified in Chapter 40 (Applications). The authorization of temporary WCF shall be subject to the following criteria:
A. A temporary WCF facility shall be permitted to operate a maximum of ninety (90) days from the date of temporary permit authorization.
B. At the discretion of the Director a time extension not to exceed a maximum of ninety (90) days may be granted to facilitate continuity in service provided that a written request letter is submitted a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration of the initial temporary use authorization.
C. The written request letter shall be submitted by an authorized representative of the service provider, shall specify the amount of the additional time request and shall explain the reason(s) for the additional time request.
D. Failure to submit the additional temporary use authorization request within the specified timeframe stated herein may result in a denial of the additional temporary use timeframe request.
E. All temporary WCF facilities shall be removed a maximum of fourteen (14) calendar days from the expiration of the initial or extended temporary use authorization.
60.70.60. Collocation Protocol.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this requirement is to create a process that will allow providers to equitably share publicly available, non-proprietary information among themselves, with interested persons and agencies, and with the City. This collocation protocol is designed to increase the likelihood that all reasonable opportunities for collocation of wireless communication antennas on existing towers have been investigated and the appropriate information has been shared among providers. The City recognizes that collocation is preferable, where technologically feasible and visually desirable, as a matter of public policy, but that collocation
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Wireless Communication Facilities
Chapter 60 SR - 293 01/03/2017
60.70.60.1
is not always feasible for technical or business reasons. However, if all licensed providers are made aware of any pending tower or antenna permit requests, such disclosure will allow providers to have the maximum amount of time to consider possible collocation opportunities, and will also assure the City that all reasonable accommodations for collocation have been investigated. The Code creates strong incentives for collocation because proposals for collocation qualify for a less rigorous approval process in almost all zones within the City.
2. Applicability. Requirements for the collocation protocol apply only to new WCF towers constructed after May 8, 2003.
3. The applicant shall show proof satisfactory to the City that it has made reasonable inquiries at potential sites for collocation that would otherwise meet the applicant's need for signal coverage.
60.70.65. Abandoned Facilities.
1. Criteria for Removal of Abandoned WCF Facilities. Abandoned wireless communication facilities inclusive of antennas and at-grade equipment shelters that are not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the WCF is located or by the owner or lessee of the WCF within a maximum of ninety (90) day from the date of a written notice letter from the City. Failure to remove abandoned WCF within this timeframe is hereby declared a nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement under the provisions of local or state law.
2. Multiple WCF Providers. If there are two or more WCF providers collocated on an abandoned tower, Section 60.70.65.A. shall not become effective until all providers cease using the WCF for a continuous period of six (6) months.
3. Time Extension. Prior to the expiration of the ninety (90) day period stated in Section 60.70.65.A., the property owner and/or the WCF owner may request a temporary use permit for an additional ninety (90) day extension to provide time to find another user.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 1 06/18/2019
CHAPTER 90 - DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases shall be construed to have the specific meanings assigned to them by definition.
Words used in present tense include the future tense, and the singular includes the
plural, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The term “shall” is always mandatory and the words “may” and “should” are permissive.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. [ORD 4224; September 2002] [ ORD 4659; June 2015]
Abut. Contiguous to; adjoining with a common boundary line. For the purposes of defining an affected abutting property for a Flexible Setback request, the following graphic will guide the definition. [ORD 4473; March 2008]
1. Existing structure in conformance with building setbacks.
2. Proposed new structure or addition requiring Flexible Setback approval.
3. Affected lot line(s) subject to proposed reduced building setback.
4. Affected abutting properties required for endorsement by property owners. Affected properties includes common lot corners.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 2 06/18/2019
A-Frame Sign. A double-faced temporary sign composed of two (2) sign boards attached at the top and separate at the bottom, not permanently attached to the ground. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Access. The place, means, or way by which pedestrians, vehicles, or both shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use. A private access is an access not in public ownership or control by means of deed, dedication or easement. [ORD 3494; March 1986]
Access Management. [ORD 3965; November 1996] City regulations of access to streets, roads, and highways from public roads and private driveways. Regulations may include but are not limited to restrictions on the siting of interchanges, restrictions on the type, number and location of access to roadways, and use of physical controls, such as signals, channelization and raised medians.
Accessory Structure or Use. A structure or use incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the main structure or use.
Accessway. [ORD 3965; November 1996] One or more connections that provide pedestrian and/or bicycle passage either between streets or between a street and a building, school, park, transit stop, or other destination.
Acreage, Net. [ORD 4046; June 1999] The net acreage for a site is defined as the proposal size expressed in acreage minus any unbuildable area. The following areas are deemed undevelopable for the purposes of calculating net acreage:
1. Street dedications and those areas used for private streets and common driveways; and
2. Environmentally constrained lands, such as open water areas, floodplains, water quality facilities, wetlands, natural resource areas, tree preservation areas, and Habitat Benefit Areas set aside in conservation easement, separate tract, or dedicated to a public entity; and
3. Land set aside in separate tracts or dedicated to a public entity for schools, parks, or open space purposes; and [ORD 4414; January 2007]
4. Topographical features with a slope equal to or greater than:
a. 25 percent within a landslide hazard area may deduct 100 percent of the applicable area, or
b. 15 percent and within a landslide hazard area may deduct 50 percent of the applicable area. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 3 06/18/2019
Added Traffic. [ORD 4103; May 2000] For purposes of fulfilling Section 60.55.10. (Traffic Impact Analysis) requirements, “added traffic” is defined as traffic generated by developments or phases of developments that have received final development approval but are not yet occupied.
Adjacent. Near or close. For example, an Industrial zoning district across the street from a Residential zoning district shall be considered as "adjacent". [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Adjoin. See “Abut”.
Agricultural Use. The term includes farming, dairying, pasturage, horticultural, floriculture, viticulture, apiaries, and animal and poultry husbandry; it does not include the operation of a feed lot or other commercial feeding of animals.
Alley. A public way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties.
Alter. As the term is applied to signs, a change to a sign or sign structure, including, but not limited to, changes in area, height, projection, illumination, shape, materials, placement and location on a site. Ordinary maintenance, repair, or repainting an existing sign surface, including changes of message or image, are not alterations within this definition. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Alteration, Landmark. The change, addition removal of or from, or physical modification or repair, which affects the exterior appearance of a Landmark; excluding, however, routine maintenance and painting.
Alteration, Structural. Any change or repair which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure. Any change in the external dimensions of the building is a structural alteration.
Amateur Radio Facilities. [ORD 4248; May 2003] The external, outdoor structures associated with an operator’s amateur radio service. This includes antennae, masts, towers, and other antenna support structures.
Amateur (“Ham”) Radio Services. [ORD 4248; May 2003] Radio communication services, including amateur-satellite service and amateur service, which are for the purpose of self-training, intercommunication, and technical investigations carried out by duly licensed amateur radio operators solely for personal aims and without pecuniary interest, as defined in Title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 97 and regulated there under.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 4 06/18/2019
Animal Care, Major. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Animal uses that provide outdoor facilities. Uses may include kennels, dog parks, animal day care, and other similar uses.
Animal Care, Minor. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Animal uses that provide indoor only facilities. Uses may include animal day care, washing, grooming, veterinarian clinics, animal medical research facilities, and other similar uses.
Animal Hospital. A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and related care.
Antenna. [ORD 4248: May 2003] A device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish used for transmitting or receiving electro-magnetic radiation. An antenna is typically mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast or building.
Arcade. [ORD 4005; February 1998] A continuously covered area which functions as a weather-protected extension adjacent to a public pedestrian way or sidewalk, with a minimum height of eight (8) feet above finished grade.
Architectural Treatment. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Architectural treatment shall include, but is not limited to, scoring, changes in material texture, and the application of other finish materials such as wood, rock, brick or tile wall treatment.
Area of Influence. [ORD 4103; May 2000] For purposes of fulfilling Section 60.55.10. (Traffic Impact Analysis) requirements, “area of influence” is defined as, at a minimum, all points of access onto the public street system, all intersections of regional significance (Arterials, Collectors, and Neighborhood Routes) within 1000 linear feet from all points of access onto the public street system, and all intersections where the traffic generated by the proposed development exceeds five (5) percent of existing a.m. or p.m. peak hour total intersection traffic volumes based on City-approved trip generation, assignment, and distribution calculations.
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V. Synonymous with Flood Management Area and Floodplain. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4392; July 2006]
At or Near a Major Transit Stop. [ORD 3965; November 1996]
At a major transit stop means a parcel that is adjacent to or includes a major transit stop or is located within 200 feet of a major transit stop.
Near a major transit stop means a parcel that is within 300 feet of a major transit stop.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 5 06/18/2019
Automotive Services, Major. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Service or repair to motorized vehicles, which affect the body or frame. This term includes: painting, bodywork, steam cleaning, tire recapping, major engine or transmission overhaul or repair involving removal of a cylinder head or crankcase, and mechanical car washes that are used by and open to the general public.
Automotive Services, Minor. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Service or repair to motorized vehicles, which do not affect the body or frame. This term includes: retail and wholesale fuel sales; tire sales or installation, glass installation, oil changes and lubrications, general engine maintenance and repair, radiator repair, detail shops, mechanical car washes solely used by on-site employees as part of retail vehicle sales, or other similar service or repair.
Awning. [ORD 4005; February 1998] A roof like structure of fabric stretched over a rigid frame projecting from the elevation of a building designed to provide continuous overhead weather protection.
Awning Sign. A sign attached to or incorporated into an awning. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Babysitter. A person who goes to the home of a child care giver during the temporary absences of the parent or legal guardian or custodian. [ORD 3613; July 1988]
Balloon Sign. A sign consisting of` a membrane that relies on internal gaseous pressure or a semi-rigid framework for maintaining its form. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Banner. A sign made of fabric or other non-rigid material with no enclosing framework. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4392; July 2006] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
Basement. A space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half (1/2) of its height, measured from the floor to its ceiling, below the average adjoining finished grade. For floodplain regulation purposes in determining building elevation requirements, this shall include any area having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. Additionally for the purposes of floodplain regulation and building construction designations, such below-grade enclosed areas that are unfinished and not suitable for active storage or human habitation but rather serve primarily for maintenance access and other incidental uses are considered as below grade crawl space. [ORD 4392; July 2006][ORD 4692; September 2016] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 6 06/18/2019
Base Station (Wireless Communication Facility). [ORD 4595; February 2013] A station at a specified site authorized to communicate with mobile stations or a land station in the land mobile service.
Beaverton Comprehensive Plan. The comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to the City of Beaverton Ordinance No. 1800, as now or hereafter constituted.
Below-Grade Crawl Space. As detailed in FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) Technical Bulletin 11-01, an enclosed area that may be below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed 4 feet at any point except as necessary to provide additional freeboard to achieve a regulation design flood elevation of at least one foot above the base flood elevation. [ORD 4744; October 2018]
Bench Sign. A sign on an outdoor bench. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Best Management Practices (BMPs). [ORD 4414; January 2007] A storm water Best Management Practice (BMP) is a technique, measure or structural control that is used for a given set of conditions to manage the quantity and improve the quality of storm water runoff in the most cost-effective manner. BMPs can be either engineered and constructed systems ("structural BMPs") that improve the quality and/or control the quantity of runoff such as detention ponds and constructed wetlands, or institutional, education or pollution prevention practices designed to limit the generation of storm water runoff or reduce the amounts of pollutants contained in the runoff ("non-structural BMPs"). No single BMP can address all storm water problems. Each type has certain limitations based on drainage area served, available land space, cost, pollutant removal efficiency, as well as a variety of site-specific factors such as soil types, slopes, depth of groundwater table, etc. Careful consideration of these factors is necessary in order to select the appropriate BMP or group of BMPs for a particular location.
Best Management Practices (BMPs), Non-Structural. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Strategies implemented to control stormwater runoff that focus on pollution prevention, such as alternative site design, education, and quality maintenance.
Best Management Practices (BMPs), Structural. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Engineered devices implemented to control, treat, or prevent stormwater runoff.
Bicycle Connection. A continuous, unobstructed, reasonably direct route between two points that is intended and suitable for bicycle use. Bicycle connections include but are not limited to accessways, bicycle lanes, bikeways, shared-use paths and pedestrian bridges. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 7 06/18/2019
Bicycle Facilities. [ORD 4061; October 1999] Improvements and provisions which accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities, maps, signs, bike lanes, multi-use paths, and shared roadways designated for bicycle use.
Bicycle Lane (Bike Lane). [ORD 4061; October 1999] The area within the street right-of-way designated specifically for use by bicyclists. The same area may also be referred to as a “bike lane.” Bicycle lanes are striped and accommodate only one-way travel.
Bikeway. [ORD 4061; October 1999] Any path or roadway facility that is intended for and suitable for bicycle use.
Billboard. A single, double or multi-face sign where the surface area of any face exceeds 120 square feet. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Bio-Detention. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Detention facility designed to store and slowly release stormwater following a precipitation event by means of an excavated pond, enclosed depression, or tank with the use of vegetation to provide additional pollutant removal and filtering functions.
Bio-Retention. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Retention facility designed to allow infiltration of stormwater runoff into the ground with the use of chemical, biological, and physical properties of plants, microbes, and soils to provide additional pollutant removal and filtering functions.
Blade Sign. A sign which hangs from the face of a building that is supported by an extended arm from the building wall. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Boarding, Rooming or Lodging House. A dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or multiple family dwelling, where lodging with or without meals is provided, for compensation, for three (3) or more persons.
Bollard Luminaires. [ORD 4332; January 2005] A luminaire that is attached to or incorporated into the design of bollards and are primarily used for the lighting of non-vehicular circulation areas, including but not limited to pedestrian pathways and bicycle pathways.
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
Building Envelope. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The internal area of a lot that remains after the minimum yard setbacks are applied.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 8 06/18/2019
Building Footprint. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The area of a lot that is covered by parking structures, buildings, or other roofed structures.
Building Height. [ORD 4542; June 2010] The vertical distance from grade plane to the highest point of roof structure.
Building Line. A line parallel to the front lot line and passing through the most forward point or plane of a building.
Building, Principal. A structure within which is conducted the principal use of the lot.
Bulk Fuel Dealerships. [ORD 4121; September 2000] A use which includes a refueling gas station that dispenses fuel without the aid of an onsite attendant, to a preapproved credit customer through a special access card-lock system or its equivalent.
Bulk Retail Use. A retail use that is housed in a warehouse style building, is developed as a warehouse style building both on the interior and exterior, sells primarily institutional sized or multi-pack products in bulk quantities, has limited hours of operation and is not part of a larger shopping center. [ORD 3825; September 1982]
Cabinet Style Sign. A sign structure typically rectangular in shape that has a metal body and a polycarbonate face that does not include Electronic Message Center components. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Caliper Measurement. [ORD 4224; September 2002] The thickness of trees measured in inches. A caliper measurement for trees shall be measured 12 inches above the soil line, or across the stump if the tree has been severed at less than 12 inches above the soil line.
Candle Power. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one (1) foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one (1) foot candle. Maximum (peak) candle power is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or luminaire.
Canopy. Area of the tree above ground including the trunk and branches measured in mass or volume.
Canopy. [ORD 4079; December 1999] A roof like structure projecting from the elevation of a structure designed to provide overhead weather protection that maintains at least an eight foot (8’) clearance above the ground.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 9 06/18/2019
Canopy Sign. A sign attached to or incorporated into a canopy. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Capacity. [ORD 4302; June 2004] The maximum sustainable flow rate at which vehicles or persons reasonably can be expected to traverse a point or uniform segment of a lane or roadway during a specified time period under given roadway, geometric, traffic, environmental, and control conditions; usually expressed as vehicles per hour, passenger cars per hour, or persons per hour.
Care Facilities. [ORD 4542; June 2010] General care located within a dwelling accommodating not more than five nonrelated persons, for children and senior citizens.
Cemetery. [ORD 4102; May 2000] A place in which the deceased are entombed. A cemetery may include crematoria and mortuaries within its boundary. This use includes, but is not limited to: Cemeteries, mausoleums, columbaria, or other similar uses.
Certified Arborist. [ORD 4348; May 2005] An individual who has demonstrated knowledge and competency through obtainment of the current International Society of Arboriculture arborist certification, or who is a member of the American Society of Consulting Arborists.
Channelization. The improvement of a waterway to ensure containment of flow within a designated alignment. The purpose for such is to minimize erosion and retain a long range capability to convey the maximum flow discharge. This work may be accomplished with the use of native materials, vegetation, rip-rap, as well as structural improvements.
Child Care or Day Care Facility. [ORD 4365; September 2005] [ORD 4584; June 2012] A facility providing care for compensation for seven or more children during a 24-hour period. This includes: day nursery, nursery school group, or other similar unit operating under any name but not including any:
a. Facility providing care that is primarily educational, unless provided to a preschool child for more than four hours a day;
b. Facility providing care that is primarily supervised training in a specific subject, including but not limited to dancing, drama, music, or religion;
c. Facility providing care that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group;
d. Facility operated by a school district, political subdivision of this State or a governmental agency;
e. Residential facility licensed under ORS 443.400 to 443.455;
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 10 06/18/2019
f. Babysitters;
g. Family Day Care or Group Home, which provides day care in the family living quarters of the provider, for not more than 16 children, including the provider's children. For this purpose only, a "child" shall mean a person under the age of 13 years. [ORD 3613; July 1988] [ORD 4462; January 2008]
Citizen Band (CB) Radio. [ORD 4248; May 2003] Two-way radio facilities operated for short range personal and business communications, without necessity of a federal license pursuant to Part 95 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).
City. The City of Beaverton, Oregon.
City Arborist. [ORD 4348; May 2005] The person designated as such by the Director of Public Works.
City Engineer. [ORD 4155; May 2001] The City Engineer of the City of Beaverton or the City Engineer’s designee.
Clinic, Outpatient. An establishment where human patients are examined or treated by physicians, surgeons, optometrists, dentists or similar State licensed professionals of the healing arts, with patients not lodged overnight.
Closed-End Street. [ORD 4302; June 2004] A street that has only one egress to any other existing street or planned street identified in the local transportation plan. Cul-de-sacs, dead-end and looped streets are examples.
Clustering. [ORD 4248; May 2003] The placement of more than one (1) wireless communication facility tower on a lot. May be referred to as “cell tower farms”, “tower farms”, “antenna tower farms”, or “antenna farms”.
Cluster Housing. [ORD 4430; April 2007] Detached dwelling units located within a Planned Unit Development where detached housing is located in close proximity to each other and share common open space including recreation areas and parking.
Code, This. [ORD 4224; September 2002] The short title of the City of Beaverton Development Code which shall be deemed to include the text of this Code, the accompanying zoning map, and all amendments made hereafter to either.
Collocation. [ORD 4248; May 2003] The location of two or more antenna systems operated by the same or separate FCC licensees (“providers”) on a tower dedicated solely to this use.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 11 06/18/2019
Commercial Amusements. [ORD 4075; December 1999] Facilities that are intended to primarily provide amusement to spectators. This use includes, but it is not limited to: Theaters, Arenas, Stadiums, Concert Halls, or other similar uses.
Commercial Schools. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Schools which are customarily commercial in nature, such as business, dancing, martial arts, and other instructional schools.
Common Green. [ORD 4542; June 2010] A right-of-way or tract that provides for pedestrian and bicycle access, but not vehicle access, to abutting property and generally providing a common area for use by residents of detached residential units. A common green may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features may be included in a common green, such as groundcover, trees, shrubs, surfaced paths, patios, benches, or gazebos.
Community Tree. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A healthy tree of at least ten inches (10”) DBH located on developed, partially developed, or undeveloped land. Community Trees are not those trees identified as Significant, Historic, Landscape or Mitigation Trees, trees within a Grove or a Significant Natural Resource Area, or trees that bear edible fruits or nuts grown for human consumption. [ORD 4348; May 2005]
Community Garden. [ORD 4659; June 2015] A garden or gardening on land that is owned by a community group, institution, special service district, or the City.
Commuter Rail. [ORD 4295; May 2004] A railway for passenger train service consisting of travel between or within metropolitan areas, central cities and suburbs. Commuter rail service may be either locomotive-hauled or self-propelled and is generally characterized by a limited number of stations, multi-trip tickets, specific station-to-station fares and railroad employment practices. Such commuter service may share the right-of-way of an inter-city or long-haul railroad or use new or vacated right-of-way.
Compact Detached Housing. [ORD 4652; February 2015] Dwelling units that front onto a shared court, common green, or public street and meet the minimum density requirements of the underlying Residential or Multiple Use zone.
Compatibility, Flexible and Zero Yard Setbacks. [ORD 4224; September 2002] For the purposes of how the phrase “compatible with the surrounding area” is used in the Flexible and Zero Yard Setback for Proposed Residential Land Division and the Flexible Setback for Proposed Land Division applications, the phrase is defined as abutting properties and properties directly across the street from the proposed development. Properties directly across the street from the development shall be
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 12 06/18/2019
those properties perpendicular from the property line of the proposed development. [ORD 4486; July 2008]
Comprehensive Plan. See “Beaverton Comprehensive Plan”.
Conservation Easement. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property, ensuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or enhancing air or water quality, or preserving the historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural aspects of real property.
Contiguous. See “Abut”.
Controlled Access Street. Encourages indirect access to abutting properties primarily by shared driveways, frontage drives, interconnecting parking lots, or some other means where practical, or some other means as needed to allow for efficient local circulation. [ORD 3494; March 1986]
Control Delay. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Control delay is the component of delay that results when a control signal causes a lane group to reduce speed or to stop; it is measured by comparison with the uncontrolled condition.
Corner Clearance. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Corner clearance is the distance between a driveway and the nearest crossroad intersection as measured from the face of curb of the intersecting street and the nearside edge of the driveway.
Coverage, Building. That percentage of the total lot area covered by buildings, including covered parking areas.
Crown Cover. The area within the drip line or perimeter of the foliage of a tree.
Cul-de-Sac. A short dead-end street with a circular turn-around at the end. Cul-de-sac length is measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side right-of-way of the nearest through traffic intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac right-of-way. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
Cutoff. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source or luminaire are completely eliminated (cutoff) at a specific angle above the ground.
Cutoff Angle. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source, above which no light is emitted.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 13 06/18/2019
Cutoff-Type Luminaire. [ORD 4332; January 2005] A luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.
Day Care Facility. [ORD 4584; June 2012] See “Child Care or Day Care Facility”.
Days. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days.
Day, Working. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Days that the City of Beaverton Community Development Department is open for business.
Dead Tree. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A tree that is lifeless. Evidence of lifelessness may include unseasonable lack of foliage, brittle dry branches, or lack of any growth during the growing season.
Decision, Effective Date of. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Unless otherwise provided, the date of the final written land use order.
Decision Making Authority. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Either the Director, the Planning Commission, or the City Council, depending on the context in which the term is used. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Denial, Final. [ORD 4224; September 2002] The decision to deny a proposal by the appellate decision making authority.
Density, Net. [ORD 4046; June 1999] The number of dwelling units per unit of land expressed as the number of acres of land per dwelling unit. The net density for any lot is computed by dividing the net acreage of the parcel by the number of dwelling units.
De Novo. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Considering the matter anew, the same as if it had not been heard before and as if no decision previously had been rendered.
Design Plan. [ORD 4005; February 1998] A plan for a defined geographic area in single or multiple ownership that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and includes, but is not limited to, a land use and circulation plan, development standards, design guidelines, an open space plan, utilities plans and a program of implementation measures and other mechanisms needed to carry out the plan. The plan shall be created through the Design Review process.
Development. The act of bringing about growth; to construct or alter a structure, to make a change in use or appearance of land, to divide land into parcels, or to create or terminate rights of access. [ORD 4111; July 2000]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 14 06/18/2019
Development. Any plat, partition, subdivision or planned unit development that is created under the city's land division or zoning regulations. [ORD 4111; July 2000]
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4744; October 2018]
Development, Surface Stormwater. [ORD 4155; May 2001] As it relates to Section 50.25., and pursuant to the Clean Water Services Design and Construction Standards manual, development shall refer to all human-induced changes of the following types to improved or unimproved real property: Construction of structures requiring a building permit if such structures are external to existing structures; land division; drilling; site alterations resulting from surface mining or dredging; grading; construction of earthen berms; paving; excavating; and clearing when it results in the removal of trees or vegetation which would require a City permit. The following activities are not included in the definition of development: Farming activities when conducted in accordance with accepted farming practices as defined in ORS 30.930 or under a Senate Bill 1010 water quality management plan, and construction on lots in subdivisions meeting the criteria of ORS 92.040(2).
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). [ORD 4224; September 2002] The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at 54 inches above natural grade.
Direct Access. The provision for immediate ingress and egress of vehicles from an abutting property to an adjacent street.
Direct-to-Home Satellite Service (DHSS). [ORD 4248; May 2003] The distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises without use of ground receiving or distribution equipment.
Director. [ORD 4224; September 2002] The Director of Community Development for the City of Beaverton, Oregon, or designee.
District or Zoning District. A portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Code.
Double Face Sign. See “Faces”.
Double Frontage Lot. See “Through Lot”.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 15 06/18/2019
Double Wall Construction. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Where an interior wall is separated from the exterior wall with framing. The exterior wall has plywood bracing weather proofed with an exterior finishing material such as but not limited to lap siding, brick, or metal.
Drip Line: [ORD 4224; September 2002] A line on the ground below the edge of the maximum overhead canopy of a tree.
Drive-In Use. Any commercial use which permits the driver to transact business from his automobile.
Drive-Up Window Facilities. A facility, whether it be a primary or accessory use, other than automobile service station, which is designed to allow patrons to make purchases or receive services at a window or service area while remaining in their motor vehicles. [ORD 3218; July 1981]
Driveway. A private drive giving access from a public street to a building or buildings on abutting property. [ORD 4061; October 1999]
Drop-Off Station. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A mobile structure which is used to receive materials such as clothing and other household or office goods donated by the public.
Duplex. A building designed or used exclusively for occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having separate entrance doors, cooking, bathroom and other housekeeping facilities for each family. A duplex is considered a two-family dwelling. [ORD 3293; November, 1982]
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the residence or sleeping place for one or more persons.
Dwelling, Attached. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A dwelling that is attached to another dwelling, excluding accessory dwellings. There are two types of Attached Dwellings:
 Multi-Dwelling Structure. A structure that contains three or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one or more units. The land underneath the multi-dwelling structure is not divided into separate lots. Multi-dwelling structures includes structures commonly called garden apartments, apartments, and condominiums.
 Single Family Attached Dwellings. Dwelling units, located on individual lots that share one or more common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units. The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least 25 percent of the length of the side of the building. The shared or abutting walls
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 16 06/18/2019
may be any wall of the buildings, including the walls of attached garages. A single family attached dwelling does not share common floor/ceilings with other single family attached dwelling units. A single family attached dwelling is also commonly called a rowhouse, townhouse, or a common-wall house.
Dwelling, Detached. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A dwelling that is not attached to any other dwelling, excluding accessory dwellings.
Dwelling, Live / Work. [ORD 4058; September 1999] [ORD 4542; June 2010] A dwelling unit combining Residential use types with Commercial or Limited Industrial use types. This Use Classification includes, but it not limited to: Hoffice, Live/Work Facilities or other similar uses, but is not a Home Occupation.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms used or intended to be used by one family containing, at a minimum, the living facilities required by the current Oregon Structural Code or applicable ordinance.
Dying Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] A tree with greater than 20% dead limbs during the growing season.
Eating or Drinking Establishments. [ORD 3975; March 1997] An establishment where meals or drinks (either alcoholic or non-alcoholic) are prepared and served to the public for consumption. This use includes: Restaurants, Cafes, Delicatessens, Sandwich Shops, Coffee Houses, and Taverns or Bars or other establishments primarily engaged in serving alcoholic beverages.
Eco-Roof. [ORD 4414; January 2007] A vegetated roof constructed for water quality and quantity control. Eco-Roofs are vegetated roof covers with growing media and plants taking the place of bare membrane, gravel ballast, shingles or tiles. The number of layers and the layer placement vary from system to system and roof type, but all Eco-Roofs include a single to multi-ply waterproofing layer, drainage, growing media and the plants, covering the entire roof deck surface.
Educational Institutions. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Public, private or parochial academic schools, colleges, universities, vocational and trade schools, excludes commercial schools.
Effective Impervious Area (EIA). [ORD 4414; January 2007] A subset of Total Impervious Area (TIA) that is hydrologically connected via sheet flow or discrete conveyance to a drainage system or receiving body. EIA contributes significantly to changes in hydrologic function of a watershed. EIA is determined by assessing the level of connectivity of each sublevel land use type (e.g., residential curb and gutter versus residential ditch system) and then tallying by percentage in each sub-watershed. EIA is more difficult to assess than total impervious area or mapped impervious area but provides a more precise measure of actual watershed
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 17 06/18/2019
imperviousness.
Electronic Message Center (EMC). A sign that displays words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Electronic Message Center Technical Definitions. For the purpose of regulating the function and technical capabilities of EMCs, the following words shall apply.
Animation — the usage of multiple frames running at a fast enough speed that the human eye perceives the content to be in continuous movement.
Dissolve — a mode of message transition on an EMC accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
Fade — a mode of message transition on an EMC accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
Flash — an intermittent or flashing light source where the identical EMC message is constantly repeated at extremely rapid intervals.
Frame — a complete, static display screen on an EMC.
Frame Effect — a visual effect on an EMC applied to a single frame to attract the attention of viewers.
Scroll — a mode of message transition on an EMC where the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
Static Display — a display that includes only messages that do not move or appear to move.
Transition — a visual effect used on an EMC to change from one message to another including but not limited to images that coalesce, interleave and interlace.
Travel — a mode of message transition on an EMC where the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 18 06/18/2019
Eligible Facilities Request (Wireless Communication Facilities). [ORD 4595; February 2013] Any request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that involves:
1. Collocation of new transmission equipment;
2. Removal of transmission equipment; or
3. Replacement of transmission equipment
Emergency Shelter. [ORD 4505; May 2009] Any facility with overnight sleeping accommodations, the purpose of which is to provide temporary shelter for the general population in a time of crisis.
Emergency Work. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The definition of this term, as it applies to the Transportation Facilities application, is located in the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings.
Employees. All persons, including proprietors, working on the premises during the largest shift at peak season.
Enhancement Activities. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Activities implemented for the sole purpose of improving or protecting, or both, the ecological functions and values of streams, wetlands and forest resources. Enhancement Activities do not include any excavation, fill, grading, or other form of earth moving of up to and including fifty (5) cubic yards of earth, the disturbance of up to and including 500 gross square feet of surface area, or both.
Equipment Shelter. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A non-staffed structure used to house and protect the equipment necessary for processing wireless communications signals, which may include air conditioning equipment and emergency generators.
Essential Public Communications Services. [ORD 4248; May 2003] Police, fire and other public safety or emergency networks.
Exempt Tree or Vegetation. For the purposes of the solar access regulations, the full height and breadth of vegetation that the Planning Director has identified as "solar friendly"; any vegetation listed on a plat map, a document recorded with the plat, or a solar access permit as exempt. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Existing Grade. [ORD 4584; June 2012] See “Grade”.
Faces.
A. Single Face Sign. A single face sign is one with words, symbols, figures or images on only one (1) surface of the sign.
B. Double Face Sign. A double face sign is one with words, symbols, figures or images on two (2) surfaces or planes back-to-back. [ORD 4071; November 1999]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 19 06/18/2019
C. Multi-Face Sign. A multi-face sign is one with more than one section or module. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Facilities, Critical. [ORD 4224; September 2002] For the purposes of Facilities Review critical facilities and services shall include public water, public sanitary sewer, storm water drainage, treatment, and detention, transportation, and fire protection. For the purposes of floodplain regulation and building construction hazard designations, critical facilities are defined as hospitals, significant medical care facilities, fire stations, police stations, storage of critical records, emergency community shelters, emergency operation centers, emergency management offices, and similar facilities. [ORD 4462; January 2008] [ORD 4692; November 2016]
Facilities, Essential. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Essential facilities and services shall include schools, transit improvements, police protection, and on-site pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the public right-of-way.
Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit in which board and lodging may also be provided for not more than four additional persons, excluding servants; or a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit.
Feather Sign. A sign typically made of cloth, canvas, plastic, or any flexible material designed to move freely that is supported by a horizontal or vertical pole of various lengths. This type of sign may also be called a bow sign or teardrop sign. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Feature Roof. [ORD 4332; January 2005] A roof which is a unique roof form calling attention to a particular part of a building such as an entrance, building corners, a steeple, a cupola, or other similar focal points of a building.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). [ORD 4248; May 2003] The FAA, a division of the United States Department of Transportation, was established by the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, and is primarily responsible for the advancement, safety and regulation of civil aviation.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). [ORD 4248; May 2003] The FCC is an independent government agency that was established by the Communications Act of 1934 and is charged with regulating interstate and international communications by radio, television, wire, satellite and cable.
Fee Ownership. [ORD 4224; September 2002] As the term relates to land divisions, a Fee Ownership Partition or Fee Ownership Subdivision is a land division application which proposes to reduce the site development requirements for lot area,
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 20 06/18/2019
lot dimension, building setbacks, building coverage, landscaping, parking and street frontage for the lot to allow fee ownership of the land on which the building rests in the Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Use zoning districts.
Fence. A barrier grown, placed, or constructed for the purpose of obstructing movement or vision.
Fence Sign. A sign attached to or painted on a fence.
Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is deposited, placed, pulled or transported on the site and includes the conditions resulting there from. The placement of fill is development of land.
Financial Institutions. [ORD 3975; March 1997] An establishment where the principal businesses is the receipt, disbursement or exchange of funds and currencies, such as: Banks, Savings and Loans, or Credit Unions.
Finish Ground Level (Grade). The average elevation of the ground adjoining the structure of building upon which the sign is erected. See also “Grade.” [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Flag. A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is generally displayed hanging free from a staff halyard or building to which it is attached. A flag is often used to display the symbol of the United States, a nation, state, or local government. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Flashing Sign. A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Fleet Parking. [ORD 4443; August 2007] Accessory parking to a primary use for the storage of operable motorized vehicles, including cars, light and heavy trucks and buses, when these vehicles are not needed to support the primary use’s off-site activities, e.g., repair/maintenance, delivery, transportation. Fleet Parking does not include vehicle inventory for rent, lease, or for sale.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community [ORD 3563; May 1987]
Flood or Flooding. [ORD 4744; October 2018]
A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 21 06/18/2019
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. [ORD 3563; May 1987];
3. Mudslides (i.e. mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
B. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.
Flood Management Area. [ORD 4155; May 2001] Pursuant to CWS Design and Construction Standards, the area of inundation that encompasses the floodplain, or the area of special flood hazard, consisting of the following: Land identified within the 100 year floodplain and floodway as shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps and land identified in updated flood studies or any other authoritative data documenting flood elevations, as approved by the City Engineer. Synonymous with Area of Special Flood Hazard and Floodplain. [ORD 4392; July 2006]
Floodplain. The zone along a watercourse enclosed by the outer limits of land which is subject to inundation in its natural or lower revised contours by the base flood. Synonymous with Area of Special Flood Hazard and Flood Management Area.
[ORD 4392; July 2006]
Flood Surface Elevation. Those elevations to which flood waters will rise at a given location for a specified flood or base flood if not otherwise specified. These elevations are referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or as determined by the City Engineer. [ORD 4392; July 2006]
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [ORD 3563; May 1987]
Floodway Fringe. The area of the floodplain lying outside of the floodway.
Floor Area. The gross area, under roof, of all of the floors of a building, measured from the interior of exterior walls, excluding only space devoted to off-street parking or loading.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 22 06/18/2019
Floor Area Ratio. [ORD 4005; February 1998] The amount of gross floor area in relation to the amount of net site area, expressed in square feet.
Food Cart. A mobile vehicle, such as a food truck, trailer or cart, from which service of food and/or beverages is provided to walk-up customers.
Food Cart Pod. A site containing one or more food carts and associated amenities on private property.
Foot-Candle. [ORD 4332; January 2005] A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source of (1) candle.
Freestanding Sign. A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground, or a sign supported by any structure primarily for the display and support of the sign.
Front Lot Line. For purposes of the solar access regulations, a lot line abutting a street. For corner lots the front lot line is that with the narrowest frontage. When the lot line abutting a street is curved, the front lot line is the chord or straight line connecting the ends of the curve. For a flag lot, the front lot line is the lot line that is most parallel to the closest to the street, excluding the pole portion of the flag lot (see Figure 1 - SOL). See also “Lot Line”. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Frontage. That portion of a parcel of property which abuts a public street.
Gas Station Price Signs. A changeable copy sign advertising gasoline price signs.
General Site Plan. A site plan for a geographic area which anticipates the streets, utilities and other infrastructure that will be necessary to serve an area larger than the development being proposed. [ORD 3918; February 1995]
Glare. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The brightness of a light source, which may cause eye discomfort.
Grade. (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or, when the property line is more than 5 feet from the building, between the building and a line 5 feet from the building.
A. Existing Grade. The grade prior to grading.
B. Rough Grade. The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.
C. Finish Grade. The final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan. [ORD 3587; January 1988].
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 23 06/18/2019
Grade Plane. [ORD 4542; June 2010] A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building a point six (6) feet from the building.
Green Roof. [ORD 4430; April 2007] A Green Roof consists of vegetation and soil, or a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. Additional layers, such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems may also be included.
Grove. A stand of three or more trees of the same or mixed species.
Guest House. An accessory building used for the purpose of providing temporary living accommodations, and containing no kitchen facilities.
Habitat Benefit Area (HBA). [ORD 4414; January 2007] An area of land determined to provide a benefit to wildlife. Identification of HBA is accomplished by referencing the Comprehensive Plan Volume III Habitat Benefit Area Map that is included in the Comprehensive Plan of the City for Beaverton Volume III: Statewide Planning Goal 5 Resource Inventory Documents. Habitat resource classification and delineation methodologies are included in the Comprehensive Plan of the City for Beaverton Volume III: Statewide Planning Goal 5 Resource Inventory Documents. HBAs are in addition to any areas required for natural resource protection by other jurisdictional regulations. For the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area Class I and II riparian habitat areas and Class A and B upland wildlife areas are also considered to be Significant Natural Resource Areas as determined by Metro Council designation of these areas as regionally significant fish and wildlife habitat through Metro Title 13 implementation for areas brought within the Metro UGB after December 28, 2005. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
Habitat Friendly Development Practice (HFDP). [ORD 4414; January 2007] A development technique or activity that reduces detrimental impacts on fish and wildlife habitat resulting from traditional development practices.
Hazardous Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] A tree that possesses a structural defect which poses an imminent risk if the tree, or part of the tree, were to fall on someone or something of value (target).
 Structural Defect. Any structural weakness or deformity of a tree or its parts. A tree with a structural defect can be verified to be hazardous by a certified arborist and confirmed as such by the City Arborist.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 24 06/18/2019
 Target. People, vehicles, structures or property, such as other trees or landscape improvements. A tree may not be a hazard if a ‘target’ is absent within the falling distance of the tree or its parts (e.g., a substandard tree in a non-populated area away from pedestrian pathways may not be considered a hazard).
Height of Sign. The height of a sign measured from the finished ground level, excluding mounds, berms, etc., to the top of the sign or the highest portion of the sign structure or frame, whichever is greater.
High Voltage Power Utility Poles. [ORD 4248; May 2003] Utility pole structures for the transmission of high-voltage electricity carrying a minimum of 50,000 kilowatts.
Historic District. A geographic area with a high concentration of historical, architectural, archeological or cultural Landmarks and/or a high concentration of contributing resources.
Historic Tree or Historic Grove. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Tree(s) designated by the City to be of historic significance based on their association with historic figures, properties, or the general growth and development of the City.
Holding Capacity. The volume over the floodway fringe between the land contour grades and the base flood elevation.
Home Occupation. A lawful nonresidential income-producing use or activity conducted in or on the premises of a lot zoned and used for residential purposes by the permanent residents thereof, said nonresidential use or activity being secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes. [ORD 3255; June, 1982].
Hospital. An institution which maintains and operates facilities for persons for the delivery of health services on primarily an inpatient basis.
Hotel. A building, or portion thereof, of more than five (5) rooms designed or intended to be used, let or hired out for the purpose of offering to the general public lodging on a day-to-day basis, where the primary entrance is through a lobby or foyer with internal circulation to the rooms; also, that in which there are no provisions for cooking in any individual room or suite. [ORD 4224; September 2002]
Hotel, Extended Stay. [ORD 3958, June 1996] A hotel intended and designed for extended stays by guests and not a highway-oriented, overnight stay facility and which includes in-room cooking facilities.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 25 06/18/2019
Illuminated Sign. A sign illuminated by an internal light source or by an external light source intended to illuminate the sign. The illumination is “external” when the light source is separate from the sign surface and shines upon the sign and “internal” when the light source is contained within the sign. External illumination is “direct” when the source of light is directly seen by the public, as with floodlights, and “indirect” when the source of light is not directly seen by the public, as with cove lighting. Signs where the text or image is composed of dot matrix or LEDs are not included in this definition. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Impervious Area. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The amount of impervious surface within a defined area.
Imperviousness. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The percentage of all roads, parking lots, rooftops, sidewalks, and other impervious surfaces in a defined area.
Impervious Surface. [ORD 4414; January 2007] A surface that cannot be penetrated by water and thereby prevents infiltration and generates runoff.
Indirect Access. The provision for ingress and egress of vehicles from an abutting property to an adjacent street is shared by two or more properties or is channeled by some means indirectly to the adjacent street.
Infiltration. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The process or rate at which water percolates from the land surface into the ground. Infiltration is also a general category of BMP designed to collect runoff and allow it to flow through the ground for pollutant removal. The Environmental Protection Agency or Oregon Department of Environmental Quality may require additional permitting for infiltration facilities.
Intermodal. [ORD 4295; May 2004] The connection of one type of transportation mode with another.
Intersection. The meeting or crossing of public and/or private streets or accessways at a common space. [ORD 3494; March 1986]
Invasive. [ORD 4348; May 2005] A type of plant that is not local to an area, but rather originates from another place. Also called "exotic," "non-native," or "alien" species.
Inventory. A census (survey) of historical, architectural, archeological or cultural buildings, structures, objects, districts or sites. Each resource (i.e. building, structure, etc.) shall have a location; a physical description, photograph, and a discussion of the resource's significance.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 26 06/18/2019
Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services. [ORD 4600; February 2013] Establishments that are primarily engaged in providing vocational rehabilitation services such as job counseling, job training, and work experience, to unemployed or underemployed persons, persons with disabilities, and persons who have a job market disadvantage because of lack of education, job skill, or experience.
Jurisdictional Wetland. A wetland identified by a jurisdiction’s Local Wetland Inventory or as determined by either the Oregon Division of State Lands or the United States Army Corp of Engineers. In general, it is a wetland that a government body requires to be considered or reviewed as defined under its regulations.
Kennel. Any premises where five or more dogs, cats, or other small animals are kept for board, propagation, training or sale.
Laboratory. [ORD 4542; June 2010] A facility equipped for scientific research, experimentation or testing; or a facility where chemicals, pharmaceuticals or explosives are prepared or manufactured.
Landmark. Those buildings, structures, objects or sites that are fifty (50) years old or older that are significant or important because of historic, architectural, archeological, or cultural value as shall be designated by the Beaverton City Council. All designated Landmarks shall have a location, a physical description, photograph and a discussion of the landmark's significance. Buildings, structures, objects or sites that are less than 50 years old may be designated if they are exceptional in terms of historic, architectural, archeological or cultural value.
Landscaping. The combination of natural elements such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines, and other living organic and inorganic material which are installed for purposes such as creating an attractive and pleasing environment and screening unsightly views. Other improvements that promote an attractive and pleasing environment that may be included as landscaping includes features such as fountains, patios, decks, fences, street furniture and ornamental concrete or stonework areas. [ORD 4224; September 2002]
Landscaping Area(s). [ORD 4224; September 2002] An open area unoccupied except for landscaping. Pathways sufficient to provide access to buildings and utility equipment are permitted within a landscape area.
Landscape Tree. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A tree, other than a Significant Tree, Historic Tree, or Tree within a Significant Natural Resource Area, that has been preserved or planted as a component of an approved landscaping plan.
Lane Group. [ORD 4302; June 2004] A set of lanes established at an intersection approach for separate capacity and level-of-service analysis.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 27 06/18/2019
LED (Light Emitting Diode). A semiconductor diode that converts applied voltage to light and is used in digital displays. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Legislative. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A land use decision that applies to an entire zoning district or a large number of individuals or properties or that establishes or modifies policy or procedure.
Light Rail Transit (LRT) Station Site. [ORD 4005; February 1998] Land currently or eventually to be owned or leased by Tri-Met, on which facilities will be located related to a light rail transit station. The Station Site may include station platforms, park and ride lots, bus stops, and other similar facilities.
Limited Access Street. A Street which allows only indirect access to abutting properties primarily by distributing traffic to intersecting lesser volume streets or some other means as needed to allow for efficient local circulation. [ORD 3494; March 1986]
Livestock. Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms.
Local Wetland Inventory. [ORD 4224; September 2002] An inventory of the City’s wetland resources adopted pursuant to Statewide Planning Goal 5.
Lot. Any continuous area, tract or parcel of land owned by or under the lawful control and in the lawful possession of one distinct ownership undivided by a dedicated street or alley or another ownership. An abutting "platted lot" or property described by metes and bounds in the same ownership shall be considered a part of such "lot". See also “Parcel”. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Lot Area. The computed area contained within the lot lines, exclusive of street or alley rights-of-way. [ORD 4397; August 2006]
Lot Consolidation. [ORD 4405; October 2006] The process of reducing the number of lots of record by means of a Property Line Adjustment or Replat.
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot, Depth. The perpendicular distance measured from the mid- point of the opposite, usually the rear, lot line.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot, with frontage only on one street.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 28 06/18/2019
Lot Line. Any property line bounding a lot.
A. Front Lot Line. For an interior lot, the lot line abutting a street; for a corner lot, a lot line abutting either street, as determined by the Director at the time of initial construction; for flag lots, the line determined by the Director at the time of initial construction which shall then govern the designation of side and rear lot lines. [ORD 3293; November, 1982.)
B. Rear Lot Line. A lot line which is opposite to and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the Director shall determine the rear lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular-shaped lot, a lot line ten feet (10') in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. In the case of a through lot, each street has a front lot line. [ORD 4071; November 1999]
C. Side Lot Line. Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line
Lot Line Adjustment. See “Property Line Adjustment”. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Lot of Record. A legally created lot meeting all applicable regulations in effect at the time of creation, and held in separate ownership or any other lot deemed a legal lot under the provisions of Section 40.47. (Legal Lot Determination). [ORD 4487; August 2008]
Lot, Through. See “Through Lot”.
Lot Width. The perpendicular distance measured between the mid-points of the two principal opposite side lot lines and at approximately right angles to the lot depth.
Low Impact Development (LID). [ORD 4414; January 2007] A stormwater management and land development strategy applied at the parcel and subdivision scale that emphasizes conservation and use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely mimic predevelopment hydrologic functions. LID tools are designed to reduce environmental impacts of development, such as increased storm water runoff due to impervious areas, poor water quality and inconsistent water quantity in streams and rivers. LID techniques control storm water runoff volume and reduce pollutant loadings to receiving waters. Not all sites are suitable for LID. Considerations such as soil permeability, depth of water table and slope shall be considered, in addition to other factors. LID techniques may not completely replace the need for conventional stormwater controls.
Luminaire. [ORD 4332; January 2005] A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 29 06/18/2019
Maintain. To cause or allow to continue in existence; when the context indicates, maintain shall mean to preserve and care for a structure, improvement, conditions or area so that it remains attractive, safe and presentable and carries out the purposes for which it was installed, constructed or required.
Maintenance. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The definition of this term, as it applies to the Transportation Facilities application, is located in the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings.
Major. [ORD 3965; November 1996] Facilities or developments which, considering the size of the urban area and the range of size, capacity or service level of similar facilities or developments in the area, are either larger than average, serve more than neighborhood needs or have significant land use or traffic impacts on more than the neighborhood.
“Major” as it modifies industrial, institution and retail development means such developments which are larger than average, serve more than neighborhood needs or which have traffic impacts on more than the neighborhood.
Major Pedestrian Route. [ORD 4005; February 1998] Any pedestrian way in a public right-of-way or easement leading to a light rail station or transit stop, that is presently used or is likely to be used by pedestrians to access public transportation service including light rail or transit stations.
Major Public Facility Sign. See “District, Neighborhood or Major Public Facility Sign”.
Major Transit Stop. [ORD 3965; November 1996] is defined as any of the following:
A. Existing or planned light rail stations, park and ride lots, and transit transfer stations, except for temporary facilities, identified in an acknowledged transportation system plan;
B. Existing stops designated as major transit stops in an acknowledged transportation system plan which:
1. Have 20 minute service during the weekday commute peak hour; and
2. Are located within 1/4 mile of an area planned and zoned for:
a. R1, R2, or other residentially zoned areas that are developed at comparable densities, or
b. NS, CS, CC, GC, RC-TO, RC-OT, RC-E, OI-WS, C-WS, TC-MU, TC-HDR, SC-MU, SC-S, or SC-HDR
C. Other planned stops designated as major transit stops in an acknowledged transportation system plan which:
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 30 06/18/2019
1. Have 20 minute service during the weekday commute peak hour; and
2. Are located within 1/4 mile of an area planned and zoned for:
a. R1, R2, or other residentially zoned areas that are developed at comparable densities, or
b. NS, CS, CC, GC, RC-TO, RC-OT, RC-E, OI-WS, C-WS, TC-MU, TC-HDR, SC-MU, SC-S, or SC-HDR
[ORD 4075; December 1999] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Manufacturing. [ORD 4058; September 1999] The assembly, fabrication, processing, and/or packing and storage of products for wholesale distribution or other similar uses.
Manufactured Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes, and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards regulations in effect at the time of construction. [ORD 3846; May 1993]
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain regulation purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days if permitted to be placed on a permanent foundation, permanently connected to utilities, or anchored to the land. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. [ORD 3563; May 1987] [ORD 4392; July 2006]
Marijuana Dispensary. Includes the sales of medical marijuana products that are authorized pursuant to ORS 475.314. [ORD 4674; Feb 2016]
Master Plan. A plan for a defined geographic area in single or multiple ownership that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and includes a land use and circulation plan, development standards, design guidelines, an open space plan, utilities plans and a program of implementation measures and other mechanisms needed to carry out the plan. The plan shall be created through the land use review processes of this Code pursuant to Sections 40.15. and 40.20. as applicable. [ORD 3918; February 1995]
Maximum Permitted Illumination. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at the property line or, if required, at the interior buffering line at ground level.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 31 06/18/2019
Mayor. The Mayor of the City of Beaverton or his designate.
Medical Clinic. [ORD 4542; June 2010] A facility, independent or part of a hospital or medical school, that is devoted to the diagnosis and care of outpatients. The establishment may be run by several specialists working in cooperation and sharing of the same facility for either a single-focus or general-purposes of the entire facility, such as cardiac clinic or pediatric clinic.
Membership Organizations. An association of persons for the promotion of some lawful non-profit common objective, such as literature, science, politics, good fellowship or community service, which meets periodically and is limited to members.
Metro. [ORD 4302; June 2004] The regional government and designated metropolitan planning organization for the Portland metropolitan area.
Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO). [ORD 3965; November 1996] An organization located within the state of Oregon and designated by the Governor to coordinate transportation planning in an urbanized area of the state.
Minimum Land Area. [ORD 4584; June 2012] The minimum amount of land required by the zoning of a property, expressed in square feet, per dwelling unit. For attached housing, the area of the parent parcel is used; for detached housing, the area of each individual lot or parcel is used.
Minimum Permitted Illumination. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The minimum permitted illumination measured in foot-candles within the interior of a site to provide adequate illumination for public safety purposes.
Mitigation, Natural Resources. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The reduction of adverse effects of a proposed project by considering, in the order: a) avoiding the impact all together by not taking a certain action or parts of an action; b) minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation; c) rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment; d) reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action by monitoring and taking appropriate measures; and e) compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable substitute.
Mitigation Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] A tree planted in an effort to alleviate the impact of the removal of another tree(s). A mitigation tree takes on the designation of the tree(s) removed (i.e. tree(s) planted to mitigate for a tree(s) removed from a grove or SNRA becomes a tree(s) protected as if it were part of a grove or SNRA).
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 32 06/18/2019
Mixed Use Development. [ORD 4584; June 2012] Development in which multiple land uses are mixed within a single building, such as residential units over commercial space, also known as vertical mixed use development.
Mobile Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction. [ORD 3846; May 1993]
Mobile Home Park. Any lot which is utilized for the occupancy of more than two mobile homes.
Mobile Home Park. Any place where two or more mobile homes are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land not less than one acre under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person.
Mobile Home Subdivisions. Developments where mobile homes are placed on individually owned lots approved under the City of Beaverton's subdivision regulations.
Motel. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A transient occupancy use with external pedestrian access to rental rooms and with vehicular access to rooms.
Motor Vehicle Dealers, New. A person or establishment engaged in the sale or lease of new motor vehicles. A motor vehicle dealer or dealership is also permitted to conduct such activities as painting, bodywork, mechanical work, overhaul and repair, parts supply, used motor vehicle sales, as well as other related services, providing the predominate activity or use is motor vehicle sales and/or leasing. [ORD 3136; October 1979]
Multi-Face Sign. See “Faces”.
Multiple Use Development. [ORD 4005; February 1998] A building or groups of buildings under one ownership designed to encourage a diversity of compatible land uses, which include a mixture of two or more of the following uses: residential, office, retail, recreational, light industrial, and other miscellaneous uses.
Name Plate. A permanent wall sign located on the facade of a residential structure associated with a home occupation.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 33 06/18/2019
Native Understory. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Foliage layer located between the floor and the canopy of a forest, wood, or grove containing plant materials that have origins in the Tualatin Valley Region of the state of Oregon. Limited to plant species identified on Metro’s Native Plant List or in Clean Water Services’ Design and Construction Standards.
Native Vegetation. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Plant materials that have origins the Tualatin Valley Region of the state of Oregon, as listed on Metro’s Native Plant List or in Clean Water Services’ Design and Construction Standards.
Natural Areas. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Natural areas may include, but are not limited to, wetlands, riparian areas, Significant Natural Resource Areas, and significant groves of trees.
Natural Landscaping. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The act of landscaping using plant materials that include groundcover and shrubs to cover bare earth and prevent erosion. Native plants, native-friendly plants and naturalized plants are recommended because they are adapted to the local environment and require little water and few chemicals to survive.
Neighborhood Association Committee (NAC). [ORD 4224; September 2002] A group of people who are residents, property owners, business owners, or representatives of a non-profit entity, such as a church, that are organized within the recognized boundary of a City of Beaverton established neighborhood area for the purpose of discussing a broad range of issues affecting the neighborhood and the community.
Non-Exempt Tree or Vegetation. For the purposes of the solar access regulations, vegetation that is not exempt. Refer to definition of “Exempt Tree or Vegetation”. [ORD 4224; September 2002] [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Non-Exempt Surveyed Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Trees that fit within the definition of Surveyed Tree, with the exception of Nuisance Trees.
Non-Native. [ORD 4348; May 2005] A type of plant that is not local to an area, but rather originates from another place.
Non-Pole-Mounted Luminaires. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Non-pole mounted Luminaires consists of Luminaires vertically or horizontally attached to building or structural wall elevations, soffit Luminaires, recessed Luminaires, access Luminaires, and ground-mounted Luminaires.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 34 06/18/2019
Non-Profit Organization. [ORD 4224; September 2002] An organization which is a non-profit organization registered with the State of Oregon pursuant to Chapter 65 of the Oregon Revised Statutes.
Northern Lot Line. The lot line that is the smallest angle from a line drawn east-west and intersecting the northernmost point of the lot, excluding the pole portion of a flag lot. If the north line adjoins an undevelopable area other than a required yard, the northern lot line shall be at the north edge of such undevelopable area. If two lot lines have an identical angle relative to a line drawn east-west, then the northern lot line shall b e a line 10' in length within the lot parallel with and at a maximum distance from the front lot line (see Figure 2 - SOL).
North-South Dimension. The length of a line beginning at the mid-point of the northern lot line and extending in a southerly direction perpendicular to the northern lot line until it reaches a property boundary (see Figure 3 - SOL).
Nuisance Tree. [ORD 4697; December 2016] Tree species that invade natural areas eventually resulting in their domination of native tree species. Includes those nuisance tree species listed in Section 40.90.10 of the Development Code.
Nuisance Vegetation. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Plant species that invade natural areas eventually resulting in their domination of native plant species. Includes those nuisance and prohibited species listed on Metro’s Native Plant List or in Clean Water Services’ Design and Construction Standards. Also see invasive and non-native.
Obstructing Sign. A sign or sign structure situated so that any portion of their surfaces or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of a fire escape, exit, standpipe or exterior windows. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Office. [ORD 4542; June 2010] A place in which business, clerical, corporate, research and development, call centers, or professional activities are conducted, not including dental and office see Service Business or Professional Services.
Open Access Street. A Street which allows direct access to each abutting property. [ORD 3494; March 1986]
Open Space. [ORD 4486; July 2008] An area of land publicly or privately owned, that remains in a natural or landscaped condition for the purpose of: providing usable space for a variety of recreational activities, providing adequate space for light and air, protecting natural resources, or any combination thereof. Open space shall be permanently reserved by common ownership among the owners of a development, dedicated to the public, or by other appropriate means. Open space may be accessible to the general public or owners of a development and may be created for the purpose of passive or active use or both.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 35 06/18/2019
Open Space, Active. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Open space where human activities include recreational and social opportunities such as play fields, playgrounds, swimming pools, plazas and other recreational facilities.
Open Space, Common. [ORD 4486; July 2008] For the purposes of defining common open space as used in Section 60.05.25.1., open space which is under common ownership of all property owners of the development for which the open space was required.
Open Space, Passive. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Open space where human activities are limited to defined walking and seating areas or areas with no human physical activity such as wetlands. [ORD 4486; July 2008]
Operations Center. [ORD 4443; August 2007] A centralized facility from which the on- and off-site construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the entity’s sites, buildings and facilities is directed, or the site from which vans, buses and other vehicles are dispatched. Activities related to the operations center may be conducted on- or off-site. The activities associated with such a facility may include one or more of the following: accessory offices; indoor/outside storage of equipment, parts and bulk materials; fleet parking; employee and visitor parking; and major and minor automotive services.
Oregon Department of Aviation. [ORD 4248; May 2003] State agency that is responsible for developing aviation as an integral part of Oregon's transportation network; creating and implementing strategies to protect and improve Oregon's aviation system; encouraging aviation-related economic development; supporting aviation safety and education; and increasing commercial air service and general aviation in Oregon.
Oversized Lot. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A lot which is greater than twice the required minimum lot size allowed by the subject zoning district.
Owner. The owner of record of real property as shown in the records of Washington County Department of Records and Elections, or a person purchasing a piece of property under contract, or a public body or public agency with authority to exercise the power of eminent domain which has formally enacted a resolution of its intent to acquire the property described in the application. [ORD 3995; December 1997]
Parapet. [ORD 4139; February 2001] That portion of an exterior wall which extends above a roof.
Parcel. [ORD 4584; June 2012] See “Lot”.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 36 06/18/2019
Parent Parcel. [ORD 4224; September 2002] [ORD 4697; December 2016] The parcel or parcels of land that is proposed to be the subject of a development proposal.
Park and Ride. [ORD 4224; September 2002] [ORD 4542; June 2010] A parking facility near a transit station or stop for the purpose of parking motor vehicles by transit and carpool riders.
Parking, As the Principal Use. [ORD 4058; September 1999] A facility providing for the temporary parking of automobiles and transportation vehicles which arrive and depart daily. [ORD 4498; January 2009]
Parking, Excess. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Required off-street parking which has been demonstrated as being unused by an existing land use.
Parking, Long-Term. [Ord.4079; November 1999] Vehicle spaces designated for residents, employees, or customers for a parking duration of at least four (4) hours at a time, except in a floodplain where Clean Water Services parking definitions and standards apply. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
Parking, Public. A structure or an open area other than a street, alley or other right-of-way used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for public use whether free, for compensation or an accommodation for clients or customers.
Parking, Short-Term. [Ord.4079; November 1999] Vehicle spaces designated for use of less than four (4) hours of time, except in a floodplain where Clean Water Services parking definition and standards apply. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
Parking Structure. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A covered structure or portion of a covered structure that provides two or more levels of parking for motor vehicles.
Parking, Surplus. [ORD 4397; July 2006] Off-Street parking that is greater in number than the maximum required off-street parking.
Parking, Tuck-Under. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Tuck under parking is unenclosed parking located below the unit where parking is accessed from an open parking drive, at grade or below.
Partition. Either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in Chapter 90.
Partition Land. To divide an area or tract of land into two or three lots within a calendar year when such an area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year. Partitioned land does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures, divisions of land resulting from foreclosure of recorded contracts for the sale of real property and
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 37 06/18/2019
divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and partition land does not include any adjustment of a lot line. Partition land does not include the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision, even though the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or property by a single owner.
Passenger Rail Track. [ORD 4295; May 2004] A permanent course for passenger rail cars, including commuter rail.
Peak Hour. [ORD 4302; June 2004] The maximum-volume hour of the day.
Pedestrian Connection. A continuous, unobstructed, reasonably direct route between two points that is intended and suitable for pedestrian use. Pedestrian connections include but are not limited to sidewalks, walkways, shared-use paths, accessways, ramps, stairways and pedestrian bridges. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
Pedestrian District. [ORD 3965; November 1996] A comprehensive plan designation or implementing land use regulations, such as an overlay zone, that establish requirements to provide a safe and convenient pedestrian environment in an area planned for a mix of uses likely to support a relatively high level of pedestrian activity. Such areas include but are not limited to:
a. Lands planned for a mix of commercial or institution uses near lands planned for medium to high density residential use; or,
b. Areas with a concentration of employment and retail activity, and which have or could develop a network of streets and accessways which provide convenient pedestrian circulation.
Pedestrian Plaza. [ORD 3965; November 1996] A small, semi-enclosed area adjoining a sidewalk or a transit stop which provides a place for pedestrians to sit or stand. They are paved with concrete, pavers, bricks or similar material and include seating, pedestrian scale lighting and similar pedestrian improvements. Low walls or planters and landscaping can be provided to create a semi-enclosed space and to buffer and separate the plaza from adjoining parking lots and vehicle maneuvering areas. Plazas connect directly to adjacent sidewalks, walkways, transit stops or buildings. A plaza 250 square feet or less is considered "small.”
Pedestrian Scale. [ORD 3965; November 1996] Site and building design elements that are dimensionally smaller than those intended to accommodate automobile traffic flow and buffering. Examples include ornamental lighting no higher than twelve feet; bricks, pavers or other paving modules with small dimensions; a variety of planting and landscaping materials; arcades or awnings that reduce the perception of the height of walls; and signage and signpost details designed for viewing from a short distance.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 38 06/18/2019
Pedestrianway. Any sidewalk, accessway, or walkway that is intended and suitable for pedestrian use. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
Pedestrian Ways. [ORD 4005; February 1998] Any paved public or private route intended for pedestrian use, including a bicycle/pedestrian path and/or esplanade, regardless of use by other transportation modes.
Pennant. A sign device made from a strip of flexible material intended to wave in the wind. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Permanent Architectural Features. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Permanent architectural features include, but are not limited to windows, bays and offsetting walls that extend at least eighteen inches (18”), recessed entrances, loading doors and bays, and changes in material types.
Permit Approval. A permit issued by the HRCC that must be obtained prior to commencing any alteration to a designated landmark.
Permittee. The person who is proposing to use or who is using the land pursuant to any permit required herein.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, syndicate, or any legal entity, whether he, she or it is acting for himself, herself or itself or as the servant, employee, agent or representative of another.
Person of Record. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A person who makes an appearance before the decision making authority in a proceeding through the submission of either written or verbal testimony.
Places of Worship. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Any building where congregations gather for prayer such as churches, mosques, synagogues, temples or other related facilities.
Planned Unit Development. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A development on land under unified control according to a single development plan for uses and structures related to the character of the zoning district with a program for operation and maintenance of common areas.
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City or any subcommittee thereof.
Plat. Includes a final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 39 06/18/2019
Plaza. [ORD 4005; February 1998] A continuous open space which is readily accessible to the public at all times, predominately open above and designed specifically for use by people as opposed to serving as a setting for a building.
Pole-Mounted Luminaires. [ORD 4332; January 2005] Luminaires that are attached to a vertical pole to provide illumination in non-vehicular and vehicular circulation areas.
Pole Sign. A freestanding sign connected to the ground by one or more supports, with the lower edge of the sign separated vertically from the ground. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Portable Sign. A temporary sign placed in one (1) location that is not permanently connected to the ground or a structure, or carried or moved during display. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Portable Sign in Public Right-of-way Graphic. For the purpose of clarifying permissible locations of portable signs placed within public right-of-way, consistent with standards, the following graphic is provided. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Preservation. The identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation, or enhancement of designated Landmarks.
Preservation District. A geographic area with a lesser concentration of historical or architectural significant landmarks or a concentration of contributing resources.
Preservation Resource Center. Research repository for historic resource inventory documents and related historic materials.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 40 06/18/2019
Primary Building Wall. For the purpose of calculating the maximum sign area, the primary building wall is the length of a single building wall positioned to face the frontage of a street. For buildings located along two or more streets, the primary building wall is the longest street-facing building façade. For curvilinear and varied building walls, the following graphic is provided as a guide for applying the definition:
[ORD 4708; May 2017]
Primary Entrances. [ORD 4332; January 2005] [ORD 4706; May 2017] A building entrance accessible to building users, including employees, customers, residents and visitors. A primary entrance is typically emphasized over other entrances by architectural features such as weather protection, materials changes, massing changes and/or special features such as lobbies, reception areas, and other semi-public interior spaces designed to receive building users.
Primary Zone. The zone designation of property upon which the floodplain district is overlaid.
Projecting Sign. A sign which projects twelve inches (12”) beyond an exterior wall. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Property Line Adjustment (Lot Line Adjustment). The adjustment of a property line between two (2) lots of record by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional lot is not created and where the number of existing lots is not reduced, and the resulting lots do not conflict with the minimum requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
Protected Solar Building Line. A line on a plat or map recorded with the plat that identifies the location on a lot where a point two feet above may not be shaded by structures or non-exempt trees (see Figure 10 - SOL).
Protected Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Includes Significant Individual Trees, Historic Trees, Trees within a Significant Natural Resource Area or Significant Grove, and Mitigation Trees.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 41 06/18/2019
Pruning, Minor. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Removal of less than 10% of a tree’s canopy or disturbance of less than 10% a tree’s root system. [ORD 4348; May 2005]
Pruning, Major. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Removal of greater than 10% of the tree’s canopy or disturbance of over 10% of the root system. [ORD 4348; May 2005]
Public Agency. A tax-exempt public jurisdiction, district or agency including but not limited to federal and state agencies, cities, counties and special service districts such as those for transit, sanitary/stormwater treatment, water, fire, sheriff, school, drainage and lighting. [ORD 4443; August 2007]
Public Buildings. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Structures, services, and uses such as City Hall, Post Office, Police and Fire Stations.
Public Sign. A sign erected, constructed, or placed within the public right-of-way or on public property, by or with the approval of the governmental agency having authority over, control of, or ownership of the right-of-way or public property.
Public View. [ORD 4332; January 2005] As it is applied to Design Review issues, this term is a viewpoint from a public area such as a sidewalk, right of way, public plaza, etc. measured from the closest point to the subject of the view, five (5) feet above the grade of the viewpoint. A subject is not visible from a viewpoint unless there is a direct, unobstructed line of sight between the viewpoint and subject.
Qualified Professional. [ORD 4224; September 2002] As the term applies to trees, a professional with academic and field experience that demonstrates expertise in urban forestry. This may include arborists certified by the International Society of Arboriculture, foresters certified by the Society of American Foresters, a registered landscape architect, or silvaculturist. A qualified professional must possess the ability to evaluate the health and hazard potential of existing trees, and the ability to prescribe appropriate measures for preservation of trees during land development. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Quasi-Judicial. [ORD 4224; September 2002] An action which involves the application of adopted policy to a specific development application, or a land use decision that applies to a small number of individuals or properties.
Rain Garden. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Highly vegetated areas that are designed to detain or retain stormwater runoff while providing pollutant removal by the chemical, biological, and physical interaction of plants, microbes, and soils with water.
Reasonably Available. [ORD 4348; May 2005] As applied to mitigation tree planting, a plant species shall be considered reasonably available if the plant is found to be available for purchase at three (3) or more separate retail or wholesale
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 42 06/18/2019
nurseries, known to stock native plants, of separate ownership within Washington, Multnomah, or Clackamas counties or a combination thereof. A plant species shall be considered to be reasonably unavailable if the species cannot be readily found at three (3) separate retail or wholesale nurseries, known to stock native plants, of separate ownership within Washington, Multnomah, or Clackamas counties or a combination thereof. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Reasonably Direct. [ORD 3965; November 1996] A route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for intended users. Out of direction travel is significant if it is more than 50 percent longer than the straight line between two points.
Recreation Vehicle. A boat, camper, motor vehicle, or portable vehicular structure capable of being towed on the highways by a motor vehicle, designed and intended for casual or short-term human occupancy for travel, recreational and vacation uses. If identified in some manner as a recreation vehicle by the manufacturer or registered as such with the State, it is prima facie a recreation vehicle. For floodplain regulation purposes, such vehicles shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use on wheels or jacking system and attached to the land only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and have no permanently attached additions. [ORD 4392; July 2006]
Recreational Facilities. [ORD 4075; December 1999] [ORD 4542; June 2010] Facilities that are intended to provide amusement to the user, with limited allowance for spectators. This use includes, but is not limited to: theaters, health clubs, golf courses, non-motorized bicycle tracks, skateboard parks, swimming clubs or pools, tennis or handball or racquet clubs, bowling alleys, dance halls, skating rinks, indoor soccer fields, laser tag, paintball, or other similar uses.
Redevelopment Potential. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Redevelopment potential exists when assessed building value per square foot is less than 50 percent of the mean value per square foot of surrounding buildings on lots within a 500 foot distance as measured from any point of the property line.
Regulated Affordable Housing. [ORD 4758; March 2019] Housing developments where the combined average income of all households served is 60% of the area median income (AMI) or less, evidenced by agreement or statutory regulation that restricts or limits resident income levels and rents for a minimum of 60 years.
Repair and Replacement. [ORD 4332; January 2005] The definition of both of these terms, as it applies to the Transportation Facilities application, is located in the Engineering Design Manual and Standard Drawings.
Replacement Wireless Communication Facility Tower. [ORD 4248; April 2003] A wireless communication facility tower capable of supporting collocated antennas that is intended to replace an existing tower that is not capable of supporting
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 43 06/18/2019
collocated antennas. See “Eligible Facilities Request” and “Substantial Increase” for replacement standards. [ORD 4595; February 2013]
Replat. [ORD 4405; October 2006] The act of platting the lots, parcels, tracts, and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.
Reserve Strip. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A strip of land located between a subdivision and other property and not dedicated to public use, but conveyed to the City for the purpose of giving the City control over development of adjacent property.
Residential Care Facilities. [ORD 4036; April 1999] A living facility for more than five (5) non-related persons, which provides specialized care, supervision, treatment or training, or a combination of these for residents. This use classification includes, but is not limited to Assisted Living Facilities, Congregate Care Facilities, Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes and Sanatoriums.
Residential Local Street. A street that is intended to provide direct access to abutting residential properties and discourage through traffic movements not related to the neighborhood in which the Local Street is located [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Residential Neighborhood Route. [ORD 4061; October 1999] A Residential Neighborhood Route is a street that is usually long relative to Local Streets and provides connectivity to Collectors or Arterials. Neighborhood Routes generally have more traffic than Local Streets and are used by residents in the area to get into and out of the neighborhood, but do not serve citywide/large area circulation.
Residential Street. A public way, lane, cul-de-sac, Local Street or Neighborhood Route serving primarily access functions, directly or indirectly, to one or more parcels that are predominantly residential in character or zoned for residential uses.
Restaurant. An establishment where meals are prepared and served to the public for consumption on the premises entirely.
Restaurant, Takeout. An establishment where some or all of the meals or food are prepared for customers to take off the premises.
Retail Marijuana Sales. Includes the sales of recreational marijuana products that are authorized pursuant to ORS 475B.110-125 and OAR Chapter 845, division 25. [ORD 4674; Feb 2016]
Retail Store. A place of sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 44 06/18/2019
Rooftop Garden. [ORD 4414; January 2007] A vegetated roof constructed for water quality and quantity control as well as passive recreation or active recreation or both.
Roof Sign. A sign that is erected, maintained, and displayed above the top of an exterior wall. [ORD 4139; February 2001] [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Root Zone. Area of the ground around the base of the tree measured from the trunk to 5 feet beyond the outer base of the branching system.
Rough Grade. See “Grade”. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Salvage Yard. A place out-of-doors where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including vehicle wrecking yards, building wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places of storage of salvaged building; wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but not including rummage, yard or garage sales of no more than four (4) days duration. Three or more dismantled or inoperable vehicles on one lot shall constitute a salvage yard.
Satellite Antenna. [ORD 4248; May 2003] The beaming or receiving of data from satellites, inclusive of satellite dishes, and microwave dishes.
Search Ring. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A geographic area identified by the communications service provider within which a wireless telecommunication facility must be located to provide coverage within a cell of its delivery system.
Secondary Entrance. [ORD 4332; January 2005] A building entry designed for limited use by building users, such as employee-only access. A secondary entry is typically not used by the public or building visitors.
Self-Storage Facilities. [ORD 4354; July 2005] A business that provides individual storage spaces for customers to store personal or business goods. This term is often used synonymously with “mini-storage” and “mini-warehouse”.
Service Business or Professional Services. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Uses engaged in providing services to the general public: such as small dental and medical offices, real estate, insurance, administrative facilities, personal care, business; professional, and similar services.
Service Provider. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A local, regional, state, or federal agency, or a public or private utility company that provides a service to development within the community.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 45 06/18/2019
Service Provider. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A person or company in the business of designing, installing, marketing and servicing of wireless communication services including cellular telephone, personal communication services (PCS), enhanced/specialized mobile telephone services, and commercial paging services.
Service Station. An establishment selling fuel and oil for vehicles; selling, servicing and installing tires, batteries, accessories and related products; furnishing minor repair and service when conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and at which incidental services are conducted. "Minor repair and service", as used in this definition, shall be understood to exclude activities such as painting, bodywork, steam cleaning, tire recapping, major engine or transmission overhaul or repair involving removal of a cylinder head or crankcase, and mechanical car washing.
Setback. The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference to a line which is parallel to the point or line of reference. The point of line of reference will be the lot line following any required dedication or a special or reservation line if one is required pursuant to this ordinance. [ORD 4486; July 2008]
Severe Cold. [ORD 4505; May 2009] A period of two or more days where temperatures are forecasted or actually reach 32 degrees Fahrenheit or below (November to March).
Severe Heat. [ORD 4505; May 2009] A period of two or more days where temperatures are forecasted or actually reach 98 degrees Fahrenheit or above (June to August).
Shade. A shadow cast by the shade point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south.
Shade Point. The part of a structure or non-exempt tree that casts the longest shadow onto the adjacent northern lot(s) when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south; except a shadow caused by a narrow object such as a mast or whip antenna, a dish antenna with a diameter of 3 feet or less, a chimney, utility pole, or wire. The height of the shade point shall be measured from the shade point to either the average elevation at the front lot line or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line. If the shade point is located at the north end of the ridgeline of a structure oriented within 45 degrees of a true north-south line, the shade point height computed according to the preceding sentence may be reduced by 3 feet. If a structure has a roof oriented within 45 degrees of a true east-west line with a pitch that is flatter than 5 feet (vertical) in 12 feet (horizontal) the shade point will be the eave of the roof. If such a roof has a pitch that is 5 feet in 12 feet or steeper, the shade point will be the peak of the roof (see Figures 4 and 5 - SOL).
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 46 06/18/2019
Shade Reduction Line. A line drawn parallel to the northern lot line that intersects the shade point (see Figure 6 - SOL).
Shadow Pattern. A graphic representation of an area that would be shaded by the shade point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging between 22.7 degrees east and west of true south (see Figure 12 - SOL).
Shared Court. [ORD 4542; June 2010] A right-of-way or tract that is designed to accommodate – within the same circulation space – access for vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles to abutting property. Instead of a sidewalk area that is separate from vehicle areas, a shared court is surfaced with paving blocks, bricks or other ornamental pavers to clearly indicate that the entire street is intended for pedestrians as well as vehicles. A shared court may also include traffic calming measures to ensure safe co-existence of pedestrians, vehicles, and bicycles. Like a common green, a shared court may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features and street furniture may be included in a shared court, such as trees, shrubs, lighting fixtures, and benches.
Shared Roadway. [ORD 4061; October 1999] A street which is recommended for bicycle use but does not have a specific area designated within the right-of-way.
Shared-Use Path. [ORD 4302; June 2004] An off-street path that can be used and shared by several transportation modes, including bicycles, pedestrians, and other non-motorized modes. Shared-use paths accommodate two-way travel.
Shopping Center. [ORD 4071; November 1999] A grouping of retail and service uses on a single site with common parking facilities.
Sidewalk. [ORD 4061; October 1999] Sidewalks are located along streets, within the right-of-way or easement, separated by a curb, planter, or both from the street and designated for preferential use by pedestrians.
Sign. Any lettered or pictorial device designed to inform or attract attention. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Sign Associated with Drive-up Window Facility. A sign placed along the approach to a drive-up window facility that may include communication devices. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Significant Grove. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Groves that are mapped on the City’s Inventory of Significant Trees and Groves, that have a unique identification code and include all species within the grove boundary as listed in the inventory documents for that grove code.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 47 06/18/2019
Significant Natural Resource Area (SNRA). [ORD 4224; September 2002] Resources identified in Volume III of the Comprehensive Plan as “significant” pursuant to Statewide Planning Goal 5. For the South Cooper Mountain Community Plan area Significant Natural Resource Areas include Class I and II riparian habitat areas and Class A and B upland wildlife areas as determined by Metro Council designation of these areas as regionally significant fish and wildlife habitat through Metro Title 13 implementation for areas brought within the Metro UGB after December 28, 2005. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
Significant Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] A tree or grouping of trees that is mapped on the City’s Inventory of Significant Trees and Groves, which has a unique identification code as listed in the inventory documents for that individual tree code.
Significant Tree and Grove Inventory Analysis. [ORD 4224; September 2002] The inventory of significant trees and groves conducted under the direction of the Beaverton Board of Design Review in 1991. The criteria on which listed trees and groves were determined to be significant are as follows:
1. An individual tree shall be considered significant if the Board finds:
(a) The tree has a distinctive size, shape, or location which warrants a significant status; or
(b) The tree possesses exceptional beauty which warrants a significant status; or
(c) The tree is significant due to a functional or aesthetic relationship to a natural resource.
2. A grove as defined in Section 90 shall be considered significant if the Board finds that:
(a) The grove is relatively mature and evenly aged; and
(b) The grove has a purity of species composition or is of a rare or unusual nature; and
(c) The grove is in a healthy growing condition; or
(d) The grove has a crucial functional and/or aesthetic relationship to a natural resource.
Sight Clearance Area. [ORD 4302; June 2004] A triangular shaped area in the vicinity of an intersection that must be kept clear of visual obstructions in order to maintain safe operation of the intersection. Sight clearance area standards are identified in the Engineering Design Manual. [ORD 4462; January 2008]
Signal Progression. [ORD 4302; June 2004] Signal progression is achieved when a group of traffic signals are programmed so that they permit the continuous flow of vehicles at a set speed in a certain direction. Good signal progression reduces stops, delay, fuel consumption, and emissions.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 48 06/18/2019
Single Face Sign. See “Faces”.
Site. That parcel of real property in common ownership, notwithstanding that the particular application may be for development of a portion of the site only. [ORD 4584; June 2012]
Site Plan. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions all the uses proposed for a parcel of land, and other information as required by specific sections of this ordinance.
Site Soil Amendment. [ORD 4414; January 2007] A soil amendment is any material added to a soil that improves its physical properties, such as water retention, permeability, water infiltration, drainage, aeration and structure. To do its work, an amendment must be thoroughly mixed into the soil. Amending a soil is not the same thing as mulching, although many mulches also are used as amendments, a mulch is left on the soil surface. The mix of amendments added to site soils varies depending on the composition of the site soils; please refer to the Guidance Manual for further information.
Social Organizations. [ORD 4542; June 2010] Social and fraternal organizations.
Solar Access Height Limit. A series of contour lines establishing the maximum permitted height for non-exempt vegetation on lots affected by a Solar Access Permit. (See Figure 11 - SOL)
Solar Access Permit. A document issued by the City that describes the maximum height that non-exempt vegetation is allowed to grow on lots to which a Solar Access Permit applies.
Solar Feature. A device or combination of devices or elements that does or will use direct sunlight as a source of energy for such purposes as heating or cooling of a structure, heating or pumping of water, and generating electricity. Examples of a solar feature include a window that contains at least 20 square feet of glazing oriented within 45 degrees east and west of true south, a solar greenhouse, or a solar hot water heater. A solar feature may be used for purposes in addition to collecting solar energy, including but not limited to serving as a structural member or part of a roof, wall, or window. A south-facing wall without windows and without other features that use solar energy is not a solar feature for purposes of this ordinance.
Solar Gain Line. A line parallel to the northern property line(s) of the lot(s) south of and adjoining a given lot, including lots separated only by a street, that intersects the solar feature on that lot (see Figure 7 - SOL).
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 49 06/18/2019
Solar Friendly Tree. A tree which the Director has determined does not cause significant winter shade due to foliar period and branch structure. The Director shall maintain a list of generally recognized solar friendly trees.
South or South Facing. True south, or 20 degrees east of magnetic south.
Square Footage. [ORD 4079; December 1999] In all instances in the Development Code where the text reads “square feet” or “square footage”, the term shall be mean “gross square feet” or “gross square footage” except in those instances where the Development Code text specifically reads “net square feet” or “net square footage”. In those instances, “net square feet” or “net square footage” shall apply.
Stable. A building in which livestock is sheltered and fed.
Stealth Design. ORD 4248; May 2003] The design of wireless communications facilities in a manner that camouflages, or conceals, or disguises the facilities as described below:
1. Camouflage. The use of shape, color, and texture to cause an object to appear to become a part of something else, usually a structure, such as a building, wall or roof. “Camouflage” does not mean invisible, but rather appearing as part of or exactly like the structure used as a mount.
2. Concealment. Fully hidden from view. For example, a Wireless Communication Facility (WCF) is concealed when it is completely hidden or contained within a structure, such as a building, wall, or roof.
3. Disguised. A Wireless Communication Facility (WCF) that has been changed to appear to be something other than what it really is. For example, WCFs are sometimes disguised to appear as trees or flagpoles.
Storage Yard. Any lot, or portion of a lot, which is used for the sole purpose of the outdoor storage of fully operable vehicles, construction equipment, construction materials or other tangible materials and equipment.
Story. That portion of a building between any floor and the next floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building between the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above it. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused under floor space is more than six feet above grade at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused under floor space shall be considered a story.
Street. A public way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 50 06/18/2019
Street Tree. [ORD 3989; August 1997] Any tree located within the public or private right of way or easement for vehicular access, or associated public utility easements.
Structure. Anything which is constructed, erected or built and located on or under the ground, or attached to something fixed to the ground.
Structure. A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. [ORD 3563; May 1987]
Subdivide Land. To divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.
Subdivision. An act of subdividing land, or an area, or a tract of land subdivided as defined in “Subdivide Land.”
Substantial Construction. Providing there are buildings on the site, the completion of construction of footings for the building where the principal use will take place shall constitute substantial construction. In the case of a land division, substantial construction shall be deemed to have taken place when vehicular access and utility provision to the resulting lots or parcels is achieved through the grading, coring and rocking of the proposed streets along with installation of pipes and utility structures. [ORD 4483; June 2008]
Substantial Increase. [ORD 4595; February 2013] Relates to the collocation of any Wireless Communications Facilities. Substantial increase in the size of the “tower” occurs if:
1. The mounting of the proposed antenna on the tower would increase the existing height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty-feet (20’), whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this paragraph if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
2. The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4), or more than one new equipment shelter; or
3. The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty-feet (20’), or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this paragraph if necessary to shelter the antenna from the inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable; or
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 51 06/18/2019
4. The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site.
Sunchart. One or more photographs that plot the position of the sun between 10:30 am and 1:30 pm on January 21, prepared pursuant to guidelines issued by the Director. The sunchart shall show the southern skyline through a transparent grid on which is imposed solar altitude for 45 degree and 30 minute northern latitude in 10 degree increments and solar azimuth from true south in 15 degree increments.
Surveyed Tree. [ORD 4348; May 2005] Trees on a proposed development site that are required to be identified in a Tree Plan application. Trees required to be surveyed include all trees greater than or equal to ten (10) inches DBH (including nuisance trees) and the following trees greater than or equal to six (6) inches DBH: western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) or mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana) trees, Pacific madrone (Arbutus andrachne) trees, and big-leaf maple (Acer macrophyllum) trees.
Sustainable Building Practices. [ORD 4430; April 2007] Land preparation, materials selection, life-cycle of the building (construction, operation and maintenance, demolition). Sustainable building includes such practices as redevelopment of inefficiently designed or environmentally damaged sites; job-site recycling of construction materials; native vegetation landscapes; stream and wetland protection and restoration; natural drainage; energy and water efficiency; low toxicity materials; recycled materials; reduced use of land and materials; and design for re-use.
Sustainable Landscape Practices. [ORD 4430; April 2007] Landscape maintenance and design that limits the use of herbicides, fertilizers, and pesticides by planting native plants and appropriate ornamentals and uses METRO certified composted mulch to amend soils and mulch plant beds. These practices naturally fertilize the soil and reduce irrigation and fertilizer needs by creating healthy soils. Sustainable landscape practices also include the concept of creating multi-functional landscapes that can serve various purposes. For example an area may be designed to manage runoff, provide screening, wind protection habitat, and serve active open space use.
Temporary Living Quarters. [ORD 3975; March 1997] Temporary living accommodations, such as: Hotels, Motels, Extended-Stay Hotels, Single-Residency Occupancy Hotels, Bed and Breakfasts, or Boarding, Rooming or Lodging House.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 52 06/18/2019
Temporary Real Estate Office. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A permanent structure that is used as an office for the purpose of selling real estate on a temporary basis. This definition does not include model homes, unless a sales office is located within the model home. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Temporary sign. A sign that is temporarily displayed, including but not limited to a banner, portable sign, and lawn sign.
Temporary Structure. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A structure such as a trailer or steel container storage unit without any foundation or footings which is attached to the ground or other structure in a non-permanent fashion. Temporary structures shall be removed from the site when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was established has ceased. For the purposes of this Code, temporary structures shall not be classified by definition as accessory structures.
Temporary Use. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A short-term, seasonal, or intermittent use.
Through Lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. In the case of a through lot, each street has a front lot line.
“Top-Hat” Antenna Array. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A horizontal platform or enclosed framework of metal pipes attached to a wireless communication facility tower, or other building or structure, that is usually triangular in shape on which antennas are mounted. This type of antenna array is used to facilitate an omni-directional or 360-degree signal receipt. May also be referred to as a “Crow’s Nest”.
Total Impervious Area (TIA). [ORD 4414; January 2007] Total area of surfaces on a developed site that inhibit infiltration of stormwater. The surfaces include, but are not limited to, conventional asphalt or concrete roads, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks or alleys, and rooftops.
Total Traffic. [ORD 4103; May 2000] For purposes of fulfilling Section 60.55.10. (Traffic Impact Analysis) requirements, “total traffic” is defined as the sum of existing traffic, Added Traffic, and site-generated traffic at build out of the proposed development.
Tract. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A non-buildable unit of land created by a partition, subdivision, deed, or other instrument recorded with the appropriate county recorder. This includes a lot, a lot of record, or a piece of land created through other methods.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 53 06/18/2019
Traffic. [ORD 4103; May 2000] For purposes of fulfilling Section 60. 55.10. Traffic Impact Analysis requirements, “traffic” is broadly defined as circulation of people and goods by all surface transportation modes--automobiles, transit, trucks, pedestrians, and bicycles--in the vicinity of the proposed development project.
Traffic Calming. [ORD 4061; October 1999] The installation of speed humps, traffic circles or similar devices intended to discourage speeding or to discourage through traffic.
Traffic Impact Analysis. An analytical and informational document professionally prepared by a licensed professional Traffic Engineer or Civil Engineer in connection with a specific proposed land use application that forecasts the impacts of the proposed land use on the transportation system and suggests ways of off-setting the traffic impacts of the proposed new activities within a geographic area. A Traffic Impact Analysis is intended as a means to furnish evidence and discussion for the decision-making authority to adequately evaluate the decisional criteria. [ORD 4302]
Traffic Management Plan. [ORD 4302; June 2004] A Traffic Management Plan is an analytical and informational document in connection with a specific proposed land use application that describes the impacts of added trips on residential streets and suggests ways of offsetting the impacts. A Traffic Management Plan is intended as a means to furnish evidence and discussion for the decision-making authority to adequately evaluate the decisional criteria.
Transit Centers. [ORD 4058; September 1999] A station with shelters that provides a community transit focus and a location for intermodal transfers. Amenities may include snack bars, drinking fountains, and transit information boards.
Transit Supportive Uses. [ORD 4005; February 1998] Uses which reinforce the transit system and support ridership growth and, by their nature and location, promote pedestrian traffic to and from the use and transit facilities.
Transportation Demand Management. [ORD 3965; November 1996] Actions which are designed to change travel behavior in order to improve performance of transportation facilities and to reduce need for additional road capacity. Methods may include but are not limited to the alternative transportation modes, ridesharing and vanpool programs, and trip reduction regulations.
Transportation Facilities. [ORD 4224; September 2002] Any physical facility that moves or assists in the movement of people or goods, which may include accessways, bicycle facilities, shared-use paths, pedestrian connections, or streets. This term does not include electricity, sewage, or water delivery systems. [ORD 4302; June 2004]
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 54 06/18/2019
Transportation System Management. [ORD 3965; November 1996] Techniques for increasing the efficiency, safety, capacity or level of service of a transportation facility without increasing its size. Examples include, but are not limited to, traffic signal improvements, traffic control devices, medians, reduced parking, channelization, access management and ramp metering.
Tree Box Filter. [ORD 4414; January 2007] Tree box filters are essentially 'boxed' bio-retention cells that are placed at the curb (typically where storm drain inlets are positioned). They receive the first flush of runoff along the curb and the storm water is filtered through layers of vegetation and soil before it enters a catch basin.
Tree Canopy. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The shape of a tree produced by the outer most leaves. A tree’s canopy cover is equal to the area within the drip line. The equation for determining tree canopy area is 3.1416 x (r)2 = x square feet (r being the radius from the center of the trunk to the drip line measured in feet). EXAMPLE: The tree canopy area for one tree with a radius of 20 feet will be equal to 3.1416 x (20)2 = 1,257 square feet.
Tree Canopy, Mature. [ORD 4414; January 2007] The expected size of the tree canopy at 10 years.
Undevelopable Area. An area that cannot be used practicably for a habitable structure, because of natural conditions, such as slopes exceeding 20% in a direction greater than 45 degrees east and west of true south, severe topographic relief, water bodies, or conditions that isolate one portion of a property from another portion so that access is not practicable to the unbuildable portion; or manmade conditions, such as existing development which isolates a portion of the site and prevents its further development; setbacks or development restrictions that prohibit development of a given area of a lot by law or private agreement; or existence or absence of easements or access rights that prevent development of a given area.
Unlawful Sign. A sign that does not conform to the provisions of this Code and is not nonconforming.
Urban Services. The term includes the following services and facilities: a public sanitary and storm sewer system, a public water supply, a street system, police and fire protection, public schools, public parks and library service.
Use, Principal. The main or primary purpose of which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Utility. For the purposes of this code, a utility includes but is not limited to a local exchange carrier or an electric, gas, water, or other public utility, and who owns or controls poles, ducts, conduits, or rights of way used, in whole or in part, for any wire
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 55 06/18/2019
or cable communications [ORD 4312; July 2004]
Utility Sign. A sign within a public right-of-way or utility easement that is constructed or placed by a public utility on or adjacent to a pole, pipe, or distribution facility of the utility.
Utility Stations or Installations. [ORD 4058; September 1999] Installations, stations, or substations which provide electrical, gas, steam, water or other utility services. This Use Classification includes, but is not limited to: sewer or water supply installations, water conservation or flood control installations, or other similar uses.
Utility Transmission Lines. [ORD 4058; September 1999] Transmission lines for sewer, water or other utilities.
Vegetation. Any woody, perennial plant, deciduous, evergreen or coniferous which is not defined as a tree.
Vehicle Repair. The general repair, alteration, rebuilding, maintenance or reconditioning of vehicles, including motor, body, frame, upholstery, interior or paint work.
Vehicle Sales, Lease or Rental. [ORD 4058; September 1999] [ORD 4542; June 2010] The sale, lease or rental of new or used automobiles, boats, motorcycles, or other motorized vehicles that require a license or registration to own or operate. This use classification includes, but is not limited to: Car Rentals, Vehicular Dealerships, Dealerships, Vehicle Sales, Vehicle Sales Lots, Travel Trailers, Recreation Vehicles, Manufactured Homes, Boat Sales or other similar uses, not located in residential zones.
Vehicle Sales Lot. A lot used for display, sale or rental of new or used vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobiles, boats, trailers and recreational vehicles.
Vehicle Sign. Any sign permanently or temporarily attached to or placed on a vehicle or trailer such that the sign is primarily stationary, with words, symbols, figures or images. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Vesting. See “Substantial Construction”. [ORD 4483; June 2008]
Video Sign. An EMC or a sign that uses different technology from an EMC that changes the sign message or background through apparent motion or pictorial imagery. A Video Sign may or may not include text. It may depict action or include a special effect that portrays motion through the display of pictorials or graphics in a progression of frames, including but not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes, not including
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 56 06/18/2019
electronic changeable copy signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
View Corridor. A three-dimensional area extending out from a public space, such as parks, trails, streets, open space, or other civic spaces that have particular significance in preserving the unique character of an area. View corridors in Beaverton may provide a vista of the Tualatin Valley, Cascade Mountains, Chehalem Ridge, or other land forms, vegetation or water courses with aesthetic value to the surrounding area. [ORD 4652; February 2015]
Volume. [ORD 4302; May 2004] The number of persons or vehicles passing a point on a lane, roadway, or other traffic-way during some time interval, often one hour, expressed in vehicles, bicycles, or persons per hour.
Volume-to-Capacity Ratio. [ORD 4302; May 2004] The ratio of volume to capacity for a transportation facility.
Walkway. [ORD 3965; November 1996] A hard surfaced area intended and suitable for use by pedestrians.”
Wall, Exterior. [ORD 4139; February 2001] A vertical architectural member used on the exterior of a building that extends from finished grade level to the eave of a sloped roof, or the top of a parapet. In the case of a sloped roof without eaves, the lowest portion of the roof shall be the top of the exterior wall.
Wall Sign. A sign attached to, erected against or painted on an exterior wall of a building. [ORD 4139; February 2001]
Wholesale. The bulk sale of goods generally for resale to a person other than the direct consumer.
Window Sign. A sign permanently or temporarily attached to or placed within three (3) feet of a window to a building or structure in any manner so that the sign is used primarily as a stationary identification. Window signs include words, symbols, figures or images. Window signs include paint applied to the window area and adhesive vinyl film that is perforated to allow visibility through the window. [ORD 4708; May 2017]
Windthrow. [ORD 4224; September 2002] A tree or trees uprooted or felled by the wind.
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 57 06/18/2019
Wireless Communication Facility (WCF). [ORD 4248; May 2003] A non-staffed facility for the transmission of radio frequency (RF) signals, usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet or other enclosed structure housing electronic equipment; a support structure; and antenna systems or other transmission and reception devices. This includes cellular towers, cellular antennas, satellite dishes, and microwave dishes.
Wireless Communication Facility, Attached. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A wireless communication facility that is affixed to an existing structure, e.g., an existing building wall or roof, utility pole, and water tank.
Wireless Communication Facility, Incorporated. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A wireless communication facility that is incorporated within or concealed behind existing or new architectural features of buildings or structures.
Wireless Communication Facility, Towers. [ORD 4248; May 2003] A structure, tower, pole or mast solely dedicated to support one or more wireless communications antenna systems. For the purpose of this Chapter, such a support structure will be referred to generically as a “tower”. Tower types include:
1. Guyed Tower. A tower that is supported by use of cables (guy wires) that are permanently anchored to the ground.
2. Lattice Tower. A tower characterized by an open framework of lateral cross-members that stabilize the structure.
3. Monopole. A single, upright pole, engineered to be self-supporting and requiring no guy wires or lateral cross-members.
Yard. A required area of land space on the same lot with a principal use unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture or other allowed accessory structures or uses may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. [ORD 4486; July 2008]
Yard, Front. A required area of land extending the full width of the lot between the front lot line or reservation line to a line which is parallel to the front lot line or reservation line. The distance between the two lines is established by the setback requirement for the subject zoning district. The required area of land is to remain, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. [ORD 4486; July 2008]
Yard, Rear. A required area of land extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line or reservation line to a line which is parallel to the rear lot line or reservation line. The distance between the two lines is established by the setback
DEFINITIONS
Chapter 90 DF - 58 06/18/2019
requirement for the subject zoning district. The required area of land is to remain unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. [ORD 4071; November 1999] [ORD 4486; July 2008]
Yard, Side. A required area of land extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line or reservation line to a line which is parallel to the side lot line or reservation line. The distance between the two lines is established by the setback requirement for the subject zoning district. The required area of land is to remain unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. [ORD 4486; July 2008]