


CITY OF BEND CHARTER OF 1995

Approved by the voters of The City of Bend, Deschutes County, Oregon at a special election held on the 16th day of May, 1995


PREAMBLE

We, the people of Bend, Oregon, in order to avail ourselves of self-determination in municipal affairs to the fullest extent now or hereafter possible under the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon, through this charter confer upon the city the following powers, subject it to the following restrictions, prescribe for it the following procedures and governmental structure, and repeal the previous charter.


CHAPTER I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1 Title of Charter.

This charter may be referred to as the City of Bend Charter of 1995.


Section 2 Name of City.

The City of Bend, Oregon, continues under this charter to be a municipal corporation with the name City of Bend.


Section 3 Boundaries.

The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to law. The custodian of the city’s records shall keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a copy of it available for public inspection in the city during regular city office hours.


CHAPTER II POWERS


Section 4 Powers of the City.

The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of the State of Oregon now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5 Construction of Powers.

In this charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or restricts authority that the city would have if the power were not specified. The charter shall be liberally construed, so that the city may exercise fully all its powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law. All powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the contrary.


Section 6 Distribution of Powers.

Except as this charter prescribes otherwise, and as the Oregon Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the city, all powers of the city are vested in the council. As the governing body of the city, the council is the successor to the City Commission of the City of Bend (which was established by Chapter II, Section 2.1 of the Amended Charter of the City of Bend adopted November 8, 1960).


CHAPTER III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


Section 7 Council.

The council consists of six councilors and a mayor nominated and elected from the city by numbered position or, in the case of one or more vacancies in the council, the council members whose offices are not vacant. (Amended by voters on May 18, 2004, and May 15, 2018)


Section 8 Councilors.

A City Council member, who is in office at the time of the general election in November, 2004, shall continue in office as a councilor for the remainder of his or her City Council term. Beginning with the general election in November, 2004 and thereafter, the candidates for the four council positions up for election shall run by numbered position, with the positions up for election being designated Position 1; Position 2; Position 3; and Position 4. Candidates for election may petition to run only for one numbered position, and must declare at the time of filing their petition for election the number of the position to which they seek election. The candidates receiving the most votes for each position shall serve four-year terms. Beginning with the general election in November, 2006 and thereafter, the three council positions up for election shall be designated Position 5; and Position 6. Candidates for election may petition to run only for one numbered position, and must declare at the time of filing their petition for election the number of the position to which they seek election. The candidates receiving the most votes for each position shall serve four year terms. The provisions of Section 22 for filling vacancies shall apply to any vacancy that exists. (Amended by voters on May 18, 2004, and May 15, 2018)


Section 9 Mayor and Mayor Pro-Tem.

(1)    Beginning with the general election in November, 2018, and at every four years thereafter, Position 7 shall be designated for an elected mayor, and a mayor shall be elected for a term of four years. A candidate petitioning for the office of mayor may not also petition for a numbered council position. The candidate receiving the most votes shall be the elected mayor of the City. The mayor shall be a member of council and have all the powers of a city councilor, in addition to the duties and powers of the mayor.

(2)    At the first regular council meeting in each odd numbered year, the council shall elect a mayor pro tem from its membership for a two-year term. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 10 Beginning and Expiration of Terms.

The term of office of a councilor or mayor who is elected at a general election begins at the first regular council meeting of the year immediately after the election, which shall be the annual meeting of the council; and ends at the annual meeting of the January in which the councilor’s or mayor’s term expires. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 11 Appointive Offices.

A majority of the council:

(1)    Shall appoint, and may remove, a city manager, and

(2)    May create, abolish, and combine additional appointive offices, other than city manager, and may remove the appointees to these additional offices.


CHAPTER IV COUNCIL


Section 12 Qualifications for Council.

(1)    The mayor and each councilor shall be a qualified elector under the state constitution and shall have resided in the city during the 12 months immediately before being elected or appointed to the office. In this subsection, “city” means area inside the city limits at the time of the election or appointment.

(2)    A councilor may be employed in a city position that is substantially volunteer in nature. Whether the position is so, may be decided by the municipal court or in some other manner, whichever the council prescribes.

(3)    Except as subsection (2) of this section provides to the contrary, the council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of members of council. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 13 Compensation.

Council members (councilors and mayor) in office at the time of the November 2018 election shall be paid compensation of $200 each month plus reimbursement for expenses that they incur in serving the city for the remainder of their terms. Compensation for each council member elected at or after the November 2018 election shall be set by ordinance, based on the recommendation of an independent advisory committee appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Reimbursement of council member expenses shall be consistent with the plan for reimbursing city personnel expenses. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 14 Oath.

The mayor and each councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitution and laws of the United States, the State of Oregon, and the City of Bend. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 15 Rules.

The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe rules to govern its meetings and proceedings.


Section 16 Meetings.

The council shall meet in the city regularly, at least once each month, at a time and place designated by the council’s rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules.


Section 17 Quorum.

A majority of the council constitutes a quorum for its business, but a smaller number of the council may meet and compel attendance of absent councilors, as prescribed by council rules.


Section 18 Record of Proceedings.

A record of council proceedings shall be kept and authenticated in a manner prescribed by the council.


Section 19 Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

(1)    When present at council meetings the mayor shall:

(a)    Preside over and facilitate council meetings,

(b)    Preserve order,

(c)    Enforce council rules, and

(d)    Determine the order of business under the rules.

(2)    The mayor is a voting member of the council.

(3)    The mayor pro-tem shall perform the mayor’s functions at council meetings when the mayor is absent, or otherwise unable to perform the functions of mayor at council meetings. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 20 Vote Required.

The express concurrence of at least four councilors is necessary to decide a question before the council.


Section 21 Vacancies.

The office of a member of council becomes vacant:

(1)    Upon the incumbent’s:

(a)    Death,

(b)    Adjudicated incompetence,

(c)    Recall from the office,

(d)    Conviction of a felony, or

(e)    Taking the oath of office of another lucrative governmental elective office.

(2)    Upon declaration by the council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent’s:

(a)    Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within ten days after the time his or her term of office is to begin,

(b)    Absence from the city for 30 days without the council’s consent or from all meetings of the council within a 60-day period,

(c)    Ceasing to reside in the city,

(d)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,

(e)    Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, or

(f)    Resignation from the office. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 22 Filling Vacancies.

(1)    A vacancy in the council shall be filled within 30 days by appointment by the council. If the council does not fill the vacancy by an appointment within 30 days, then the vacancy shall be filled at the next available election as provided by state law, provided that election is before the expiration of the term of the predecessor councilor who left the office vacant. The term of the person elected shall begin when that person qualifies for office after the election, and shall end upon the expiration of the term of the predecessor councilor who left the office vacant.

(2)    The term of a person appointed by the council to fill a vacancy shall begin when the appointee qualifies for the office after the appointment, and shall expire at the expiration of the term of the predecessor council member who left the office vacant, or at the annual meeting immediately after the next general election, whichever happens first. If a general election occurs after the vacancy is filled by appointment, but before the expiration of the term of the council member who left the office vacant, then the position shall be filled at such intervening general election. The person receiving the most votes for mayor or the vacant numbered councilor position at such intervening general election shall serve until the expiration of the term of the predecessor council member who left the office vacant.

(3)    A vacancy in the office of the mayor or mayor pro-tem shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the council, with the term of such appointment to expire at the time a mayor is elected and assumes the duties of the office, as provided in Section 22(2), or at the time a mayor pro-tem is to be appointed by the council, as provided in Section 9. Appointment of a sitting councilor to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor or mayor pro-tem shall not extend the term of a councilor appointed to fill the vacancy. Appointment of a sitting councilor to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor shall create a vacancy in the councilor’s former seat, to be filled as provided in this Section 22. (Amended by voters on May 18, 2004, and May 15, 2018)


CHAPTER V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 23 Mayor.

(1)    The mayor appoints, with the consent of the council, members of committees and commissions established by ordinance or resolution, and other persons required by the council to be so appointed.

(2)    The mayor, or in his or her absence or inability to act, the mayor pro-tem, shall sign all ordinances and resolutions; and all other official documents, including but not limited to contracts and deeds, unless the council has specifically authorized other city personnel to sign such official documents.

(3)    The mayor serves as the political head of the city government. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 24 City Manager.

(1)    The city manager is the administrative head of the city government, and may be removed by the council at its pleasure. Within six consecutive months after a vacancy occurs in the office, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment. The appointment shall be without regard to political considerations and solely upon the basis of administrative qualifications.

(2)    The city manager need not reside in the city or the state when appointed, but promptly thereafter shall become, and during his or her tenure of office remain, a resident of the city.

(3)    The manager shall:

(a)    Attend all council meetings unless excused by the council or mayor,

(b)    Keep the council advised of the affairs and needs of the city,

(c)    See that the provisions of all ordinances are administered to the satisfaction of the council,

(d)    See that all terms of franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are fulfilled,

(e)    Appoint, discipline and remove city personnel, except appointees of the mayor or council,

(f)    Supervise and control the manager’s appointees in their service to the city,

(g)    Organize and reorganize the departmental structure of city government,

(h)    Prepare and transmit to the council an annual city budget,

(i)    Supervise city contracts,

(j)    Supervise operation of all city-owned public utilities and property, and

(k)    Perform other duties as the council prescribes.

(4)    The manager may not control:

(a)    The council,

(b)    The municipal judge in the judge’s judicial functions, or

(c)    Except as the council authorizes, appointive personnel of the city whom the manager does not appoint.

(5)    The manager and other personnel whom the council designates may sit with the council but may not vote on questions before it. The manager may take part in all council discussions.


Section 25 Municipal Court and Judge.

(1)    The council may appoint a municipal judge, as a city officer, who shall hold, within the city at a place and times that the council specifies, court known as the Municipal Court for the City of Bend, Deschutes County, Oregon. The judge must be a member in good standing of the Oregon State Bar. The appointee’s term shall be two years, and shall continue until a successor is appointed and takes office.

(2)    Except as this charter or city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, proceedings of the court shall conform to general laws of this state governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(3)    All area within the city and, to the extent provided by state law, area outside the city, is within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(4)    The municipal court has original jurisdiction over every offense that an ordinance of the city makes punishable. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties that such ordinances prescribe.

(5)    The municipal judge may:

(a)    Render judgments and enforce them by imposing sanctions on persons and property within the court’s territorial jurisdiction,

(b)    Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city,

(c)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of such an offense,

(d)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas,

(e)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve in the trial of matters before the court,

(f)    Penalize contempt of court,

(g)    Issue process necessary to effectuate judgments and orders of the court,

(h)    Issue search warrants, and

(i)    Perform other judicial and quasi- judicial functions prescribed by ordinance.

(6)    The council may appoint, and may authorize the municipal judge to appoint, municipal judges pro-tem for terms of office set by the council or the judge.

(7)    Notwithstanding this section, the council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court.

(8)    The council shall establish, and may adjust, the compensation of the municipal judge.


CHAPTER VI PERSONNEL


Section 26 Qualifications.

The qualifications of appointive officers of the city shall be whatever the council prescribes or authorizes, provided they do not conflict with the provisions of this charter.


Section 27 Compensation.

The council shall prescribe the compensation of city officers. The council may prescribe a plan for reimbursing city personnel for expenses that they incur in serving the city. (Amended by voters on May 15, 2018)


Section 28 Oath.

Before assuming city office, an officer shall take an oath, or shall affirm, that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitution and laws of the United States, the State of Oregon, and the City of Bend.


CHAPTER VII ELECTIONS


Section 29 State Law.

Except as this charter or a city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a city election shall conform to state law applicable to the election.


Section 30 Nominations.

A person may be nominated in a manner prescribed by ordinance to run for the office of city councilor.


CHAPTER VIII ORDINANCES


Section 31 Ordaining Clause.

The ordaining clause of an ordinance shall be “The City of Bend ordains as follows:”.


Section 32 Adoption by Council.

(1)    Ordinances must be read in two open council meetings, and at least ten days shall elapse between the first and second readings, before being adopted by the council. Ordinances may be read by title only if copies of the ordinance are available to the public prior to consideration by the council, and available at the two council meetings.

(2)    Upon the adoption of an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the councilors shall be entered in the record of council proceedings.

(3)    After adoption of an ordinance, the custodian of city records shall endorse it with its date of adoption and the endorser’s name and title of office.


Section 33 Effective Date.

A nonemergency ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth day after its adoption or on a later day if the ordinance so prescribes. An ordinance adopted to meet an emergency may take effect as soon as adopted, provided that it receives the affirmative vote of all of the councilors present at the meeting, and there are at least four councilors present.


CHAPTER IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 34 Procedure.

The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement, and the procedure for special assessments, shall be governed by ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable state law.


CHAPTER X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 35 Debt.

The city’s indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A city officer or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is jointly and severally liable for the excess. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.


Section 36 Continuation of Ordinances.

Insofar as consistent with this charter, and until amended or repealed, all ordinances in force when the charter takes effect retain the effect they have at that time.


Section 37 Repeal.

All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are hereby repealed, except for those charter provisions authorizing the issuance of bonds.


Section 38 Severability.

The terms of this charter are severable. If a part of the charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the charter, except as the logical relation between the two parts requires.


Section 39 Effective Date.

This charter takes effect 90 days after its adoption by the voters of the City of Bend.


Section 40 Direct Sales Tax.

Direct sales taxes imposed by the city shall not become effective unless approved by the majority of the votes cast at a citywide election. This requirement does not apply to fees or charges imposed by the City for services or products provided by the City; building permit charges or system development charges; franchise fees including but not limited to cable, utility and telecommunications franchise fees, and any other fee or charge which is unrelated to the sale of goods or services to the public by the City. Taxes and tax increases approved by the City prior to January 1, 2002 shall not be subject to the voter approval requirement.

[Adopted by a vote of the people as an amendment to the Charter on March 21, 2002].

Submitted to and approved by the voters of the City of Bend on May 16, 1995.

(s) Steve Stenkamp, Mayor

Attest:

(s) Patricia S. Stell

Recorder of the City of Bend


Title 1 GOVERNMENT AND PROCEDURES  Revised 7/20

Chapters:

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    City Council

1.20    Advisory Boards, Committees and Commissions 

1.25    Elections Revised 7/20

1.30    City Manager and City Attorney

1.35    Municipal Court

1.40    Civil Infractions

1.45    Impounding Vehicles, Inventory

1.50    Real Property

1.55    Public Contracts

1.60    Emergencies

1.65    Claims Process for ORS 195.300 through 195.336

1.70    Neighborhood Associations

1.75    Percent for Art Program


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.05.005    Interpretation.

1.05.010    Caption.

1.05.015    City Seal.

1.05.020    Computation of Time.

1.05.025    Correction of Scrivener’s Errors.

1.05.030    Definitions.

1.05.035    Severability.

1.05.040    Reference to Offices.


1.05.005 Interpretation.

This code shall be interpreted as giving the City, City officials and City staff the broadest possible scope of authority. Unless otherwise specified to the contrary, the grant of authority or responsibility to any City official shall include the named official and any designee. No formal delegation or designation of authority by the official to subordinate City employees is required. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a specific legal meaning shall be understood to have that meaning. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the specifics enumerated unless expressly so limited. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.010 Caption.

Headings and captions in this code are part of the code and shall be considered in interpreting the scope and meaning of the text. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.015 City Seal.

The original City Seal is on file with the City Recorder. The City Seal is to be used only on official City documents. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.020 Computation of Time.

The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time to complete the act shall be extended to the next day. If the act requires delivery to or filing with the City, if City Hall is not open for business on the day delivery is due, the deadline shall be extended until the next day the City is open for business. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.025 Correction of Scrivener’s Errors.

In preparing adopted ordinances for codification and distribution, the City Recorder shall not alter the sense, meaning, effect, or substance of any ordinance, but may correct manifest clerical or typographical errors, either before or after codification. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.030 Definitions.

As used in this code, the following words are defined as follows, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning or otherwise specified.

A.    City means the City of Bend, Oregon.

B.    City Manager means the City Manager of the City.

C.    Chief of Police means the Chief of the Bend Police Department.

D.    City property means all other real property owned or controlled by the City.

E.    County means Deschutes County, Oregon.

F.    Fire Chief means the Chief of the Bend Fire Department.

G.    Judge means a Bend Municipal Court Judge, including any pro-tem Judges.

H.    Legal owner means the owner who has title to the property, although the title may actually carry no rights to the property other than as a lien.

I.    Law enforcement agency means any City, County, State or Federal agency or department with authority to enforce criminal laws.

J.    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, company, trustee, or any other legal entity.

K.    Quorum. A majority of the members of a body shall constitute a quorum.

L.    State means the State of Oregon.

M.    Tamper means to manipulate or attempt to manipulate a part of the vehicle whether or not an instrument is used and whether or not actual damage is done.

N.    Vehicle means every vehicle including, but not limited to, automobiles, motor boats, motorcycles, mopeds, trucks, trailers, buses, motor homes, bicycles.

O.    Year means a calendar year unless otherwise expressed. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.035 Severability.

If any provision, section, phrase, or word of this code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.05.040 Reference to Offices.

Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the City exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.10 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

1.10.010    Council Rules.

1.10.020    Ordinances.

1.10.030    Request to Adopt Ordinances.

1.10.040    Council Member and Mayor Compensation.


1.10.010 Council Rules.

As authorized by the Bend Charter, the City Council shall adopt rules applicable to the Council and Council meetings. The Council rules shall be posted on the City website. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.10.020 Ordinances.

Ordinances that impose generally applicable rules are to be adopted as amendments to this code and the title of the ordinance is to indicate that the ordinance amends the code. In the event that an ordinance does not specify that it is amending the code, the City Recorder shall determine whether the ordinance should be incorporated into the code. Failure to comply with this section does not invalidate any ordinance. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.10.030 Request to Adopt Ordinances.

A.    Any person may request a Council member to initiate a proposed ordinance. The Council member shall have total and absolute discretion whether to initiate a proposed ordinance.

B.    Any person may request that the Council as a whole initiate a proposed ordinance. The request may be in writing or oral request during the visitor’s section of a Council agenda. The Council shall have total and absolute discretion whether to initiate a proposed ordinance.

C.    If a citizen requests adoption of an ordinance, the City will follow all applicable procedural and format requirements. Ordinances will not be considered for immediate adoption if they have not been placed on the agenda. If the Council decides to proceed with an ordinance proposed by a citizen, the Council will by motion direct staff to prepare the ordinance and place it on a future agenda to give the public an opportunity to comment before adoption. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.10.040 Council Member and Mayor Compensation.1

A.    Council members shall be paid a stipend of 10 percent of area median income (AMI) based on the HUD calculation method for FY 2017 (U.S. Census Bureau’s ACS estimate of area median income for a family of four for Bend-Redmond, OR MSA), and the Mayor paid 20 percent of AMI. For 2017, the rounded AMI for Bend-Redmond was $64,000. Based on this number, Council members shall be paid $533.00 per month, and the Mayor shall be paid $1,066 per month. No other benefits (such as health or retirement benefits) are provided. As provided in the Bend Charter, Council members will continue to be reimbursed for expenses consistent with the plan for reimbursing City personnel expenses.

B.    This stipend amount will adjust automatically every two years beginning January 2021, after Council members take office, based on any revision (up or down) to the AMI as calculated and published by HUD for the current fiscal year. City finance staff are directed to implement this change.

C.    If the ballot measure removing Council member compensation is approved by the voters, the Council should reappoint an advisory committee every five years, starting in 2023, to review and reevaluate compensation and consider its recommendation, if any, to be implemented after the next election cycle.

D.    This section takes effect only if the removal of Council member compensation from the Charter ballot measure is approved by the voters. If approved, it is effective whether or not the directly elected Mayor ballot measure is approved by the voters.

E.    If the compensation ballot measure is approved by the voters, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section for Council members (including the Mayor) elected in November 2018 shall be when those members take the oath of office in January 2019, and thereafter for Positions 5, 6 and 7. It is effective for Positions 1, 2, 3 and 4 following the election in November 2020 (January 2021), or earlier if filled by appointment. City staff are directed to take any steps necessary to implement the provisions of this section. If the ballot measure does not pass, this section shall not take effect. [Ord. NS-2306, 2018]1

Code revisor’s note: The ballot measure referenced in this section was passed May 15, 2018. 


Chapter 1.20 ADVISORY BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 

Sections:

1.20.005    Applicability and Authority.

1.20.010    Board, Committee, and Commission Appointments and Service.

1.20.015    Organization and Operation.

1.20.020    Budget Committees.

1.20.025    Civil Service Commission – Civil Service System for Fire Personnel.

1.20.030    Planning Commission.

1.20.035    Urban Renewal Agency.

1.20.040    Repealed.

1.20.050    Bend Economic Development Advisory Board.

1.20.060    Arts, Beautification and Culture Commission.

1.20.070    Repealed.

1.20.080    Affordable Housing Committee.

1.20.090    Landmarks Commission.

1.20.100    Neighborhood Leadership Alliance – An Advisory Committee. 


1.20.005 Applicability and Authority.

A.    Applicability. BC 1.20.005 through 1.20.015 apply to all City boards, commissions and committees, including temporary or ad hoc committees unless mandated otherwise by State statute or City ordinance. Provisions applicable to specific boards, commissions, or committees shall prevail over inconsistent provisions in these general provisions.

B.    Unless explicitly authorized by statute, ordinance, or other formal action of the City Council, the authority of boards, committees, and commissions is limited to making recommendations to the Council on matters germane to the committee, board or commission, including planning and execution of Council goals related to the subject area of the committee, board, or commission, or matters referred by the Council within the scope of the committee’s, board’s or commission’s purpose. No board, committee, or commission, as a whole, or any member or members individually or collectively, may bind the City, its officers, or agents to financial commitments or obligations. The decision-making authority of boards, committees, and commissions is limited to the authority expressly granted by State statute or City ordinance. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.010 Board, Committee, and Commission Appointments and Service.

A.    Application. Persons interested in serving on a board, committee or commission shall complete an application and file it with the City.

B.    Selection Process. The Mayor and Council members selected by the Mayor may interview applicants for a vacancy. The decision whether to interview applicants or select based on application materials is at the Mayor’s discretion.

C.    Criteria for Appointment. All appointments, including reappointments, to a board, committee, or commission shall be considered in accordance with this section, together with the ability of the applicant to further Council goals and, for reappointments, the individual’s overall record of service. Consideration should be given, whenever possible, to representation of backgrounds consistent with the skill set needed for the board, commission or committee, a balance of viewpoints, and diversity, including representation for all of the community. All board, commission, and committee members shall serve without compensation.

D.    Resident Requirement. Board, committee and commission members should be residents of the City, except in rare circumstances where the person brings a unique skill that may be needed by a particular committee.



E.    Method of Appointment. Board, committee, or commission positions and vacancies are filled by appointment of the Mayor with confirmation by the Council. Council confirmation shall be by approval of a motion.

F.    Terms. Unless a different term number or length is provided for a committee under this chapter or State statute, appointments are made for terms not to exceed four years and will expire either January 1 or July 1 depending on the date appointed, if a replacement appointment has been made. Permanent committee or commission members may serve two consecutive terms, or six years, whichever is greater. Unless otherwise recommended to the Council by the Mayor, an incumbent seeking reappointment will be considered along with other applications. If no replacement is appointed to replace a member whose term is expiring, the member shall remain in office until a replacement is appointed. When the provisions governing membership or terms are amended, the term of existing members shall not be affected unless expressly stated in this chapter.

G.    Multiple Committees. Citizens with adequate time available may serve on more than one permanent, ad hoc or temporary commission, board, or committee; however, in the selection process, consideration may be given to including as many citizens as possible to foster citizen engagement in Council recommendations.

H.    Removal. All members of temporary committees serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and may be removed at any time, in the discretion of the Mayor. Members of a board, committee, or commission serve at the pleasure of the Council and may be replaced at any time.

I.    Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as an initial appointment, but the appointment shall be for the unexpired term. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.015 Organization and Operation.

A.    Election of Chair and Vice-Chair. Each permanent board, commission and committee shall elect a chair and vice-chair by motion annually at the first meeting in each calendar year. The chair and vice-chair of temporary committees authorized by subsection (H) of this section may be selected by the Mayor prior to the first meeting of the committee to best ensure they understand the Council direction for the committee.

B.    Staff Support. The City will provide necessary staff support for boards, commissions and committees, including postage, meeting place, clerical service, and new member orientation and training.

C.    Meetings. All meetings shall be subject to the requirements of Oregon Public Meeting Law. A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business and the concurrence of a majority of those members present and voting shall be required to decide any matter. These meetings shall be an opportunity for public involvement in the discussion of issues relating to that particular board, committee, or commission.

D.    Annual Reports and Minutes. Except for the Budget Committee, the chair or vice-chair of each committee, board or commission shall report on its activities at the request of Council. The written minutes for each committee, board or commission shall be submitted to the City Recorder or Council for information as requested. Recommendations to the Council shall be submitted with the published agenda prior to the Council meeting at which the matter will be considered and in a form prescribed by the City Recorder.

E.    State Law and Conflicts of Interest. Boards, commissions, and committees of the City are subject to State public records statutes. Board, committee, and commission members appointed by the City are considered “public officials.” As such, they are expected to abide by State statutes governing conflicts of interest and other applicable provisions of State Ethics Law. Board, committee and commission members with clients who would be affected by action of the board, committee or commission shall declare actual and potential conflicts of interest of their clients and treat the conflicts as if they were their own. Board, committee and commission members are subject to State restrictions on election advocacy.

F.    Comments. Boards, committees, and commissions may be asked to provide comments to other advisory bodies and staff when matters under consideration relate to their functional area of expertise.

G.    Establishment of Permanent Boards, Commissions, and Committees. Permanent boards, commissions, and committees shall be established by ordinance, except that boards, commissions, and committees may be established by other means if required or expressly authorized by State statute.

H.    Temporary Committees. The Council may establish temporary committees (including task forces, ad hoc or advisory committees) by resolution to address specific issues or to engage in specific tasks, within identified time frames, to make recommendations to Council. The scope of the authority and responsibilities of the temporary committees shall be established in the resolution creating the temporary committees. The Council may follow the recommendations, change the recommendations, reject the recommendations, refer the action back to the committee or take any other action the Council deems appropriate.

I.    City Manager Advisory Groups. Nothing in this code is to be construed to prohibit the City Manager or other administrative staff from creating informal groups for the purpose of obtaining information. This includes technical advisory groups, focus groups, and evaluation teams. These groups may or may not be subject to the Public Meetings Law, depending on the role and authority of the group. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2172, 2011; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.020 Budget Committees.

A.    The City and the Urban Renewal Agency shall each have a budget committee formed in accordance with State law.

B.    Budget committees shall have the rights, responsibilities, and authority provided by State law.

C.    A City Budget Committee member may also serve on the Urban Renewal Budget Committee.

D.    Citizen members serve a term of four consecutive years and a maximum two terms or six years, whichever is greater. Elected members serve for the duration of their term on the Bend City Council. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.025 Civil Service Commission – Civil Service System for Fire Personnel.

A.    Establishment.

1.    The City of Bend Civil Service Commission is established and shall have the authority and responsibility provided by this code.

2.    The Civil Service Rules and Regulations as supplemented by the Fire Association collective bargaining agreement, City personnel policies, City budget and payroll systems shall constitute a civil service system covering employees of the Fire Department as required by State law.

B.    The Civil Service Commission shall have the following duties:

1.    Adopt and implement rules for Fire Department recruitment, selection, promotions, retention, discipline and discharge.

2.    Inspect facilities and operations to implement this section.

3.    Investigate written complaints or statements of irregularities or violations of the Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

C.    Membership.

1.    The City of Bend Civil Service Commission consists of three members who are not officials or employees of the City.

2.    All members shall be residents of the City and registered voters of Deschutes County.

3.    The term of office of each Commissioner shall be six years, except that the term of office of any Commissioner appointed to fill a vacancy in the office shall be for the unexpired term of the vacant office.

4.    The Commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson.

5.    Two members of the Commission constitute a quorum, and the votes of two members shall be sufficient for the decisions and the transaction of the business of the Commission.

6.    The Commission will hold meetings as necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.

7.    Commission members, the Executive Board for the Fire Association, and Fire Department executive staff shall be notified of meeting dates and times.

D.    This section does not limit the City’s authority to create or abolish positions or to determine compensation for Fire Department employees. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.030 Planning Commission.

A.    Powers and Duties. The Bend Planning Commission is established, and shall have the authority and responsibility provided by this code and State law. The Planning Commission is the appointed citizen body that provides recommendations to the City Council on land use policies; makes land use decisions on planning applications; and provides a public forum for community values, visioning and strategic thinking in long range planning. The Commission shall have the following duties:

1.    Review those land use applications within its jurisdiction pursuant to applicable laws.

2.    Review and act on quasi-judicial decisions on land use applications and appeals of land use decisions pursuant to the City’s land use procedures.

3.    Periodically review the Comprehensive Plan, as prioritized in a work plan approved by the City Council through its goal setting process or as otherwise directed by the City Council.

4.    Act as the Citizen Involvement Committee within the Bend Urban Growth Boundary and advise the City Council on citizen involvement programs. As directed by the City Council, this role may include working with stakeholder groups or citizen advisory committees, to help inform refinement and other land use plans, and/or facilitating community engagement on land use issues with groups such as neighborhood associations or coalitions.

5.    Make recommendations to the City Council on Type IV legislative land use actions.

B.    Membership.

1.    The Bend Planning Commission consists of seven members who are not officials or employees of the City. All voting members shall be residents of the City.

2.    No more than two voting members of the Commission may engage principally in buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation, that engages principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two members shall be engaged in the same kind of occupation, business, trade or profession.

3.    No Commission member shall serve more than two full terms or 10 years if appointed mid-term, whichever is greater.

4.    Consideration shall be given to including representatives of the various geographical parts of the City of Bend.

5.    The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair to serve one-year terms. Election of the officers shall be held at the first meeting of the Commission in each calendar year, but failure to hold the election at the first meeting in a calendar year shall not invalidate any action by the Commission.

6.    City planning staff shall perform administrative functions for the Planning Commission.

7.    Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. The Commission may act by a majority of those voting while a quorum is present. The Commission shall meet in accordance with its bylaws. The Commission may adopt and amend rules and regulations to govern the conduct of its business. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2285, 2017; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.035 Urban Renewal Agency.

A.    Governance. The Bend Urban Renewal Agency is created and all authority of the Bend Urban Renewal Agency shall be exercised by the City Council. Any act of the Bend Urban Renewal Agency is an act of the Urban Renewal Agency only and not of the City or City Council.

B.    Officers and Administration. The administrative responsibilities of the Bend Urban Renewal Agency shall be discharged by City of Bend personnel under the supervision of the City Manager, who shall function as the executive director of the Bend Urban Renewal Agency. The Bend Urban Renewal Agency may select the following officers by a majority vote:

1.    Chairperson. The Chairperson must be a member of the Agency and shall preside at all Agency meetings.

2.    Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson must be a member of the Agency and shall act as chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.20.040 Infrastructure Advisory Committee.

Repealed by Ord. NS-2259. [Ord. NS-2172, 2011]


1.20.050 Bend Economic Development Advisory Board.

A.    The purpose of the Bend Economic Development Advisory Board (BEDAB) is to: 

1.    Advocate – Provide input into City policy and procedures from a private sector perspective.

2.    Facilitate – Broker entrepreneurial support among existing community resources.

3.    Market – Brand and guide marketing efforts of Bend as “Open for Business.”

4.    Coordinate – Organize and oversee City resources applied to economic development.

B.    BEDAB consists of nine voting members that represent key industries in the City of Bend. In addition, BEDAB shall include the following nonvoting ex officio members:

1.    One member representing the Economic Development for Central Oregon (EDCO);

2.    One member representing post-secondary education;

3.    One member representing Visit Bend;

4.    One member representing the Bend Chamber of Commerce.

C.    Voting BEDAB members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council and shall serve staggered three-year terms. Members shall serve until s/he resigns or a replacement is appointed.

D.    BEDAB may establish subcommittees and appoint subcommittee members.

E.    Funding for the implementation of the BEDAB strategic plan and the economic development program will be recommended by the BEDAB and allocated and approved annually by the City Council. 

F.    BEDAB shall:

1.    Create a three-year strategic plan for consideration by the City Council.

2.    Identify activities and projects that will enhance economic growth in the City of Bend.

3.    Work with the Bend Business Advocate on business promotion and support.

4.    Report on plans, activities and results achieved by BEDAB to Council.

5.    Propose annual revisions to the strategic plan as needed to improve the economic vitality of the City of Bend.

6.    Work with the City Manager or his/her designee to direct the activities of the BBA and other staff assigned to BEDAB to ensure the strategic plan is implemented effectively.

7.    Advise the City Council on ordinances, policies and activities that affect the economic vitality within the City of Bend.

8.    Advise the City Council on the business license program and fees annually. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2233, 2014; Ord. NS-2172, 2011]


1.20.060 Arts, Beautification and Culture Commission.

A.    The purpose of the Arts, Beautification and Culture Commission (ABC Commission) is to provide advice and recommendations on the appropriate role for the City of Bend to take in supporting arts, beautification and culture and to encourage and promote arts, community beautification and culture with emphasis on community gathering, events, cultural tourism and the arts.

B.    The ABC Commission may make recommendations to the Council regarding City participation and cooperation in arts, community beautification and culture programs and activities. The ABC Commission shall explore, encourage and monitor outside funding opportunities, and, to the extent funds are budgeted, participate or support arts, beautification, and cultural activities and programs.

C.    The ABC Commission consists of four to seven community members who serve three-year terms, a City Councilor and a staff representative from the City. The community members will be selected from diverse backgrounds including but not limited to art, culture and tourism. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2172, 2011]


1.20.070 Transportation Safety Advisory Committee.

Repealed by Ord. NS-2299. [Ord. NS-2172, 2011]


1.20.080 Affordable Housing Committee.

A.    The purpose of the Affordable Housing Advisory Committee (AHAC) is to advise the City Council and City staff on affordable housing issues.

B.    AHAC consists of nine members who serve three-year terms. All members shall have an interest in meeting the needs of very low, low, and moderate income populations in Bend. Existing committee members shall serve the remainder of their existing terms.

C.    The AHAC shall include at least one member with the following affiliations, interest or experience:

1.    A member of the building and development community.

2.    A real estate professional.

3.    A member of the business community.

4.    A member of the affordable housing development community.

5.    A person with experience in lending/financing.

6.    A member of a tenant organization.

D.    In considering the appointments, the Council shall consider the recommendation of Central Oregon Builders Association as to the member representing the building and development community, the recommendation of the Central Oregon Association of Realtors as to the real estate professional, and the recommendation of the Bend Chamber of Commerce as to the business community representative.

E.    AHAC may make recommendations to Council and staff on the allocation of Community Development Block Grant funds and on programs for the promotion of affordable housing. AHAC may make recommendations on the development of criteria for the prioritization and selection of housing projects for affordable housing and CDBG funding, evaluate applications for affordable housing and CDBG funding and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the allocation of funds, furnish citizens with information concerning funding available, eligible uses of funds, and programs and projects. AHAC may provide input on affordable housing plans and provide comments on City affordable housing programs. AHAC may conduct public meetings to obtain public input on the use of affordable housing funds. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2237, 2015; Ord. NS-2172, 2011]


1.20.090 Landmarks Commission.

A.    Membership.

1.    The Landmarks Commission is composed of five members with interest in architecture, history, architectural history, planning, prehistoric and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation, landscape architecture or related disciplines to the extent such professionals are available.

2.    Members shall reside within the Urban Growth Boundary.

3.    The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint two Alternate Commissioners who may take part in any deliberation but may vote only as provided in subsection (D) of this section.

B.    Terms of Office. Landmarks Commissioners and Alternate Commissioners serve four-year terms; provided, that at the time of the initial appointment of the Landmarks Commission, two Commissioners and one Alternate Commissioner will be appointed to two-year terms and, if reappointed by the Mayor under this chapter, may serve an additional four-year term for a total of three consecutive terms. Commissioners shall serve without compensation. Any vacancy occurring in a position for any reason other than expiration of a term shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the term.

C.    Duties and Powers. The Commission shall serve as:

1.    The hearings body on certain quasi-judicial applications as provided in the Development Code.

2.    An advisory body to the City Council on decisions that could affect historic resources.

D.    Quorum. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. The Commission may act by a majority of those voting while a quorum is present. An Alternate Commissioner is counted as part of the quorum and may vote if their participation is necessary to make a quorum. If only one Alternate Commissioner is needed to make a quorum, the Alternate Commissioner who has served the longest time as Alternate Commissioner will be part of the quorum and vote. [Ord. NS-2299, 2017; Ord. NS-2172, 2011]


1.20.100 Neighborhood Leadership Alliance – An Advisory Committee. 

A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Neighborhood Leadership Alliance (NLA) is to provide a direct and continuing means for neighborhood association constituent participation and input to the City Council from a neighborhood and community perspective. To facilitate this purpose, the NLA will provide:

1.    Recommendations, as requested by Council, on the City’s review of plans, ordinances and policies affecting how the City manages growth within the urban area and considers and implements the planning goals for the community.

2.    Continuing input to Council on the recommendations and needs of the Neighborhood Association constituents, particularly during Council planning and goal setting, and as otherwise scheduled by the City for advisory committees. 

3.    Advisory input to the City Council and City staff on pertinent issues that affect well-designed, well-connected, diverse and safe neighborhoods, in light of Council goals and strategic plans. 

4.    In coordination with the Bend Planning Commission and other appropriate committees, provide for increased civic engagement and education for neighborhood association constituents, including planning for an evolving vision of Bend to keep the city vital, and emphasizing quality of life for all residents.

B.    Membership.

1.    NLA membership consists of one member representing each recognized neighborhood association, recommended by the neighborhood association’s board and appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council. 

2.    Initial members shall serve staggered two- and four-year terms. Subsequent term(s) are four years. Members may be re-recommended by their boards.

C.    The creation of the NLA is not intended to change or diminish the autonomy or roles of neighborhood associations, or impact board of director duties, neighborhood association articles of incorporation, bylaws or the legal structure of a particular neighborhood association. Any decisions made by a neighborhood association are under its own rules and procedures and are not governed by the City or this advisory committee.

D.    The NLA shall select a chair and vice-chair, who will serve as the primary points of contact with the City. [Ord. NS-2307, 2018]




Chapter 1.25 ELECTIONS Revised 7/20

Sections:

1.25.005    City Elections. Revised 7/20


1.25.005 City Elections. Revised 7/20

A.    Initiative and Referendum Measures. All elections related to initiative and referendum elections shall be in compliance with the rules established by the Secretary of State’s office and shall comply with State law.

B.    Nomination of Candidates for City Council. Candidates for City Councilor can only be nominated for that office by filing a nominating petition with the City Recorder and may not be nominated by filing a declaration of candidacy. The requirements of the nominating petition and the procedures for filing it shall be as provided by State law except that the nominating petition shall contain at least 150 signatures of electors of the City of Bend.

C.    Declarations of Candidacy for City Council Allowed for November 3, 2020 Election. Notwithstanding any provision in subsection (B) of this section to the contrary, candidates for City Councilor may be nominated for that office on the November 3, 2020 election ballot either by filing the above-described nominating petition or by filing a declaration of candidacy, as provided by state law, and by paying to the City the applicable filing fee.

D.    Election Dates. All elections shall be held on the same biennial State general and special elections dates in accordance with State Election Law. The City Recorder is the City Election Officer and will file all necessary initiatives, referendum measures and candidate nominations with the County Clerk of Deschutes County. [Ord. NS-2374*, 2020; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]

*  Code reviser’s note: Section 4 of Ord. NS-2374 (adding subsection (C) of this section) provides, “The provisions of this ordinance shall be null, void, and of no further force and effect, and the Code amendment under this ordinance shall be repealed, on and after January 1, 2021.”


Chapter 1.30 CITY MANAGER AND CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

1.30.005    City Manager Authority to Adopt Administrative Regulations, Policies and Guidelines.

1.30.010    City Manager Discretionary Authority.

1.30.015    Authority Regarding Contracts and Intergovernmental Agreements (IGAs).

1.30.020    Authority Regarding Real Property.

1.30.025    City Attorney.


1.30.005 City Manager Authority to Adopt Administrative Regulations, Policies and Guidelines.

A.    The City Manager is authorized to adopt administrative regulations, policies and guidelines to implement the City Manager’s authority under the Charter or as delegated by the City Council.

B.    The City Manager’s authority under subsection (A) of this section includes but is not limited to the authority to adopt regulations, policies and guidelines relating to:

1.    Hiring, discipline, termination, supervision and control of City staff other than Council and Mayor appointees;

2.    Operation, maintenance and use of City-owned public utilities, including water, sewer, storm drainage, and transportation utilities, and the watershed;

3.    Operation, maintenance and use of all City-owned property, including: properties generally open to the public as well as City-owned properties that have restricted public access. For purposes of this section, properties owned by the Bend Urban Renewal Agency shall be considered to be owned by the City;

4.    Operation of public services offered by the City, including but not limited to transit services; and

5.    Any authority delegated to the City Manager by the City Council.

C.    Regulations adopted by the City Manager and made available to the public by posting on a City website, by posting at the facility subject to the regulations, or by being made available at City offices shall be enforceable and binding on members of the public. The Council may review any regulation adopted by the City Manager on its own motion, or on petition of any person filed within 30 calendar days of the first public posting of the regulation.

D.    City employees shall comply with all regulations, policies and guidelines adopted by the City Manager.

E.    All regulations, policies and guidelines adopted by the City Manager shall be consistent with the City of Bend Charter, the Bend Code, and Council ordinances. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.30.010 City Manager Discretionary Authority.

A.    The City Manager has the discretion to make all administrative decisions for the City relating to all functions of the City. The City Manager’s authority is limited to administrative matters and does not extend to legislative decisions. The City Manager shall have complete discretion in administrative decision-making, consistent with applicable laws and Council resolutions and policies.

B.    The City Manager’s authority under subsection (A) of this section extends to all administrative matters of the City, except to the extent that decision-making authority is granted to another under applicable law. Administrative matters is to be interpreted broadly to encompass all decisions other than legislative decisions or other decisions expressly reserved to a decision-maker other than the City Manager. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.30.015 Authority Regarding Contracts and Intergovernmental Agreements (IGAs).

A.    The City Manager may sign any contract approved by City Council or contracts that do not require Council approval.

B.    The City Manager may approve and sign any intergovernmental agreement that is administrative in nature and does not involve policy issues that are within the scope of Council consideration.

1.    Intergovernmental agreements are administrative in nature if they involve work to be done by another governmental entity that could be done by City staff or if the City is to provide services and the City is compensated for its services or can provide the services without incurring additional costs.

2.    The City Manager may approve and sign any intergovernmental agreement if the City Manager has the authority to approve and sign a similar agreement with a nongovernmental entity.

3.    The City Manager may approve and sign any renewal or extension of an intergovernmental agreement originally approved by the City Council.

C.    The City Manager has the authority to pay bills and claims. The City Manager shall maintain a record of bills and claims. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.30.020 Authority Regarding Real Property.

A.    The City Manager may approve the acquisition of an interest in real property if that interest is valued at less than $25,000 or if the property is valued at more than $25,000 and is donated to the City.

B.    Dedications of property for rights-of-way shall not be considered acquisitions of property by the City for purposes of this section and may be accepted by the City Manager.

C.    The City Manager may transfer or create an easement, leasehold or other interest in real property if the value of the interest transferred is less than $25,000 and the City Manager determines that the transfer is not contrary to the public interest. For leases, the value of the interest transferred shall be measured by the amount of rent due over the first five years of the lease. Leases of airport property are not subject to the dollar limits of this subsection.

D.    The City Manager may transfer real property or any interest in real property if the sale price is at least 90 percent of the appraised value and the City Manager determines that the transfer is not contrary to the public interest.

E.    The City Manager may enter into, extend or agree to an amendment of any lease at the Bend Municipal Airport if the rent to be charged is consistent with the rates established pursuant to the periodic appraisal used to set lease rates at the airport and the lease does not contain special arrangements that would otherwise require Council approval. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.30.025 City Attorney.

A.    The City may choose to employ an in-house City Attorney or contract with an outside lawyer or law firm to provide City Attorney services. The City Attorney is hired by and reports to the City Manager.

B.    An in-house City Attorney may employ Assistant City Attorneys. The City Attorney may delegate responsibilities under this chapter to Assistant City Attorneys, provided the City Attorney retains supervisory control.

C.    The City Attorney may retain additional outside counsel to provide legal services on matters requiring specialized legal knowledge or training or if the resources of the City Attorney’s office are not sufficient to timely provide all legal services needed by the City. In most cases, retention of outside counsel should be through the City Attorney’s office, although outside counsel may be retained and budgeted by City departments with the approval of the City Manager and City Attorney.

D.    The City Attorney’s client is the City of Bend as an entity. The City Attorney may provide legal advice to (1) the City Council as a body, (2) the City Manager, (3) department heads and management personnel, and (4) individual staff members in connection with their work responsibilities. The City Attorney may independently review legal issues affecting the City that come to the attention of the City Attorney.

E.    All ordinances and resolutions must be reviewed by the City Attorney before being presented to the City Council. As needed, the City Attorney shall provide an explanation to the City Council of support of or objections to an ordinance or resolution.

F.    No City contract or intergovernmental agreement may be entered into without City Attorney review and approval. A contract using a form approved by the City Attorney is considered to have been approved by the City Attorney. The City Attorney may provide blanket approvals of contracts below a certain cost amount. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.35 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

1.35.000    Authority of Judge.

1.35.010    Municipal Court Procedures.

1.35.015    Court Costs.

1.35.020    Payment of Fines and Costs.


1.35.000 Authority of Judge.

The Municipal Judge has all statutory authority of a Justice of the Peace and all authority conveyed by the Charter and this code. The Municipal Judge has contempt authority and the authority to issue warrants to enter real property and the authority to issue orders to compel appearance. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.35.010 Municipal Court Procedures.

Any failure to comply with the Oregon Revised Statutes that may be tried as a violation under ORS Chapter 153 or similar statutes may be tried in Bend Municipal Court. Violations of any provision of the Bend Code shall be tried as civil infractions in Bend Municipal Court. Misdemeanors and felonies shall not be tried in Bend Municipal Court, but any violation of the Bend Code listed as a misdemeanor may be tried as a civil infraction in Bend Municipal Court. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.35.015 Court Costs.

A defendant in Municipal Court who does not prevail shall pay all court costs and assessments imposed by State law. The City Council may set the amount of court costs by Council resolution. Payment of the full amount of costs and assessments is required of any defendant who does not prevail. Costs and assessments are in addition to any fine or penalty imposed by the court. The City may require payments of costs and assessment prior to hearing, and refund the costs and assessment if the defendant prevails. The City Council may adopt nonrefundable fees by resolution to cover administrative costs and costs associated with program supervision by the court. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.35.020 Payment of Fines and Costs.

A.    Time and Method of Payment. If a defendant is required to pay a fine, penalty or cost, the Municipal Court may grant permission for payment to be made within a specified period of time or in specified installments. Unless otherwise approved by the court, the fine or penalty shall be payable immediately.

B.    Effect of Nonpayment. The Municipal Court may pursue collections of fines or penalties by any means allowed under Oregon law. Any unpaid penalty may be filed in the City’s lien docket. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.40 CIVIL INFRACTIONS

Sections:

1.40.005    Definitions.

1.40.010    Purpose.

1.40.015    No Mental State Required.

1.40.020    Civil Infraction Pre-citation Procedures.

1.40.025    Voluntary Compliance Agreement.

1.40.030    Citation Issuance and Form.

1.40.035    Service of Summons.

1.40.040    Filing of Citation.

1.40.045    Response, Answer and Appearance.

1.40.050    Hearing.

1.40.055    Evidence at Hearings.

1.40.060    Decision – Appeal.

1.40.065    Enforcement.

1.40.070    Lien Filing and Docketing.

1.40.075    Civil Penalty.

1.40.080    Schedule of Penalties.

1.40.085    Penalty Schedule.


1.40.005 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Code enforcement officer means all police officers, community service officers, the Building Official, the Community Development Director, the City Engineer, the Fire Marshal, and all other persons designated by the City to serve as code enforcement officers.

B.    Civil penalty means the monetary payment imposed for violation of a City ordinance.

C.    Infraction means an action or failure to act in violation of any provision of the City code, any City ordinance, or any order, permit, license, approval, or condition authorized by code or ordinance.

D.    Responsible party means the person responsible for curing or remedying an infraction. “Responsible party” includes:

1.    The person alleged to have committed or authorized the infraction.

2.    If an infraction involves a condition of or on real property, the property owner, any agent of the property owner, and any person occupying or having possession of the property.

E.    Respondent means the person to whom a citation or summons is issued. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a civil infraction procedure for enforcement of City ordinances. The City may use the civil infraction procedure for any infraction. The civil infraction procedure is not a criminal procedure. The civil infraction procedure is not exclusive, and the City may use any other procedure for enforcement authorized by law, including the City’s nuisance procedure, any procedure established by State law, or enforcement through appropriate actions in circuit court. The civil infraction procedure may be used in conjunction with other enforcement actions or procedures. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.015 No Mental State Required.

A culpable mental state is not required to establish an infraction unless the mental state is part of the code provision, ordinance, or other requirement alleged to have been violated. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.020 Civil Infraction Pre-citation Procedures.

A.    Reporting. All reports or complaints of infractions shall be referred to the appropriate code enforcement officer.

B.    Review of Facts. The appropriate code enforcement officer shall investigate the facts and circumstances surrounding any infraction reported or otherwise made known to the code enforcement officer.

C.    Prior Contact. Before a civil infraction citation is issued, the code enforcement officer may contact a responsible party and may give the responsible party a reasonable opportunity to cure or remedy the alleged infraction. Contact prior to issuance of a citation is solely within the discretion of the code enforcement officer. If prior contact is made, the following information shall be communicated to the responsible party:

1.    Description or identification of the activity constituting the alleged infraction and identification of the recipient as being the reputed responsible party for the infraction;

2.    A statement that the code enforcement officer has determined the activity to be an infraction;

3.    A statement of the action required to remedy the infraction and the time and/or date by which the remedy must be completed;

4.    A statement advising that if the required remedy or cure is not completed within the time specified, a citation will be issued and that a civil penalty in the maximum amount provided for the particular infraction may be imposed. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.025 Voluntary Compliance Agreement.

The City and a responsible party may enter into a written voluntary compliance agreement to attempt to resolve the alleged infraction. The fact that a person alleged to have committed a civil infraction enters into such an agreement shall not be considered an admission of having committed an infraction for any purpose. The City will not serve or file a citation while a voluntary compliance agreement is in effect and is being complied with. If the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are satisfied, the City shall take no further action concerning the alleged infraction other than those steps necessary to terminate the matter. The failure to comply with any term of the voluntary compliance agreement constitutes a separate civil infraction. If the voluntary compliance agreement is not complied with, the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation for the infraction that is the subject of the voluntary compliance agreement. The maximum penalty for willfully failing to comply with the voluntary compliance agreement shall be double the maximum penalty on the underlying infraction. Nothing in this section precludes informal resolution without a written agreement. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.030 Citation Issuance and Form.

A.    Issuance. A civil infraction citation may be issued any time after discovery of an infraction. Unless authorized in writing by the City Attorney, only code enforcement officers or the City Attorney may issue citations for City ordinance violations.

B.    Form of Citation. The City may use any form sufficient to inform the respondent of the nature of the alleged infraction and the options to respond to the citation. The citation should include:

1.    A summons to appear, either personally in court or by submitting a written answer to the court prior to the scheduled court appearance date;

2.    The name and location of the court, including the mailing address where written answers may be sent;

3.    The name of the person cited;

4.    The date, time, and place the infraction occurred, or, if the infraction is of a continuing nature, the date, time, and places the infraction was observed;

5.    The date on which the citation was issued;

6.    A readily understandable statement of the nature of the alleged infraction;

7.    The civil penalty amount for the alleged infraction;

8.    The date and time for the court appearance. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.035 Service of Summons.

Service of summons on individuals may be made by any of the following means:

A.    Service by Mail. Service may be made by mailing a copy of the citation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the individual’s last known mailing address. Service by mail shall be deemed to occur three days after mailing within the State, and seven days after mailing outside the State. Default may be entered against a person served by mail on submission of evidence of receipt, nonacceptance, or rejection of the certified mail by the person served.

B.    Service by Posting. If the alleged infraction relates to real property, the citation may be served by posting the citation at the main entry to an occupied residence or office on the property if the person to whom the citation is issued is not present. A copy of the citation shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, restricted delivery to the responsible person at the mailing address of the property no later than the end of the business day following posting. For the purpose of this section, Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal or City holidays shall not be considered business days. If service is made in accordance with this subsection, service shall be not less than five days before the court appearance date contained in the summons. Service shall be completed upon mailing.

C.    Other Methods of Service. Service may be made by any means authorized by Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure (ORCP) 7, and service on entities, minors, and incapacitated persons shall be as provided in ORCP 7. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.040 Filing of Citation.

The code enforcement officer shall file the original citation and a return of service showing service as authorized in BC 1.40.030 with the Municipal Court. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.045 Response, Answer and Appearance.

Compliance with the State law “violation” procedure shall be deemed compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter.

A.    Response Options. The respondent shall respond to the citation either by appearing in court as specified in the citation or by submitting a written answer that must be received by the Municipal Court prior to the scheduled appearance. Answers and appearances may be through legal counsel. A respondent who submits a written answer received by the City prior to the scheduled appearance is not required to appear at the scheduled appearance. It is the respondent’s responsibility to assure that any written answer is received by the court prior to the appearance date.

B.    Written Answer. The respondent’s answer may take three forms:

1.    A written explanation, with payment of the amount stated in the citation. The statement shall constitute a waiver of hearing and consent to judgment. The written information may contain evidence that the violation has been corrected. The court shall review the written statement, the citation and any other evidence that may be available, including any written submission of the code enforcement officer. The court shall issue a judgment based on the record and may notify the code enforcement officer and the responsible party of the decision. The court may refund some or all of the amount submitted.

2.    An admission of the infraction, accompanied by payment of the amount stated in the citation. On receipt of an answer admitting the civil infraction, the court shall enter judgment in the amount stated in the citation.

3.    A denial and a request for a hearing. Correction of the violation is not a defense.

C.    A written explanation without payment shall be treated as a denial and request for a hearing.

D.    Appearance. If the respondent does not file an answer by the scheduled appearance date, the respondent must appear in court as scheduled. At the in-court appearance, the respondent may admit the infraction, not contest the infraction, or deny the infraction. If the respondent admits or does not contest the infraction, the respondent will be allowed to provide an explanation, including evidence that the violation has been cured, and request that the penalty be reduced. If the respondent denies the infraction, the matter will be scheduled for a hearing at least two weeks after the date of the appearance unless an animal has been impounded or an immediate remedy is required. The court will mail confirmation of the hearing date and time. Appearances may be rescheduled for good cause by agreement of the court and respondent prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. Requests for rescheduling shall be in writing and should normally be made at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing. If the respondent does not deny the infraction, the Municipal Judge shall determine the amount of the penalty to be imposed and shall enter a judgment. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.050 Hearing.

A.    If the respondent’s request for a hearing is received by the court prior to the scheduled appearance, a hearing date will be set by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court shall notify the respondent by mail of the date and time of the hearing.

B.    The respondent may be represented by a lawyer at respondent’s expense. Respondent or respondent’s lawyer shall provide written notice to the court that respondent will be represented. If notice of appearance by a lawyer has not been provided the Judge at the hearing shall give the code enforcement officer the option of proceeding or postponing the hearing so that the City Attorney may be consulted.

C.    The City Attorney may appear at any hearing where the respondent is represented by a lawyer, and may assist the code enforcement officer in all cases.

D.    Each party shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses, to cross- examine the other party’s witnesses, and to submit rebuttal evidence.

E.    If the respondent wishes to compel the attendance of witnesses, the respondent must submit a written request to the court at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing, accompanied by a fee of $35.00 per subpoena, or higher amount authorized by Council resolution, to cover the costs of preparing the subpoena. The code enforcement officer or the City Attorney may also request that the court subpoena witnesses. Signed subpoenas shall be given to the party seeking the subpoena, who shall be responsible for serving the subpoena and for paying subpoenaed witnesses a witness fee of $35.00 per day per witness.

F.    Only evidence relevant to the infraction alleged in the citation will be considered or admitted. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.055 Evidence at Hearings.

A.    Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation.

B.    Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a decision unless it would be admissible under the Oregon Rules of Evidence.

C.    Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.

D.    Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

E.    The City shall have the burden of proving the alleged infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.

F.    The City shall not call the respondent as a witness, but if the respondent chooses to be a witness, the City may examine the respondent and shall not be limited to cross-examination. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.060 Decision – Appeal.

A.    The court shall determine whether the infraction alleged in the citation was committed and shall enter judgment accordingly, including the amount of any penalty imposed. The court, in addition to imposing a penalty, may require the defendant to abate the infraction and may require the defendant to pay restitution to persons harmed by the infraction. The court may impose a community service requirement as an alternative to payment of all or part of the penalty. A copy of the judgment shall be delivered to the respondent personally or by mail. The judgment may provide that payment be suspended if the violation is cured within a specified time.

B.    The decision of the Municipal Court shall be final. Judicial review of the Municipal Court decision shall be by writ of review under ORS Chapter 34. [Ord. NS-2235, 2015; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.065 Enforcement.

A.    Failure to Appear or Answer. If a cited person fails to respond to a citation as required by this chapter, a default judgment shall be entered in the amount of the scheduled penalty.

B.    Payment of Penalty and Fees. Any penalty or fee is to be paid no later than 10 days after entry of the judgment or such later time as authorized by the Municipal Judge or by agreement with the City. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.070 Lien Filing and Docketing.

A.    Filing. A copy of a judgment imposing a penalty may be filed in the City lien docket.

B.    Judgment as Lien. A judgment amount entered in the City lien docket shall be a lien for an initial period of 10 years upon all real property in the City owned by the person against whom judgment was entered.

C.    Renewal of Lien. If a judgment is renewed by the Municipal Court, the lien created by subsection (B) of this section is automatically extended 10 years from the renewal date.

D.    Recording Lien in County Records. The City may file the Municipal Court judgment and a declaration of lien with the County Clerk of any County in the State where the person against whom the judgment was entered owns property.

E.    Licenses and Permits. The City may deny or revoke any City license or permit held or applied for by a person who has not paid a judgment imposing a civil penalty. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.075 Civil Penalty.

The amount required to be paid as a civil penalty shall be established by the Council by ordinance or resolution. The Council may establish the maximum civil penalty by ordinance and may establish the amount to be paid on issuance of a citation by resolution, which may be less than the maximum civil penalty established by ordinance. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.080 Schedule of Penalties.

A.    Infractions for violations of the Bend Code are classified as follows:

1.    Class A civil infractions with a maximum civil penalty of $750.00.

2.    Class B civil infractions with a maximum civil penalty of $400.00.

3.    Class C civil infractions with a maximum civil penalty of $200.00. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.40.085 Penalty Schedule.

The court is authorized to establish a penalty schedule for any civil infraction. A copy of this schedule is to be kept at the office of the Municipal Court Clerk. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.45 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES, INVENTORY

Sections:

1.45.010    Purpose and Scope.

1.45.020    Vehicle Impounds.

1.45.030    Definitions.

1.45.040    Inventories of Impounded Vehicles.

1.45.045    Booking Inventories.

1.45.050    Found Property Inventories (Bend Police Department).

1.45.055    Return of City-Held Personal Property.


1.45.010 Purpose and Scope.

This chapter provides the procedures for towing a vehicle by or at the direction of the Bend Police Department and for conducting inventories of personal property in an impounded vehicle. This policy shall not be interpreted as limiting any legal authority that police officers may have to search persons or to search or seize property. Failure to follow this chapter does not give rise to a claim against the City, the Police Department, or any individual, but may be grounds for disciplinary action by the City. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.45.020 Vehicle Impounds.

Police officers may order the towing or impoundment of vehicles in the following circumstances:

A.    Abandoned vehicles.

B.    Vehicles left in or partially in a vehicle travel lane that block or restrict traffic.

C.    Vehicles that need to be moved from their current location when the owner is arrested, cannot be located, or is incapable of caring for the vehicle.

D.    Recovered stolen vehicles.

E.    Vehicles disabled in a collision.

F.    Vehicles seized as evidence in a criminal investigation.

G.    Under any statutory authority, consistent with constitutional restrictions. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.45.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Valuables means:

1.    Cash money of an aggregate amount of $100.00 or more; or

2.    Individual items of personal property with a value of $100.00 or more.

B.    Open container means a container that is unsecured or incompletely secured in a fashion that the container’s contents are exposed to view.

C.    Closed container means a container whose contents are not exposed to view. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.45.040 Inventories of Impounded Vehicles.

A.    The contents of all vehicles impounded by a police officer will be inventoried. The inventory shall be conducted before constructive custody of the vehicle is released to a third-party towing company except under the following circumstances:

1.    If there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or any other person is at risk, a required inventory will be done as soon as safely practical; or

2.    If the vehicle is being impounded for evidentiary purposes in connection with the investigation of a criminal offense, the inventory will be done at an appropriate time during the investigation.

B.    The purpose for the inventory of an impounded vehicle will be to:

1.    Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property;

2.    Assist in the prevention of theft of property;

3.    Locate toxic, flammable, or explosive substances;

4.    Reduce the danger to persons and property.

C.    Inventories of impounded vehicles will be conducted according to the following procedure:

1.    An inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will be conducted throughout the passenger area of the vehicle including, but not limited to, accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, in any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front seat, and in any console between the seats, and under the seats;

2.    In addition to the passenger area, an inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will also be conducted in the following locations:

a.    Any other type of unlocked compartments that are a part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, unlocked vehicle trunks and unlocked car-top containers;

b.    Any locked compartments such as locked vehicle trunks, locked hatchbacks and locked car-top containers, if the keys are available to be released with the vehicle to the third-party towing company or an unlocking mechanism for the compartment is available within the vehicle.

3.    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, closed containers located either within the vehicle or any of the vehicle’s compartments will not be opened for inventory purposes, unless:

a.    The closed container is to be placed in the immediate possession of a person at the time that person is placed in the secure portion of a custodial facility, police vehicle, or secure police holding room;

b.    The person requests that the closed container be with them in the secure portion of a police vehicle or a secure police holding room; or

c.    The closed container is designed for carrying money and/or small valuables on or about the person such as closed purses, closed wallets, laptop carrying cases and closed fanny packs.

4.    On completion of the inventory, the police officer will prepare a written inventory listing any valuables located during the inventory process. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.45.045 Booking Inventories.

A.    Booking inventories of personal property shall be done as soon as the person is safely inside the booking room.

B.    All personal property shall be collected and stored in an appropriate property locker.

C.    All unlawful weapons, contraband and evidence shall be removed and placed in the property room until lawful disposition is determined. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.45.050 Found Property Inventories (Bend Police Department).

A.    All found property received by the Bend Police Department shall be inventoried.

B.    Found property inventories shall be limited to a general inventory of the item(s) and its content(s).

C.    Found property inventories shall be thorough enough to determine:

1.    Any evidence of the identity of the owner; and

2.    That no hazardous, dangerous or noxious material is retained in the property room.

D.    The Bend Police Department may immediately dispose of hazardous, dangerous, noxious and perishable materials in a manner allowed by law. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.45.055 Return of City-Held Personal Property.

A.    Custody of Property. When personal property of substantial value other than abandoned motor vehicles is abandoned, left on property controlled by the City, is seized, or held by the City for any other reason, the property shall be held by the City. The department that originally takes possession of lost property shall attempt to return it to the owner and if unsuccessful shall turn the property over to the Bend Police Department.

B.    Recovery by Owner. At any time within 60 days after property described in subsection (A) of this section is taken into possession by the City, except when personal property is confiscated or held as evidence, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the property may reclaim it after submitting satisfactory proof of the person’s ownership or right to possession of the property, and after payment of any charges or expenses incurred in the storage, preservation and custody of the property.

C.    Sale of Property. If property is unclaimed for more than 60 days, the City Police Chief may sell or dispose of any personal property described in subsection (A) of this section. Property that has been confiscated, held for evidence or ordered to be destroyed by competent authority is exempt from this provision. The Police Chief shall post notice on the City’s Internet website of any public auction. Sale shall be for cash to the highest bidder. All net proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the City’s General Fund.

D.    Title to Property Sold. All personal property described in subsection (A) of this section which is sold shall be sold as is without any warranty, either express or implied, of any kind, including but not limited to warranties of title or fitness for any purpose. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.50 REAL PROPERTY

Sections:

1.50.010    Purpose and Application.

1.50.020    Classification.

1.50.030    Sale of Substandard Undeveloped Property.

1.50.040    Disposal of Standard Undeveloped Property and Developed Property.

1.50.050    Broker Selection.

1.50.060    Acquisition of Real Property.

1.50.070    Transfer of an Interest Other Than Fee Title.

1.50.080    Transfer to Another Governmental Entity.

1.50.090    Special-Case Property.

1.50.095    Exchange of Real Property.

1.50.097    Lease of Airport Property.

1.50.100    Procedures for Specific Types of Properties.


1.50.010 Purpose and Application.

This chapter provides procedures and standards for the acquisition and transfer of real property by the City. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.020 Classification.

Real property owned by the City is classified as follows:

A.    Substandard Undeveloped Property. Lots or parcels without structures that are not of minimum buildable size for the zone in which they are located or that cannot be developed for other reasons;

B.    Standard Undeveloped Property. Lots or parcels without structures that are of minimum or greater buildable size for the zone in which they are located and that can be developed;

C.    Developed Property. Lots or parcels of any size with structures;

D.    Special-Case Property. Any real property that, notwithstanding subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section, was acquired by the City subject to an agreement restricting the use, transfer or disposition of the property. At the time of a proposed sale of real property by the City, the City Manager shall determine the classification of the property;

E.    Airport Property. Any portion of the property at the Bend Municipal Airport not needed for runway, taxiway, and airport operations. Airport property includes all portions of the airport designated for private development in the Bend Airport Master Plan. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.030 Sale of Substandard Undeveloped Property.

The City Manager is authorized to sell substandard undeveloped property by direct negotiation with an adjoining property owner. The City Manager may, but is not required to, use a real estate broker to assist the transaction. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.040 Disposal of Standard Undeveloped Property and Developed Property.

A.    Any proposed sale of standard undeveloped property or developed property shall be set for a hearing before the Council. The Council may consider the sale of multiple properties at the hearing.

B.    The City Recorder shall cause notice of the hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least five days prior to the hearing describing the property proposed for sale. Notice shall also be mailed to property owners within 500 feet of the subject property.

C.    Public testimony shall be solicited at the hearing to determine if a sale of the property or any portion of it is in the public interest.

D.    After the hearing, the Council shall decide whether to offer the property for sale and shall establish minimum acceptable terms. The Council may consider appraisal(s) or other evidence of market value in establishing the minimum acceptable terms. The Council may decide to offer the property for sale only if it determines that the property is surplus to the City’s needs.

E.    The City shall obtain an appraisal or other evidence of market value before concluding any sale to a private entity.

F.    If a sale is authorized by the Council, it may direct that the property be listed with the City’s real estate agent of record or direct that it be sold by bids. If sale is to be by a bidding process, a notice soliciting sealed bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least two weeks prior to the bid deadline date. The notice shall describe the property to be sold, the minimum acceptable terms of sale, the person designated to receive bids, the last date bids will be received, and the date, time and place that bids will be opened.

G.    The City Manager is authorized to approve the sale of the property if the minimum acceptable terms set by Council are met.

H.    If one or more bids are received at or above the minimum acceptable terms, the highest bid shall be accepted and the City Manager or designee shall complete the sale.

I.    If no acceptable bids are received, the Council may:

1.    Accept the highest bid among those received;

2.    Direct staff to hold another sale, with the same or amended minimum terms;

3.    Direct the property to be listed with the City’s real estate agent of record, or if the City does not have a real estate agent of record, with a local real estate broker on a multiple listing basis;

4.    Decide to keep the property.

J.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Council may adopt, after public notice and hearing, a resolution establishing a procedure for the sale of individual parcels of a class of City-owned real properties, or any interest in the properties, under a single program established within the City for the sale of that class of properties. The City may thereafter sell any parcel under that adopted procedure in lieu of the procedure established in this section. See ORS 221.727. [Ord. NS-2168, 2011; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.050 Broker Selection.

The City may retain a real estate broker of record or retain real estate brokers on a case-by-case basis. Selection of a real estate broker shall be by a competitive process. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.060 Acquisition of Real Property.

The City Manager may approve the acquisition by the City of an interest in real property if the cost to the City is less than $25,000. All other acquisitions of an interest in real property shall be approved by the City Council. Council authorization of a road, utility or other project requiring the acquisition of land shall constitute approval of the acquisition, even if the land to be acquired is not precisely described in the project approval. An appraisal shall be required for all property acquired by the City for more than $25,000. Dedications of property for rights-of-way shall not be considered acquisitions of property by the City for purposes of this section and may be accepted by the City Manager, community development director, or public works director. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.070 Transfer of an Interest Other Than Fee Title.

The transfer of an interest in real property by the City is not a sale of surplus real property if the City retains title to the property. The City Manager may transfer an easement or other interest in real property less than fee title. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.080 Transfer to Another Governmental Entity.

The City Council may authorize transfer of real property of any type to another governmental entity or to a nonprofit entity, with or without consideration, for so long as the property is used for public purposes by the entity to which it is transferred. The agreement shall provide for return of the property to the City if the property is no longer used by the transferee for public purposes. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.090 Special-Case Property.

The City shall comply with all agreements and restrictions applicable to special-case property. The City may transfer special-case property following any of the applicable procedures provided by this chapter, subject to the restrictions imposed by deed or agreement. If the deed or agreement provides a procedure for transfer by the City, the City may transfer the property as provided by the deed or agreement. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.095 Exchange of Real Property.

A.    The City Council may authorize the trade or exchange of real property with other governmental entities or with private parties.

B.    The City shall exchange real property with private entities only if the City receives at least equivalent value for the property it transfers. Payments may be made to compensate for any imbalance in the value of the property exchanged.

C.    For exchanges with private entities, the City shall require or obtain an appraisal or other evidence of market value if the value of the property transferred by the City or received by the City exceeds $100,000.

D.    In determining the relative value of the properties exchanged, in addition to the factors normally considered in determining the value of property, the City may consider the following factors:

1.    Whether the property is adjacent to or otherwise enhances the value of other property the City owns.

2.    The suitability of the property for City use.

3.    Whether the transfer of the property being transferred by the City to a private party will result in a benefit to the City or community. Potential benefits may include allowing more cohesive development of an area, providing needed housing or employment opportunities, or increasing the City’s tax base. [Ord. NS-2168, 2011; Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.50.097 Lease of Airport Property.

Airport property may be leased by the City. Lease rates shall be based on the appraisal of airport property lease values that the City obtains every fifth year, but variations may be allowed based on specifics of a particular lease. Because airport property is intended to be leased, the City is not required to declare airport property surplus before leasing it. The City may, but is not required to, issue a request for proposals in connection with the lease of airport property. Leasing authority is established in BC 1.30.020. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013]


1.50.100 Procedures for Specific Types of Properties.

The Council may by resolution establish procedures for the sale of specific types or categories of real property that differ from the procedures required by this chapter. [Ord. NS-2168, 2011]


Chapter 1.55 PUBLIC CONTRACTS

Sections:

1.55.010    Local Contract Review Board and Delegation of Authority.

1.55.020    Purpose and Policies.

1.55.030    Competitive Procurement.

1.55.040    Personal Service Contracts.

1.55.050    Authority to Obligate the City.

1.55.060    Purchasing from City Employees.

1.55.070    Negotiation with Bidders.

1.55.080    Model Contract Forms.

1.55.090    Disposition of Surplus Personal Property.


1.55.010 Local Contract Review Board and Delegation of Authority.

A.    The City Council shall act as the Local Contract Review Board and shall have all powers authorized by State law and the City Charter.

B.    The Contract Review Board may delegate its powers and responsibilities consistent with the Oregon Public Contracting Code, applicable rules, and the Bend Code.

C.    The City Manager shall have all authority relating to public contracting except authority specifically reserved to the Contract Review Board by this chapter.

D.    Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this chapter, the City Manager may further delegate authority granted by this chapter.

E.    The Local Contract Review Board may adopt rules relating to public contracts and the public contracting process, including exemptions from formal competitive bidding or formal competitive proposal requirements.

F.    As used in this chapter, public contract means any purchase, lease, or sale by the City of personal property, public improvements or services, including personal services. “Public contract” does not include collective bargaining agreements or other employment agreements between the City and its employees. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.020 Purpose and Policies.

A.    The purposes of State Public Contracting Law and this chapter are:

1.    To obtain public improvements, goods and services that result in the best combination of high quality and low cost to the City.

2.    To avoid favoritism in the award of contracts.

3.    To use a process appropriate to the type and amount of the contract.

4.    To encourage competitiveness among contractors.

5.    To use a fair process for the sale of surplus personal property to maximize net proceeds to the City.

B.    The following policies apply to public contracting:

1.    The City shall comply and shall require all contractors to comply with Americans with Disabilities (“ADA”) rules, regulations, and procedures, and will not discriminate on the basis of disability in its purchasing and contracting policies, practices, and procedures. Prospective contractors shall comply with the ADA in employment practices, and perform contractual obligations consistently with ADA Federal requirements/regulations, State Disability Law, and applicable regulations.

2.    Sustainability. The City recognizes that the actions it takes in its operations, maintenance, policies and planning efforts will have impacts on sustainability in our community. It is the City’s policy to encourage implementation of sustainable purchasing. Sustainable practices incorporate three broad factors: environmental stewardship, life cycle costing and equal opportunities for every person impacted by a purchase. By including sustainability in purchasing decisions, the City can promote practices that improve public and worker health, use economic resources responsibly, conserve natural resources, and reward environmentally conscious manufacturers while maintaining cost excellence and value standards. The City shall consider sustainability in soliciting and awarding contracts. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.030 Competitive Procurement.

A.    The City shall use a competitive procurement process in the award of all public contracts, except as exempted by State law or this chapter. Personal service contracts may be awarded as provided in this section or in BC 1.55.040.

B.    Competitive procurement includes:

1.    Invitations to bid and requests for proposals in compliance with State law and applicable rules. A process that involves a prequalification stage followed by an invitation to bid or request for proposals is a competitive process, provided the prequalification stage includes public notice equivalent to that required for invitations to bid and requests for proposals.

2.    For contracts of $100,000 or less in value, obtaining bids or proposals from at least three potential contractors (limited solicitation).

3.    Awarding contracts under a Federal or State master contract or purchase arrangement or program.

4.    Awarding contracts on the same terms as an existing contract award by another governmental entity after a competitive procurement.

5.    Awarding contracts for computer equipment, software and services based on obtaining bids or proposals from at least three potential contractors unless the City finds that fewer than three potential contractors provide the needed equipment, software or services.

6.    Contracts awarded under ORS 279C.100 to 279C.125 and implementing rules, including contracts for related services.

C.    The following contracts are exempt from competitive procurement:

1.    Contracts exempted from competitive procurement by the Oregon Contracting Code.

2.    Contracts under $10,000, which may be entered into by direct award.

3.    Emergency contracts awarded in compliance with applicable statutes and rules. In the event the emergency is of a nature that requires immediate action to prevent damage to property or health (e.g., a major water line break or sewage overflow) the City Manager, or in the City Manager’s absence, the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and/or Public Works Director, may use all the means necessary to meet the emergency. Any emergency contract in excess of $100,000 shall be brought before the Contract Review Board for ratification at the next scheduled Council meeting.

4.    Public facility improvement agreements entered into between the City and a person responsible for carrying out conditions of approval of a City land use decision.

5.    Purchases of used goods when the cost of the used goods is substantially below the cost of new goods, and the City has made a reasonable effort to obtain the best quality goods at the lowest price. The City shall maintain a written record of its efforts to obtain the best quality goods at the lowest price, including a list of quotes obtained from other vendors.

6.    Any other contracts where the public interest would be promoted by exempting the contract from the competitive bidding process; provided, that the Contract Review Board adheres to the Public Contracting Code and the Model Rules in making the exemption.

D.    The City may use competitive procurement even if a contract is exempt from competitive procurement requirements. An exemption from competitive procurement does not relieve the City of the obligation to take reasonable measures to ensure that procurements are consistent with the policy of obtaining the best combination of quality and price.

E.    Contracts awarded by competitive bids shall be awarded based on the lowest “life cycle” costs to the City. Life cycle costs include both initial cost and cost of operating, repair, maintenance and replacement. Contracts awarded by competitive proposals shall be awarded to the responsible proposer that provides the best combination of price and quality, and shall consider cost on a “life cycle” basis.

F.    A procurement may not be artificially divided or fragmented to qualify for direct award or limited solicitation. A series of contracts with the same contractor for substantially similar work without a significant time between the contracts will normally be considered a single contract for purposes of determining whether an appropriate competitive selection process was used.

G.    Notice for competitive procurements may be electronically published by the City and shall comply with State law. [Ord. NS-2210, 2013; Ord. NS-2174, 2011; Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.040 Personal Service Contracts.

A.    A personal service contract is appropriate for contracts for services where the individual qualifications and skills of the person providing the service are essential to the service. A personal service contract is awarded primarily on the basis of the contractor’s qualifications including but not limited to criteria such as experience, training, knowledge, and expertise, technical skill, creativity, artistic ability, performance history, and demonstrated ability to exercise sound professional judgment. A personal service contract is not appropriate where price is the major factor and quality of service is only a minor factor and can be satisfied by compliance with minimum standards.

B.    In addition to the selection procedures authorized by BC 1.55.030, personal service contracts may be awarded by either of the following procedures:

1.    Direct appointment of the contractor believed to be able to provide the best services, taking into consideration expertise, ability, experience and cost, if:

a.    The fee for the contract will not exceed $10,000 in any 12-month period, or $30,000 in any 12-month period if specifically authorized in writing by the City Manager;

b.    The contract is for legal services or for an expert witness; or

c.    The City Manager has determined in writing that it is in the public interest to award the personal services contract without a competitive process and that the direct award will not promote favoritism or discourage competition and is otherwise consistent with the policies of this chapter; or

2.    By soliciting project specific scopes of work and costs from a list of potential contractors established by a request for proposal process. Lists of qualified contractors for certain types of professional services may be established for up to five years by a competitive request for proposal process. The City will annually review the performance of contractors on the list and may delist contractors for poor performance. The City will also provide an annual opportunity for contractors to be added to the list by an additional request for proposal process. A list of rates and costs will be required as part of the request for proposal process.

C.    The following rules apply to solicitation of personal service contracts by competitive proposals. A request for qualifications may be used as the first step in a request for proposal process.

1.    The City may arrange for any or all proposers to be interviewed for the assignment by an appropriate City employee or by an interview committee.

2.    Following a review of the proposals and interview (if used), the City shall select the contractor based on the criteria stated in the solicitation document, which may include the following factors:

a.    Specialized experience in the type of work to be performed.

b.    Capacity and capability to perform the work, including any specialized services within the time limitations for the work.

c.    Educational and professional record, including past record of performance on contracts with governmental agencies and private parties with respect to cost control, quality of work, ability to meet schedules, and contract administration, where applicable.

d.    Availability to perform the assignment and familiarity with the area in which the specific work is located, including knowledge of design or techniques peculiar to it, where applicable.

e.    Cost. Except when State or Federal law or grant restrictions prohibit consideration of cost in selecting a contractor, the City shall consider cost as a factor in all contract awards, but cost shall not be the prime consideration in the selection of providers of professional services.

f.    Any other factors relevant to the particular contract. [Ord. NS-2210, 2013; Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.050 Authority to Obligate the City.

A.    The City Manager may enter into a public contract that does not exceed $100,000 without specific Council approval, provided the obligation is part of an adopted budget and a record is made of the transaction that shows compliance with applicable law and regulations. The City Manager may not delegate more than $25,000 in contracting authority to any other position or department, but the authority of the City Manager under this section may be authorized by any person designated to act as City Manager in the City Manager’s absence.

B.    The City Manager may adopt forms, computer software, procedures, purchasing limits, change order standards and administrative policies for all City purchases. The City Manager may adopt purchasing policies dealing with ethics, sustainability, ADA compliance, conflicts of interest and other administrative matters consistent with this chapter and applicable law.

C.    All public contracts in excess of $100,000, and each additional amendment or group of amendments in excess of $100,000 increments, require approval of the Local Contract Review Board, excluding subsequent phase costs authorized by subsection (E) of this section. Once an additional $100,000 has been approved by the Local Contract Review Board, further amendments will only need additional approval if the cumulative additional total exceeds $100,000.

D.    All public contracts shall include a maximum contract price, which may not be increased by more than 25 percent or $25,000, whichever is greater, for any single change, or 50 percent or $50,000, whichever is greater, cumulatively, without approval of the City Manager. The City Manager’s authority to approve increases may not be delegated except when the City Manager is absent from the City or otherwise unavailable for a week or longer. Changes in a contract will be permitted only when authorized by a written change order or amendment. Change orders that will increase the cost of a contract will be permitted only if there are unexpected conditions that could not have been discovered with normal diligence prior to execution of the contract, if a project cannot be completed as designed, or if the need for the change order is the result of an action or decision by the City.

E.    It is expected that the City will anticipate future needs when soliciting contracts and will scope work broadly enough to avoid the need for contract revisions to add work that could have been anticipated prior to entering into the original contract. The City may contract for work in phases, with a contract amendment for each phase. If work is to be performed in phases, the maximum contract price need only be established for the first phase, with estimates for future phases included in the contract. The maximum contract price shall be established by contract amendment prior to the start of each subsequent phase. If the maximum contract price for a subsequent phase is more than 25 percent greater than the estimated cost for that phase or if no estimate for future phases was included in the original contract, a new competitive procedure is required, except for personal service contracts for professional services that include a provision for establishing the cost of subsequent phases based on a review by a neutral third party. Any contract with phases shall contain provisions allowing the City to terminate at the end of any phase. The City Manager may waive the requirement for a new competitive procedure based on a determination that the waiver is in the public interest, will result in cost savings to the City, and will not discourage competition. [Ord. NS-2174, 2011; Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.060 Purchasing from City Employees.

A.    The purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment, labor or services, including personal, professional, technical and expert services, from any City employee, or any business with which a City employee is associated, is discouraged but may be allowed subject to prior written approval by the City Manager and approval shall be based upon findings that:

1.    The purchase will be at the least cost to the City;

2.    The purchase will result in the most efficient method to accomplish the City’s purpose;

3.    The purchase could not lead to any alleged violations of the personnel rules;

4.    The approval of the purchase could not lead to an adverse employer-employee relationship should the contract be unsatisfactorily performed; and

5.    The purchase is in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and City policies.

B.    For purposes of this section, any business with which a City employee is associated means any business of which the employee or spouse, parent, child or sibling of the employee is a director, officer, owner or employee, or any business association in which the employee or spouse, parent, child or sibling of the employee owns or has owned more than 10 percent of the business within the preceding calendar year. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.070 Negotiation with Bidders.

A.    If all bids exceed the budget for the project or an engineer’s cost estimate, the City may, prior to contract award, negotiate for a price within the project budget, including an amended project budget. Negotiations will begin with the lowest, responsive and responsible bidder. If negotiations are not successful, the City may begin negotiations with the next lowest responsive, responsible bidder. Negotiations may include the inclusion of value engineering and other options to attempt to bring the project cost within the budgeted amount. A contract may not be awarded under this section if the responsibilities of the contractor are significantly changed from the description in the solicitation documents, as determined by the City Manager.

B.    If the low bid is substantially below the budget for the project and the engineer’s cost estimate, if any, the City may negotiate for additional work on the same project on the same terms as the bid. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.080 Model Contract Forms.

A.    City model contract forms will be used unless the City Manager or City Attorney authorizes use of an alternate form. Terms may be amended to take into account specific circumstances. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Manager or City Attorney, contracts shall include the following provisions:

1.    A requirement that the contractor defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees against and from any and all claims or demands for damages of any kind arising out of the contractor’s performance under the contract.

2.    A provision requiring the person or entity providing the service to obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage in at least the amount of the City’s tort liability limits, naming the City as an additional named insured, during the life of the contract.

3.    Contract provisions mandated by State and Federal law. These provisions may be incorporated by reference unless the law requiring the provision requires the provision to be set forth in full.

4.    A maximum contract price. The City Manager may authorize contracts without a maximum contract price if the City Manager determines that there is no reasonable way to establish a maximum contract price and that it is in the best interest of the City to proceed with the contract. The authority granted by this section may not be delegated.

B.    Public improvement contracts shall include provisions requiring compliance with any standards and specifications adopted by the City. Compliance with adopted standards and specifications is required for all public improvements even if the standards and specifications are not referenced in the contract. [Ord. NS-2210, 2013; Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


1.55.090 Disposition of Surplus Personal Property.

A.    Personal property owned by the City and under the dollar value of $5,000 may be declared surplus and disposed of with the approval of any department head or the City Manager. Personal property with a value of less than $25,000 may be disposed of only after being declared surplus by the City Manager. Personal property with a value greater than $25,000 may be declared surplus and disposed of only with the approval of the City Council or if beyond an adopted replacement schedule. No personal property shall be declared surplus if the property is usable and needed by any City department. The method of disposal will be determined based on condition, value, demand, and/or use. Personal property may be declared surplus if it is scheduled for replacement in an adopted budget or it is no longer necessary to provide City services.

B.    When the current market value of an item is estimated to be more than $25,000, the personal property must be disposed of in a competitive process that includes at least one notice published in a local newspaper. The City at its discretion may choose between sealed written bids, a public auction, an Internet auction, or some other process that allows competitive bidding. If no bids are received or if a determination is made that the market value of the property exceeds the offer of the highest responsible bidder, all bids may be rejected, and the City may negotiate a sale subject to the following conditions:

1.    An appraisal of the market value of the property is obtained and documented, and the negotiated sale price meets or exceeds the market value; or

2.    The sale amount exceeds the highest bid received through the bidding or auction process.

C.    The City may sell personal property whose value is estimated to be less than $25,000 by any means calculated to achieve the best net result to the City.

D.    City employees who have participated in the process of declaring goods to be surplus may not purchase or otherwise acquire surplus goods from the City. Other City employees may not purchase or otherwise acquire surplus goods until the general public has a reasonable opportunity to bid on, purchase or otherwise acquire the goods. Departments may adopt additional rules relating to the acquisition of surplus goods by City employees.

E.    The City may retain one or more agents to sell surplus personal property if the selection of the agent was conducted by a competitive request for proposal process.

F.    The City may, with the approval of the City Manager and without a competitive process, transfer surplus personal property with or without remuneration to the following entities:

1.    Another public agency;

2.    Any sheltered workshop, work activity center or group care home which operates under contract or agreement with, or grant from, any State agency and which is certified to receive Federal surplus property;

3.    Any private, nonprofit social or health service activity or entity; or

4.    Any other recognized nonprofit activity that is certified to receive Federal surplus property.

G.    The City may give away surplus personal property to the public at no charge on a first-come, first-served basis for property that it would otherwise pay to dispose of. A City employee may take property under this provision only after it has been available to the public for a reasonable period of time (15 minutes if widely publicized in advance, one working day if not publicized in advance).

H.    The City may trade personal property owned by the City to other government agencies or to other entities provided the following conditions apply:

1.    Trades to other government agencies must be approved in writing by the City Manager.

2.    Trades of personal property with parties other than government agencies must proceed as follows:

a.    The market value of both the item to be given and the item to be received must be documented.

b.    The proposal to trade an item for another item must be made available to an adequate number of other potential traders to encourage competition.

c.    The trade must be approved by the City Manager.

I.    If the City is purchasing new goods or equipment to replace existing goods or equipment and the seller accepts trade-ins, the City may trade in the old equipment in order to get a reduction in the price of the new goods without going through any process for the sale of the used goods.

J.    The City may dispose of surplus property that has no monetary value or that has a monetary value insufficient to cover the costs of a sale by disposing of the property as waste. Property that would otherwise be disposed of as waste may be made available to the public at no charge or at a minimal charge.

K.    All personal property sold or otherwise disposed of by the City shall be sold as-is without any warranty of any kind. Goods sold through an auction or other third-party seller shall be provided along with a bill of sale or receipt disclaiming all warranties. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011; Ord. NS-2145, 2010]


Chapter 1.60 EMERGENCIES

Sections:

1.60.005    Emergency Situation and Declaration.

1.60.010    Effect of Emergency Declaration.

1.60.015    Emergency Declaration.

1.60.020    Emergency Management Policies and Procedures.


1.60.005 Emergency Situation and Declaration.

An emergency situation exists when the health, safety or welfare of the City or a portion of the City is threatened by a potential or actual natural disaster, accident, act of war or terrorism, disease, or other event or ongoing occurrence that results in an immediate and substantial threat to life, health or property. The City may declare an emergency following the procedures of BC 1.60.015 when an emergency situation exists. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.60.010 Effect of Emergency Declaration.

A.    On declaration of an emergency, the City shall have all powers not prohibited by Federal and State constitutions and laws, including any powers authorized in emergency situations. The powers of the City shall be exercised by the incident commander. The incident commander shall be the City Manager or other person designated in the emergency declaration. Notwithstanding the delegation of powers to the incident commander under this section, the City Council will remain the governing body of the City and the incident commander shall remain subject to Council direction and control.

B.    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the City may take the following actions during an emergency:

1.    Procure goods and services without compliance with normal procurement procedures.

2.    Use any available City funds for emergency purposes.

3.    Close or limit the use of streets and other public places.

4.    Order and assist the evacuation of people to protect safety or health.

5.    Turn off water, gas, fuel, or electricity.

6.    Control, restrict, and/or regulate the sale of goods and services, including the imposition of price controls.

7.    Prohibit the sale or possession of any weapons or explosives in public places.

8.    Any other action for the protection of safety, health, life or property.

C.    In the event of an emergency, the City will continue to provide government services to the extent reasonably practical under the circumstances. City employees are expected to report to work and may be assigned to duties other than their regular job responsibilities. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.60.015 Emergency Declaration.

A declaration of a state of emergency within the City of Bend may be issued by the City Manager. Prior to declaring an emergency, the City Manager will make reasonable efforts to contact City Councilors to inform them of the need to declare an emergency. The City Manager will submit the declaration of emergency to the Deschutes County Emergency Manager for County Commissioner approval. At its next City Council meeting, the Council shall consider ratification of the declaration of emergency. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.60.020 Emergency Management Policies and Procedures.

The City Council shall adopt an Emergency Operations Plan and the City Manager shall periodically review the Plan, in an effort to establish procedures to prepare for and carry out activities to prevent, minimize, respond to or recover from an emergency. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.65 CLAIMS PROCESS FOR ORS 195.300 THROUGH 195.336

Sections:

1.65.005    Definitions.

1.65.010    Claims Procedure.

1.65.015    Summary Rejection of Claim.

1.65.020    Completeness.

1.65.025    Claims Processing.

1.65.030    Approval Criteria.

1.65.035    Council Review and Decision.

1.65.040    Effect of Waiver.

1.65.045    Procedural Error.

1.65.050    Recordation of Waiver.

1.65.055    Judicial Review.

1.65.060    Ex Parte Contacts, Conflict of Interest and Bias.


1.65.005 Definitions.

The definitions in this section apply in this chapter. Terms used in this chapter have the same meaning as in ORS 195.300 through 195.336. This chapter is to be interpreted to be consistent with ORS 195.300 through 195.336.

A.    Appraisal means a written statement as to the value of the property for which the claim is made prepared by a person certified under ORS Chapter 674 or a person registered under ORS Chapter 308 and in compliance with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice, as authorized by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.

B.    Reduction in fair market value means the difference in the fair market value of the property from the date that is one year before the enactment of the land use regulation to the date that is one year after the enactment.

C.    Waive or waiver means an action or decision authorizing a claimant to use property without application of the land use regulation(s) to the extent necessary to offset the reduction in fair market value of the property. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.010 Claims Procedure.

Claims for compensation or waiver of a land use regulation under ORS 195.300 through 195.336 are subject to the following procedural requirements:

A.    All claims shall be filed in person or by U.S. Mail. The filing date is the date the claim is received by the City. Claims are to be submitted to the Community Development Department.

B.    Claims must be on City claim forms and include:

1.    The name and address of each owner;

2.    The date when the property was acquired by the current owner;

3.    The address, if any, and the assessor’s map and tax lot number of the property that is the subject of the claim;

4.    A statement of the owner’s desired use of the property for residential use;

5.    Specification of each land use regulation enacted after January 1, 2007, that is alleged to restrict the person’s desired use of the property and when the land use regulations were enacted;

6.    The amount of reduction in fair market value alleged for each regulation at issue;

7.    Whether a previous permit was issued for development of the property including a description of the use and the case file number;

8.    Whether a claim was filed for the subject property with the State or any other government; and

9.    The cost of the appraisal.

C.    In addition to the claim form, the application must include:

1.    A copy of the instrument conveying the property to the claimant;

2.    A title report from a title company including the name of the person in whom title is vested, the most recent transfer date, and a list of recorded exceptions and encumbrances;

3.    The written consent of all of the owners if there is more than one owner;

4.    An appraisal showing the fair market value of the property one year before the enactment of each land use regulation and the fair market value of the property one year after the enactment. The appraisal must include a determination of the highest and best use of the property;

5.    A claim review fee in the amount established by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.015 Summary Rejection of Claim.

The City shall summarily reject a claim if:

A.    The claim is not filed within five years from the date the land use regulation was enacted;

B.    An application for a comprehensive plan or zoning amendment has been approved for the subject property since the date of the regulation complained of; or

C.    The highest and best use of the property was not residential at the time the land use regulation was enacted. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.020 Completeness.

For claims that are not summarily rejected, the City shall:

A.    Determine whether a claim is complete within 60 days.

B.    Notify the claimant of any missing information or required submissions within 60 days of receipt of the claim.

C.    Classify the claim as complete when all required information and materials are submitted, or when the claimant provides written notice that no additional information will be provided. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.025 Claims Processing.

A.    If a claimant fails to respond to a notice of missing information under BC 1.65.020(B) within 60 days, the claim will be deemed withdrawn.

B.    On receipt of a complete claim, City staff will prepare a written recommendation to the City Council.

C.    City shall provide notice of a public hearing on the claim at least 30 days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall be sent to:

1.    All property owners of record within 250 feet of the subject property, including all owners of the property;

2.    Deschutes County;

3.    The recognized neighborhood association in which the subject property is located; and

4.    The Department of Land Conservation and Development.

D.    The notice shall contain:

1.    A description of the claim and the property;

2.    The date, time and place of the hearing;

3.    A statement that judicial review of the City’s decision and final determination on the claim will be limited to the written evidence and arguments submitted to the City;

4.    A statement that judicial review is available only for issues raised with sufficient specificity to allow the City to respond.

5.    A statement that all testimony and written submittals must be submitted prior to the close of the final public hearing on the claim;

6.    Any other information deemed appropriate by the City.

E.    A staff report recommending approval or denial and addressing the approval criteria shall be prepared and will be available at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing. If the recommendation is for approval, the staff report shall include a recommendation on the amount of compensation or the extent of the waiver recommended. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.030 Approval Criteria.

A claim may be approved only if the claimant demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that the following criteria are met:

A.    A City-enacted land use regulation enacted after January 1, 2007, and after the property was acquired restricts the claimant’s desired residential use of the property.

B.    The land use regulation has the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property.

C.    The highest and best use of the property at the time the property was acquired is restricted by the land use regulation.

D.    The land use regulation is not an exempt land use regulation under ORS 195.305.

E.    All other requirements of ORS 195.300 to 195.336 have been met. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.035 Council Review and Decision.

A.    The Council shall make its decision after the close of the public hearing and within 180 days of the date the application became or was deemed complete. The Council decision shall be based on the written record and the testimony provided to the Council.

B.    The Council may reject the claim, pay compensation or waive the land use regulations to the extent allowed by statute.

C.    The Council may impose conditions of approval on any waiver. Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the waiver.

D.    The City shall send a copy of the Council’s decision to the claimant, to those who were sent notice, and others who appeared in the process. The notice shall describe the decision, including the amount of any compensation provided or the extent of development allowed by any waiver. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.040 Effect of Waiver.

A decision to waive a land use regulation does not excuse noncompliance with regulations not expressly waived in the decision. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.045 Procedural Error.

No procedural defect in processing a claim shall invalidate any proceeding or decision unless the party alleging the error demonstrates prejudice to a substantial right. Inadvertent failure to provide notice or complete notice shall not be grounds for invalidating a decision. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.050 Recordation of Waiver.

A memorandum of any waiver shall be recorded in the County deed records. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.055 Judicial Review.

Judicial review of the City’s final decision under this chapter shall be by judicial review under ORS 34.010 to 34.100. No action will be taken on a final decision until the time for filing judicial review has passed or until the final decision on judicial review or further appeal. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


1.65.060 Ex Parte Contacts, Conflict of Interest and Bias.

The statutes, regulations and standards applicable to ex parte contacts, conflict of interest and bias in a quasi-judicial land use process apply to the process under this chapter. [Ord. NS-2159, 2011]


Chapter 1.70 NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS

Sections:

1.70.010    Definition.

1.70.020    Existing Neighborhood Associations.

1.70.030    Recognition of New Neighborhood Associations.

1.70.040    Termination and Withdrawal from Recognized Associations.

1.70.050    Status of Recognized Neighborhood Association.

1.70.060    Grants and Other Assistance.


1.70.010 Definition.

Neighborhood association means an association comprised of residents 18 years or older, property owners, any legal entity that operates a place of business, professional office, government agency or nonprofit institution within an area of the City. Participation is voluntary and open to all persons who comprise the association. Neighborhood associations are formally recognized organizations which offer an opportunity for those comprising the association to participate in the decision-making for their neighborhood, particularly on land use matters. [Ord. NS-2171, 2011]


1.70.020 Existing Neighborhood Associations.

All neighborhood associations recognized by the City as of January 1, 2011, shall continue to be recognized until termination of recognition under BC 1.70.040. Neighborhood associations recognized as of January 1, 2011, are:

A.    Awbrey Butte.

B.    Boyd Acres.

C.    Century West.

D.    Larkspur.

E.    Mountain View.

F.    Old Bend.

G.    Old Farm District.

H.    Orchard District.

I.    River West.

J.    Southeast Bend.

K.    Southern Crossing.

L.    Southwest Bend.

M.    Summit West. [Ord. NS-2171, 2011]


1.70.030 Recognition of New Neighborhood Associations.

The residents, property owners, legal entities that operate a place of business or professional office, government agency or nonprofit institution of any area in the City not within an existing neighborhood association may seek City recognition for a neighborhood association. City will not recognize any neighborhood association that includes territory of a recognized neighborhood association unless a majority of the members of the neighborhood association who live in the territory to be transferred have agreed in writing that the territory will be transferred to the other neighborhood association. Recognition of new neighborhood associations shall be by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2171, 2011]


1.70.040 Termination and Withdrawal from Recognized Associations.

A.    Any recognized neighborhood association may voluntarily dissolve itself and shall inform the City of the dissolution. The City shall terminate the recognition of any association on the date of its dissolution.

B.    The City may terminate the recognition of any neighborhood association if it has not held a general meeting in the previous 18 months.

C.    The City shall terminate the recognition of a neighborhood association as to an area if the City receives a petition signed by a majority of the registered voters in the area requesting that the neighborhood association no longer be recognized for the area. The petition must include a map showing the area to be withdrawn.

D.    The City may terminate the recognition of a neighborhood association that is not in compliance with this chapter. [Ord. NS-2171, 2011]


1.70.050 Status of Recognized Neighborhood Association.

A.    Neighborhood associations are independent entities and not part of the City government.

B.    City recognition of a neighborhood association does not make the association part of the City or make it a governmental entity. ORS Chapter 197 gives recognized associations certain rights to notice of certain land use applications. The Bend Development Code also provides recognized associations the right to notice and comment on certain land use applications and the right to a waiver of appeal fees, consistent with the Bend General Plan provisions on citizen involvement. The role of neighborhood associations in the land use process does not make them decision-makers or advisory bodies to the decision-makers. Recognition of a neighborhood association gives the recognized association the rights granted by State law, the Bend Development Code, and this chapter to recognized neighborhood associations.

C.    The City has no responsibility or liability for actions of neighborhood associations.

D.    Recognized neighborhood associations must designate an authorized representative and provide the City with contact information for the designated representative to allow notice to be provided under applicable land use regulations. Recognized neighborhood associations must have bylaws or other binding rules that require publicly announced and open meetings, govern election of board members and/or officers and meeting procedures, and must maintain minutes of open meetings. [Ord. NS-2171, 2011]


1.70.060 Grants and Other Assistance.

A.    The City may provide grants to recognized neighborhood associations through the City’s budget process, may waive land use appeal fees for neighborhood associations by resolution, and may provide assistance, including coordination and administrative assistance, to neighborhood associations. City grant proceeds may not be used to advocate for or against a declared candidate or ballot measure. Neighborhood associations that receive grants shall provide a written report on the expenditure of grant funds on an annual basis as part of the application for grant funding.

B.    The City may allow recognized neighborhood associations or meetings of representatives of neighborhood associations to use City facilities, consistent with applicable building use policies. [Ord. NS-2171, 2011]


Chapter 1.75 PERCENT FOR ART PROGRAM

Sections:

1.75.010    Purpose.

1.75.020    Definitions.

1.75.030    Dedication.

1.75.040    Public Art Trust Fund.

1.75.050    Siting.

1.75.060    Guidelines.

1.75.070    Ownership.

1.75.080    Decisions.

1.75.090    Implementation.


1.75.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the City of Bend to dedicate one percent of the total eligible costs or one percent of the total eligible funds of all improvement projects (whichever is less) to the selection, acquisition, fabrication, installation, maintenance, project management, conservation, deaccessioning, community education, documentation and registration of public art. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.020 Definitions.

As defined in this chapter, the following terms shall apply:

A.    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

B.    Eligible costs means the City’s capitalized costs for completion of an improvement project, including costs for capitalized tenant improvements. Eligible costs do not include costs for: design and engineering, administration, fees and permits, building demolition, relocation of tenants, environmental testing, environmental remediation, nonconstruction contingency or indirect costs, such as interest during construction, advertising and legal fees. When an improvement project involves the acquisition of real property, costs attributable to land acquisition are not eligible costs, while costs attributable to improvements on the real property are eligible costs.

C.    Eligible funds means the City of Bend’s monetary contribution to an improvement project including bonded indebtedness proceeds unless those proceeds are not eligible as follows. The following are not eligible funds: private development revenue, Federal and State grants that preclude public art as an object for expenditure, local improvement district revenue, water operating fund revenue, water construction fund revenue, sewer systems operating fund revenue, sewer systems construction fund revenue and revenue from any other funding source subject to legal restrictions which preclude public art as an object for expenditure. Improvement projects exclude projects funded by systems development charges.

D.    Improvement project means any project paid for wholly or in part by the City of Bend in which the City’s contribution of eligible funds equals $50,000 or more for the construction, rehabilitation, remodeling, improvement or purchase for a public use of any building, structure or parking facility or any portion. 

1.    Maintenance and repair does not constitute an improvement project.

2.    The purchase of improved or unimproved property by the Bend Urban Renewal Agency solely for resale or redevelopment, in which property is not otherwise to be put to a governmental use, shall not constitute an improvement project subject to the provisions of this chapter.

E.    Parking facility means any area provided for public parking that is controlled through parking management by the City of Bend, including the Bend Centennial Parking Plaza, surface parking lots, on-street parking spaces, and areas controlled through issuance of parking permits.

F.    Public art means original artwork which is accessible to the public and/or public employees, and which has been approved as public art by the Regional Arts Council, acting on behalf of the City of Bend. 

G.    Regional Arts Council means the organization recognized by the State of Oregon that serves the Bend community.

H.    Structure means that which is built or constructed.

I.    Selection panel means a group responsible for reviewing proposed public art and making recommendations to the Regional Arts Council on the selection of public art. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.030 Dedication. 

Any City of Bend official or employee acting on behalf of the City who authorizes or appropriates expenditures for an improvement project shall include in the capital improvement program of the City’s capital budget, and disburse to the Regional Arts Council, a monetary contribution for public art equal to one percent of the total eligible costs or one percent of the total eligible funds of the improvement project, whichever is less, no later than by the completion of the project. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.040 Public Art Trust Fund.

The Regional Arts Council, under contract with the City, shall maintain a special fund called the public art trust fund into which funds dedicated to public art pursuant to BC 1.75.010 shall be deposited.

A.    Such funds shall be deposited into the public art trust fund, and shall be allocated as follows:

1.    Seventy-five percent shall be used by the Regional Arts Council for costs associated with public art including, but not limited to, the acquisition, fabrication, and installation of public art.

2.    Fifteen percent shall be used by the Regional Arts Council for costs associated with public art, including, but not limited to, costs of selection, project management, documentation, community education and registration of public art.

3.    Ten percent shall be retained by the City for the maintenance, conservation and deaccessioning of public art.

B.    Such funds shall be deposited in separate accounts within the public art trust fund if separate accounting is requested by the City or required by law.

C.    Disbursements from the public art trust fund shall be made by the Regional Arts Council.

1.    Disbursements shall be made according to the terms of this chapter and any guidelines adopted hereunder by the Regional Arts Council.

2.    If acquisition, fabrication and installation of art is funded by revenue sources whose expenditure is restricted by the City Charter, Bend Code, or other law, the Regional Arts Council, prior to making a disbursement for public art from such a restricted account in the public art trust fund, shall adopt written findings demonstrating that the proposed disbursement complies with all applicable restrictions.

3.    The Regional Arts Council will report annually to the City on the disbursement of funds from the public art trust fund. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.050 Siting.

Public art selected pursuant to this chapter may be sited in, on or about any improvement project or other property owned, leased, or rented by, donated to, or otherwise made available to the City of Bend in accordance with any restrictions placed by the City. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.060 Guidelines. 

The Regional Arts Council shall, under contract with the City, adopt guidelines to:

A.    Provide for annual reporting to the City;

B.    Develop an annual plan for public art that takes into account the views of the City;

C.    Provide a method for the appointment of representatives to selection panels;

D.    Determine a method or methods of selecting and contracting with artists for the design, execution and siting of public art;

E.    Determine the dedication and disbursement process for the public art trust fund;

F.    Determine a process for the ongoing care, maintenance and conservation of public art;

G.    Determine a process to deaccession art;

H.    Set forth any other matter appropriate to the administration of this chapter;

I.    Develop a public involvement plan for selecting and siting public art. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.070 Ownership.

All public art acquired pursuant to this chapter shall be acquired in the name of the City of Bend, and title shall vest in the City of Bend. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.080 Decisions.

The Regional Arts Council’s decisions as to the acquisition, fabrication, installation, deaccessioning, management, community education and registration of public art, and disbursement of the public art trust fund, shall be ratified by the City Council. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


1.75.090 Implementation.

The Regional Arts Council shall implement the provisions of this chapter, in cooperation with the City Manager or designee. [Ord. NS-2051, 2007]


Title 2 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Chapters:

2.10    Local Improvement Districts

2.20    Reimbursement Districts

2.30    Economic Improvement Districts


Chapter 2.10 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.10.005    Initiation of Local Improvement Districts.

2.10.010    Preliminary Engineer’s Report.

2.10.015    Payment for Preliminary Engineer’s Report.

2.10.020    Notice of Hearing on District Formation.

2.10.025    Hearing on District Formation.

2.10.026    Notice of District Formation.

2.10.030    Final Plan and Specifications.

2.10.035    Construction.

2.10.040    Costs Included in Assessment.

2.10.045    Method of Assessment.

2.10.050    Notice of Assessment.

2.10.055    Payment.

2.10.060    Lien and Foreclosure.

2.10.065    Errors in Assessment Calculations.

2.10.070    Abandonment of Proceedings.

2.10.075    Division of Assessments.

2.10.080    Curative Provisions.

2.10.085    Reassessment.

2.10.090    Review.

2.10.095    Interpretation and Coordination with State Law.

2.10.100    Sidewalk Public Improvements.


2.10.005 Initiation of Local Improvement Districts.

The Council on its own motion or on petition of the owners of at least half the property benefited by the proposed public improvement may direct that a preliminary engineering report be prepared to assist the Council in determining whether a local improvement district should be formed to pay all or part of proposed water, street, sanitary sewer, sidewalk, storm drain, and/or other public improvements. Only public improvements may be financed by local improvement districts. The City may charge a fee in an amount established by Council resolution for filing the petition. The fee shall cover the costs of receipt and processing of the petition and the initial Council action. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.010 Preliminary Engineer’s Report.

The preliminary engineer’s report shall contain:

A.    A full description of the project including boundaries of the proposed district. The proposed district may differ from the area described in the initial petition and any changes in district boundaries do not invalidate the initial petition.

B.    A description of each parcel of land specially benefited, including the name of the record owner of the parcel as listed in the County’s tax records as of the date of the engineer’s report.

C.    An estimate of the probable cost of the project, including property acquisition, design, construction and administrative costs. The estimate shall include all costs assessable under BC 2.10.040.

D.    A recommendation as to what portion of the total costs of the project should be paid by specifically benefited properties.

E.    A recommendation of a method of assessment, together with an estimate of the cost per unit to specially benefited properties.

F.    A recommendation whether to proceed with formation of the local improvement district. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.015 Payment for Preliminary Engineer’s Report.

A.    A petitioner may agree to pay the cost of the preliminary engineer’s report and the notice of the hearing on district formation. A petitioner who agrees to pay these costs shall provide a deposit in the amount of the estimated cost before the City proceeds with the preliminary engineer’s report.

B.    If a petitioner pays the costs of a preliminary engineer’s report and hearing notice, the petitioner shall not be reimbursed if the district is not formed or the improvements are not built.

C.    If the district is formed and the improvements are built, the costs paid under this section shall be included in the costs assessed under BC 2.10.040, and the petitioner shall be entitled to a credit on the assessment imposed on petitioner’s property in the amount paid by petitioner under subsection (A) of this section. If more than one petitioner pays the costs, the credit shall be spread among properties owned by those who paid for the report and notice. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.020 Notice of Hearing on District Formation.

A.    For projects that involve improvements other than sidewalks and associated curbs, unless all owners of specially benefited property have petitioned for formation of the local improvement district and waived the right of remonstrance, the City shall mail notice to property owners of a Council hearing on the proposed district at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Notice will be mailed to the property owners’ addresses as listed in the County tax records as of the date of the notice. The City may provide additional notice if determined to be in the interest of property owners.

B.    The notice shall contain:

1.    A general description of the proposed local improvement(s) and the boundaries of the district, which shall include all specially benefited properties and no properties that are not specially benefited.

2.    An estimate of the total cost of the improvement.

3.    The date, time, and place of the public hearing, and the deadline to submit written objections before the hearing.

4.    A statement of the place where the preliminary engineer’s report and other information on the project may be obtained.

5.    A description of the proposed method of assessment and allocation of costs.

6.    A statement that the purpose of the hearing is to hear comments and remonstrances and that all comments and remonstrances must be submitted prior to the close of the hearing.

7.    A statement that the Council may modify the proposed improvement(s) and modify the proposed boundaries of the district.

8.    A statement that the costs, proposed allocation of costs, and proposed method of assessment are estimates or proposals only and that the actual assessment will be based on actual costs and on a method of assessment to be determined only after the construction of the local improvement(s) is completed. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.025 Hearing on District Formation.

A.    For improvements other than sidewalk improvements, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement and formation of the district and consider oral and written testimony, as well as remonstrances.

B.    If property owners owning two-thirds of the property area within the district to be specially assessed remonstrate against the improvement, the Council shall not proceed with forming the district and financing the improvement by special assessment. This provision shall not apply if the only improvements to be constructed are sidewalks or if the Council unanimously declares the improvement to be needed because of an emergency or public health concern. If a property has multiple owners, a remonstrance by an owner shall be considered a fraction of a remonstrance to the extent of the interest in the property of the person filing the remonstrance.

C.    All remonstrances must be in writing and filed with the City Recorder by the end of the public hearing. Remonstrances may be withdrawn any time prior to the close of the hearing.

D.    If insufficient remonstrances are filed to prevent the formation of the local improvement district, the Council shall have discretion whether or not to form the district and proceed with the public improvement.

E.    Based on testimony at the hearing, the Council may modify the scope of the improvements and/or the district boundary. The Council may use any reasonable method of determining the extent of the local improvement district based on the benefits of the proposed local improvement(s). If any modifications approved by Council include additional property or result in a likely increase in assessments on any property, the City shall hold another hearing and provide notice of the additional hearing in the same manner as it provided notice of the initial hearing.

F.    A decision to accept the engineer’s report, form the local improvement district and proceed with making the local improvements shall be by resolution.

G.    After formation of the local improvement district the City may enter a notice of potential future lien in the City lien docket. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.026 Notice of District Formation.

A.    Within 10 days after the effective date of the resolution forming local improvement district, the City shall mail to property owners within the district a notice that Council has adopted a resolution forming the local improvement district. Notice will be mailed to property owners’ addresses listed in the County tax records as of the date of the notice.

B.    The notice shall contain:

1.    A copy of Council resolution forming the local improvement district.

2.    Estimated construction start and end date.

3.    A statement that the City Engineer will be developing a final plan and specifications. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.030 Final Plan and Specifications.

A.    After a Council decision to form the district and proceed with the local improvement(s), the City Engineer shall be responsible for acquisition of necessary rights-of-way and easements and for development of a final plan and specifications prior to publishing contract solicitation documents.

B.    After developing the final plan and specifications, the City Engineer shall prepare a new estimate of costs. If the City Engineer determines that the new estimate significantly exceeds the estimate provided to the Council at the time of district formation or that there are significant changes in the project, a supplemental engineer’s report shall be prepared and submitted to the Council which shall hold a hearing on the supplemental engineer’s report. The hearing shall be noticed in the same manner as the original hearing, and property owners shall have the right to submit a remonstrance based on the supplemental engineer’s report. The Council shall follow the same procedure and standards applicable to the original hearing. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.035 Construction.

A.    Construction work on the local improvement(s) may be by the City, by another government agency, by contract with a private contractor, or by any combination of those entities. Any contracting shall be in accordance with the City’s public contracting rules.

B.    Construction may proceed after the development of the final plan and specification if the final plan and specifications do not significantly differ from the improvements authorized by the Council after the initial hearing. If an additional hearing is held, construction may proceed after a Council decision accepting the revised engineer’s report and directing that the local improvement(s) be constructed.

C.    The City shall make reasonable efforts to inform property owners of any delays in the construction schedule. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.040 Costs Included in Assessment.

The costs and expenses of public improvements that may be assessed against specially benefited properties include but are not limited to:

A.    The costs of property, right-of-way or easement acquisition, including the cost of any condemnation proceedings.

B.    Engineering and survey costs, including the preliminary engineering report and final plans and specifications.

C.    Costs of construction and installation of improvements.

D.    Advertising, legal, administrative, survey, engineering, notice, supervision, materials, labor, contracts, equipment, inspection and assessment costs.

E.    Financing costs, including interest charges and debt issue costs.

F.    Attorney fees.

G.    Any other necessary expenses.

Private improvements (sewer and water laterals that are the property of the customer) may not be included in a local improvement district project. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.045 Method of Assessment.

A.    After final acceptance of the public improvements by the City, the City shall prepare a final engineer’s report that describes the completed improvement, lists the total costs with a breakdown of the components of the total cost, and proposes a method of assessment. The City shall prepare the proposed assessments for each lot within the improvement district. The City shall provide an explanation of any difference in the proposed cost allocation or method of assessment previously proposed.

B.    The City will schedule a Council hearing and mail notice of the proposed assessments to each owner of assessed property within the district at least 10 days before the hearing. The notice shall contain:

1.    The name of the owner and a description of the property to be assessed.

2.    The amount of the assessment.

3.    The proposed allocation and method of assessment.

4.    The date, time and place of the Council hearing on objections to the assessment, and the deadline to submit written objections before the hearing.

5.    A statement that the assessment as stated in the notice or as modified by the Council after the hearing will be levied by the Council, charged against the property, and be due and payable.

C.    Any mistake, error, omission, or failure relating to the notice shall not invalidate the assessment proceedings, but there shall be no foreclosure or legal action to collect until notice has been provided to the property owner, or if owner cannot be located, notice is published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.

D.    The Council shall hold the public hearing and consider oral and written objections and comments. After the hearing, the Council shall determine the amount of assessment to be charged against each property within the district according to the special benefits to each property from the improvement(s). The Council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement(s), may use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed that the Council determines to be just and reasonable among the properties in the local improvement district. The final decision spreading the assessment shall be by resolution. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.050 Notice of Assessment.

Within 10 business days after the effective date of the resolution spreading the assessments, the City shall send by first-class mail to the owner of the assessed property a notice containing the following information:

A.    The date of the resolution levying the assessment, the name of the owner of the property assessed, the amount of the specific assessment, and a description of the property assessed.

B.    A statement that application may be filed to pay the assessment in installments in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C.    A statement that the entire amount of the assessment, less any part for which application to pay in installments is made, is due within 30 days of the date of the notice and, if unpaid on that date, will accrue interest and subject the property to foreclosure. Supplementary notice of assessment may also be published or posted by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.055 Payment.

A.    Unless an application is made for payment in installments as provided by this section, assessments shall be due and payable in full within 30 days after the date the notice of assessment is mailed, and if not so paid, shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. The City may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment lien if the amount is not paid in full within 90 days of the date the notice of assessment is mailed.

B.    Any time within 30 days after the notice of assessment is mailed, the owner of the property may apply to pay any assessment in excess of $500.00 in equal installments, with the first payment to be paid within 180 days of the application for installment or as determined by the City’s financing plan. The City shall allow payments to be made over 10 years, and may, in the City’s discretion, allow payments to be made over a longer period of time, not to exceed 30 years. The application shall state that the applicant:

1.    Waives all irregularities or defects, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any way relating to the assessment.

2.    Understands the terms and conditions of the City’s payment policies including the penalties for nonpayment.

C.    On receipt of an application for payment in installments, the City shall determine whether the City will finance the payments internally, or issue bonds, or obtain a loan for the amount financed. The interest rate will be set at the interest rate charged to the City, plus one and one-half to two percent. If the City finances the payments internally, the interest rate shall be at a rate appropriate for 10- to 30-year loans based on the Bloomberg national average mortgage rates. The City shall then notify the property owner of the payment amounts and due dates.

D.    The entire amount of principal and accrued interest shall be payable on any transfer for consideration of the specially assessed property or change in its boundaries. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.060 Lien and Foreclosure.

A.    The City shall enter in the City lien docket:

1.    A statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land or portion thereof;

2.    A description of the improvement;

3.    The names of the owners; and

4.    The date of the assessment resolution.

B.    On entry in the lien docket, the amount entered shall become a lien and charge upon the properties that have been assessed for such improvement.

C.    All assessment liens of the City shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property.

D.    The City may collect any payment due and may foreclose the liens in any manner authorized by State law. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.065 Errors in Assessment Calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the Finance Director who shall determine whether there has been an error. If the finance director determines that there has been an error, the matter shall be referred to the Council for an amendment of the assessment resolution. On amendment of the resolution, the Finance Director shall make necessary corrections in the City lien docket and send a correct notice of assessment by certified mail. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.070 Abandonment of Proceedings.

The Council may abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements at any time prior to the final completion of the improvements. No assessment shall be imposed if improvements are not completed. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.075 Division of Assessments.

Whenever property has been assessed in an entire tract, parcel or acreage and subsequently divided into smaller lots or parcels, any person desiring to have the total assessment divided among the smaller lots or parcels may apply to the City for a division of the assessment and a determination of the amount due on each portion. All costs of any division shall be paid by the person applying for the division. Division of assessment shall be solely at the discretion of the City, and on terms and conditions required by the City. Divisions shall be allowed only for properties on which payment is current. No division of an assessment shall become effective until all affected owners have executed an agreement acknowledging the validity of the assessments as divided and waiving any and all errors and irregularities in the proceedings. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.080 Curative Provisions.

No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by a failure of any incompleteness or other defect in any engineer’s report, resolution, notice, or by any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps required by this chapter, unless the assessment is unfair or unjust. The Council shall have the authority to remedy or correct any matter by suitable proceedings and action. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.085 Reassessment.

Whenever any assessment or reassessment is set aside or its enforcement restrained by any court with jurisdiction or when the Council is in doubt as to the validity of the assessment or reassessment, the Council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by the State law or may follow the procedure applicable to an original assessment, but shall not be required to repeat any portion of the procedure properly completed. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.090 Review.

Actions of the Council under this chapter are reviewable only by writ of review. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.095 Interpretation and Coordination with State Law.

The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted consistent with State law relating to local improvement districts and Bancroft bonding. When State law authorizes local governments to adopt standards and procedures different from those specified in the statutes, the City may comply with either this chapter or State statutes. To the extent that any standard or procedure is not governed by this chapter, the City shall comply with State statutes. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.10.100 Sidewalk Public Improvements.

The City may follow the process and standards of this chapter for local improvement districts to construct sidewalks, but the remonstrance provisions do not apply to local improvement districts for sidewalks. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 2.20 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.20.005    Definitions.

2.20.010    Application.

2.20.015    City Engineer’s Report.

2.20.020    Amount of Reimbursement.

2.20.025    Public Hearing.

2.20.030    Notice of Public Hearing.

2.20.035    City Council Action.

2.20.040    Notice of Adoption of Resolution.

2.20.045    Recordation.

2.20.050    Contesting the Reimbursement District.

2.20.055    Final Public Hearing.

2.20.060    Obligation to Pay Reimbursement Fee.

2.20.065    Annual Fee Adjustment.

2.20.070    Administration.


2.20.005 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Reimbursement district means the area which is determined by the City Council to derive a benefit from the construction of street, water or sewer improvements and includes property which has the opportunity to utilize the improvements.

B.    Reimbursement fee means the fee required to be paid by a resolution of the City Council and the reimbursement agreement. The term “reimbursement fee” does not include any local improvement district assessment or any system development charge established by Oregon law. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.010 Application.

A.    The City and any person who builds a street, water or sewer improvement to City standards and specifications and conveys the improvements to the City or the public may by written application request that the City establish a reimbursement district covering properties that will be benefited by the improvements. The street, water and sewer improvements must include improvements in addition to or in a size greater than those which would otherwise ordinarily be required in connection with an application for permit approval and must be available to provide service to property other than property owned by the applicant. Examples include but shall not be limited to full street improvements instead of half street improvements, off-site sidewalks, connection of street sections for continuity, extension of water lines and extension of sewer lines. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by resolution, sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review, including the City Engineer’s report, and notice required by this chapter.

B.    The application must be filed with the City before improvements are constructed.

C.    The application shall include the following:

1.    A description of the location, type, size and cost of the public improvement to be eligible for reimbursement.

2.    A map showing the properties to be included in the proposed reimbursement district; the zoning district for the properties; the front footage or square footage of said properties, or similar data necessary for calculating the apportionment of the cost; and the property or properties owned by the applicant.

3.    The estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projections of the cost of labor and materials, or other evidence satisfactory to the City Engineer. If the project is eligible for SDC credit, the anticipated amount of SDC credit shall be stated.

4.    The estimated date of completion of the public improvements.

5.    Applicant may request a discretionary annual fee adjustment, which, if granted, will be administered pursuant to BC 2.20.065.

6.    An acknowledgement by the applicant that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, appointed officials, employees and agents from any and all claims that may arise from the creation or administration of the district. This acknowledgement shall release the City, its elected officials, appointed officials, employees and agents from any and all claims that reimbursement fees were improperly collected, collected in the wrong amount, or not collected at all, for any reason, including negligence on the part of the City, its elected officials, appointed officials, employees and agents. The applicant shall acknowledge that the applicant accepts all risk that reimbursement will not occur, or will not occur in the amount expected by the applicant. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.015 City Engineer’s Report.

A.    The City Engineer shall review the application for the establishment of a reimbursement district and evaluate whether a district should be established. The Engineer may require the submittal of other relevant information from the applicant in order to assist in the evaluation. The Engineer shall prepare a written report for the City Council, considering and making recommendations concerning the following factors:

1.    Whether the applicant will finance some or all of the cost of a street, water or sewer improvement, thereby making service available to property, other than property owned by the applicant;

2.    The area to be included in the reimbursement district;

3.    The estimated cost of the street, water or sewer improvements within the area of the proposed reimbursement district and the portion of the cost for which the applicant should be reimbursed;

4.    A methodology for spreading the cost among the parcels within the reimbursement district and where appropriate defining a “unit” for applying the reimbursement fee to property which may, with City approval, be partitioned, altered, modified, or subdivided at some future date. The methodology should include consideration of the cost of the improvements, prior contributions by property owners, the value of the unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance public improvements, and other factors deemed relevant by the City Engineer. Prior contributions by property owners will only be considered if the contribution was for the same type of improvement and at the same location (example: a sewer-related contribution in the same location as a sewer improvement would be considered, a water-related contribution in the same location as a sewer improvement would not be considered);

5.    The amount to be charged by the City for administration of the district by the City. The administration fee shall be fixed by the City Council and will be included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. If the applicant is other than the City, the administration fee is due and payable to the City at the time the agreement in BC 2.20.035(B) is signed. If the City is the applicant, the administration fee shall be included in the reimbursement fee and is due and payable at the time there is an obligation to pay the reimbursement fee as required by BC 2.20.060.

6.    The period of time that the right to reimbursement exists, if the period is less than 10 years. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.020 Amount of Reimbursement.

A.    The cost to be reimbursed to the applicant shall be limited to the cost of construction, engineering, and right-of-way acquired as part of the project. Engineering shall include surveying and inspection and shall not exceed 13.5 percent of eligible construction cost. Right-of-way acquisition costs are limited to the reasonable market value of land or easements purchased by the applicant from a third party for the improvements.

B.    No reimbursement shall be allowed for financing costs, permits or fees required for construction permits, land or easements dedicated by an applicant other than the City, costs which are eligible for systems development charge credits, project management fees or any costs which cannot be clearly documented.

C.    No reimbursement shall be allowed for construction costs that occur prior to the formation date of the reimbursement district.

D.    A reimbursement fee shall be computed by the City for all properties which have the opportunity to utilize the improvements, including the property of the applicant for formation of a reimbursement district. The applicant for formation of the reimbursement district shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the reimbursement fee computed for the property of the applicant. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.025 Public Hearing.

Within a reasonable time after the City Engineer has completed the report, the City Council shall hold an informational public hearing in which any person shall be given the opportunity to comment on the proposed reimbursement district. Because formation of the reimbursement district does not result in an assessment against property or lien against property, the public hearing is for informational purposes only and is not subject to termination because of remonstrances or objections. The City Council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.030 Notice of Public Hearing.

Not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to any public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district shall be notified of the hearing. Notice shall be accomplished by either mail or personal service. Mailed notice shall be mailed at least 13 days before the hearing. Notice shall be deemed effective on the date that the notice is mailed. Failure of the applicant or any affected property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any reimbursement district resolution or the City Council’s authority. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.035 City Council Action.

A.    After the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, reject or modify the recommendations contained in the City Engineer’s report. The City Council’s decision shall be embodied in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include the City Engineer’s report as approved or modified.

B.    When the applicant is other than the City, the resolution shall instruct the City Manager to enter into an agreement with the applicant pertaining to the reimbursement district improvements. The agreement shall be contingent upon the improvements being accepted by the City. The agreement, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions:

1.    The public improvement(s) shall meet all applicable City standards.

2.    The estimated total amount of potential reimbursement to the applicant.

3.    The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expense arising as a result of or related to the City’s establishment of the district. The applicant shall acknowledge that the City is not obligated to collect the reimbursement fee from affected property owners, and that the applicant assumes all risk of every kind that the amount reimbursed may not be as much as anticipated, or that any particular reimbursement fee may not be collected by the City. The applicant has a private cause of action for collection of a reimbursement fee against any person obligated to pay a reimbursement fee, and the applicant shall bear the entire cost of an action to collect the reimbursement fee, without any right to contribution by the City.

4.    Other provisions that the Council determines appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

C.    If a reimbursement district is established by the City Council, the date of the formation of the district shall be the date that the City Council adopts the resolution forming the district.

D.    The City Council resolution and reimbursement agreement shall determine the boundaries of the reimbursement district and shall determine the methodology for imposing a fee which considers the cost of reimbursing the applicant for financing the construction of a street, water or sewer improvement within the reimbursement district. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.040 Notice of Adoption of Resolution.

The City shall notify all property owners within the district and the applicant of the adoption of a reimbursement district resolution. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was adopted and a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the reimbursement fee and the amount of the fee. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.045 Recordation.

The City shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to be filed in the office of the County Recorder so as to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district. The City shall also record the obligation of each benefited property to pay a reimbursement fee in the City’s lien docket. The recording shall not create a lien. Failure to record shall not affect the legality of the resolution or the obligation to pay the reimbursement fee. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.050 Contesting the Reimbursement District.

No legal action intended to contest the formation of the district or the reimbursement fee, including the amount of the charge designated for each parcel, shall be filed after 60 days following adoption of a resolution establishing a reimbursement district. Legal challenge shall only be by writ of review. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.055 Final Public Hearing.

A.    Within three months after completion and acceptance of the improvements, the applicant shall submit to the City Engineer the actual cost of the improvements as evidenced by receipts, invoices, canceled checks and other similar documents. The City Engineer shall review the actual costs and shall prepare a written report for the City Council.

B.    The final cost shall not exceed by more than 10 percent the cost estimated at the time of reimbursement district formation unless an exception is approved by the City Council. An exception may be approved only if the applicant can show legitimate circumstances beyond the control of the applicant that caused the cost increase.

C.    Within a reasonable time after the City Engineer has completed the post-acceptance report, the City Council shall hold an informational public hearing in which any person shall be given the opportunity to comment on any changes from the original report.

D.    Failure to provide the documentation required by this section shall result in the automatic lapse of any resolution adopted by the City Council pursuant to BC 2.20.035. Following the final public hearing provided for herein, and subject to the limitations provided for herein, the City Council shall have the authority to approve, rescind, or modify the reimbursement district. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.060 Obligation to Pay Reimbursement Fee.

A.    The applicant for a City approval related to property within any reimbursement district shall pay the City, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the Council, if within the time specified in the resolution establishing the district, the person applies for and receives approval from the City for any of the following activities:

1.    A building permit for a new building;

2.    Building permit(s) for any addition(s), modification(s), repair(s) or alteration(s) of a building, which exceed 25 percent of the value of the building within any 12-month period. The value of the building shall be the amount shown on the most current records of the County Department of Assessment and Taxation for the building’s real market value. This subsection shall not apply to repairs made necessary due to damage or destruction by fire or other natural disaster;

3.    Any alteration, modification or change in the use of real property, which increases the number of parking spaces required under City standards in effect at the time of permit application;

4.    Connection to or use of a water improvement, if the reimbursement district is based on the water improvement;

5.    Connection to or use of a sewer improvement, if the reimbursement district is based on the sewer improvement;

6.    Connection to or use of a street improvement, if the reimbursement district is based on the street improvement;

7.    Approval of a land partition or final subdivision plat.

B.    The City’s determination of who shall pay the reimbursement fee is final. Neither the City nor any elected official, appointed official, agent or employee of the City shall be liable for payment of any reimbursement fee as a result of this determination, or as a result of failure, for any reason, of the City to collect a reimbursement fee.

C.    A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a benefit from the construction of street improvements, regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street at any time. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or limit the authority of the City to provide or require access management.

D.    No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or on property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid. Reimbursement fee must be paid in full when a permit or land division approval, including a final subdivision plat, is issued or approved.

E.    The City, Deschutes County, the State of Oregon and the United States are not required to pay a reimbursement fee.

F.    The right of reimbursement shall not extend beyond 10 years from the district formation date. The applicant solely and exclusively bears the risk that the City may not collect from benefited property owners their respective share of the cost of the improvement, and that the total amount collected may be less than anticipated. Further, the applicant acknowledges that by utilizing the procedures of this chapter that the City shall be under no obligation to institute legal proceedings to collect unpaid amounts that may be due to the applicant. The applicant must institute and pay for such legal proceedings, and the City will not be obligated to share or pay the litigation costs associated with such proceedings.

G.    The applicant shall warrant the improvement against defects in materials or quality of construction for a period of one year from the date of acceptance. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.065 Annual Fee Adjustment.

A.    The City Council may grant an annual fee adjustment at the time of application for formation of a reimbursement district.

B.    If granted, an annual fee adjustment shall be applied to the reimbursement fee beginning on the first anniversary of the date of the reimbursement agreement as a return on the investment. The annual fee adjustment shall be fixed and computed against the reimbursement fee as simple interest and will not compound. The amount of the fee adjustment shall be determined at the time that a district is formed and shall be the same each year. The interest rate will be determined by the Council on recommendation of the Finance Director. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.20.070 Administration.

A.    The right of reimbursement may be transferred with written approval from the City.

B.    The City shall establish separate accounts for each reimbursement district. Payments collected during a calendar year shall be paid to the person entitled to reimbursement by January 31 of the following year. No interest earnings shall accrue or be paid on payments collected.

C.    The reimbursement fee is in lieu of a local improvement district for the improvements installed pursuant to the reimbursement district agreement. The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit any other fee or charge collected by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 2.30 ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.30.010    Purpose.

2.30.020    Initiation of Economic Improvement District.

2.30.030    Public Hearings and Assessments.

2.30.050    City Lien Docket.

2.30.060    Imposition of Additional Business License Fee.

2.30.070    Advisory Committee.

2.30.080    Extension of Business Licensing Period.

2.30.090    Expenditure of Assessment and Business License Revenues.


2.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement ORS 223.112 through 223.161, which authorize cities to create economic improvement districts and to impose assessments or to impose supplemental business license fees to support economic improvement projects within those districts. This chapter shall be interpreted to be consistent with ORS 223.112 through 223.161, and the City shall comply with those statutes. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.020 Initiation of Economic Improvement District.

The City Council may consider an ordinance to create an economic improvement district and impose assessments on its own motion or at the request of any person, entity, association, or City staff. The ordinance shall describe the economic improvement projects, contain a cost estimate and proposed formula for apportioning costs, describe the boundaries of the district and specify the number of years that assessments will be levied. The ordinance shall require notice to affected property owners of the time and place of a public hearing, which is to be held not sooner than 30 days after mailing or delivery of the notice. The ordinance shall provide that the assessments will not be made and the economic improvement district terminated when written objections are received at the public hearing from owners of property upon which more than 33 percent of the total amount of assessments is levied. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.030 Public Hearings and Assessments.

A.    A public hearing shall be held on the proposed economic improvement district. If the City Council decides to proceed with the economic improvement district, the Council shall determine whether the property benefited shall bear all or a portion of the costs. The Council shall determine, based on the actual or estimated cost of the economic improvement projects, the amount of assessment on each lot in the district. The City shall then prepare the proposed assessment for each lot in the district. Notice of the proposed assessment for each property shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of the property to be assessed. The notice shall state the time and place of a public hearing at which affected property owners may appear to support or object to the proposed assessment.

B.    The hearing on proposed assessments shall not be held sooner than 30 days after the mailing or personal delivery of the notices.

C.    At the hearing on assessments, the Council shall consider objections and may correct, modify, or revise the proposed assessments. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.050 City Lien Docket.

The City shall enter each final assessment in the City lien docket. Unpaid assessments for economic improvements may be collected in the same manner as unpaid assessments for local improvements. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.060 Imposition of Additional Business License Fee.

As an alternative to imposing assessments on real property to pay for economic improvement projects, the Council, on its own motion or after receiving a petition for the formation of an economic improvement district signed by 33 percent or more of persons conducting business within the proposed district, may enact an ordinance establishing a procedure to be followed in imposing a business license fee surcharge to raise revenue for the cost of an economic improvement. An economic improvement district formed under this section shall include only areas zoned for commercial or industrial use. The business license fee surcharge shall be only for economic improvement projects that primarily benefit persons conducting business within the economic improvement district. An ordinance adopted under this section shall:

A.    Describe the economic improvement project to be undertaken or constructed.

B.    Contain a preliminary estimate of the probable cost of the economic improvement.

C.    Describe the boundaries of the district in which property will be assessed.

D.    Specify the number of years, to a maximum of five, in which business license fees for the economic improvement will be imposed.

E.    Contain provision for notices to be mailed or delivered personally to affected persons that announce the intention of the Council to construct or undertake the economic improvement project and to impose a business license fee upon persons conducting business within the district for a part or all of the cost. The notice shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the amount of the business license fee.

F.    Provide for a hearing not sooner than 30 days after the mailing or delivery of notices to affected persons at which the persons may appear to support or object to the proposed improvement and business license fee.

G.    Provide that if, after the hearing, the Council determines that the economic improvement shall be made, the Council shall determine whether the businesses benefited shall bear all or a portion of the cost and shall determine, based on the actual or estimated cost of the economic improvement, the amount of the business license fee.

H.    Provide that the Council shall consider the objections of persons subject to the proposed business license fee and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed business license fee.

I.    Provide that the business license fee will not be imposed and the economic improvement project terminated when written objections are received at the public hearing from more than 33 percent of persons conducting business within the economic improvement district who will be subject to the proposed business license fee. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.070 Advisory Committee.

An ordinance adopted under BC 2.30.060 may provide for creation of an advisory committee to develop a plan and to allocate expenditure of monies for economic improvement activities. If an advisory committee is created, the Council shall appoint persons conducting business within the economic improvement district to the advisory committee. An existing association of persons conducting business within an economic improvement district may enter into an agreement with the City to provide the economic improvement activities. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.080 Extension of Business Licensing Period.

The Council may extend the term of a business license surcharge under BC 2.30.060 by an ordinance that grants to persons conducting business in the district the same notice and right of remonstrance provided for initial establishment of the district and business license surcharge. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


2.30.090 Expenditure of Assessment and Business License Revenues.

All proceeds from assessments or business license surcharges may be spent only on and for the purposes described in the ordinance authorizing the assessment or business license surcharge. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Title 3 RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND CITY PROPERTY Revised 6/19

Chapters:

3.05    Bend Municipal Airport

3.10    Public Works Standards

3.20    Utility License Fee and Use of Rights-of-Way Revised 6/19

3.30    Sidewalks

3.40    Right-of-Way Permits

3.50    Revocable Right-of-Way and City Property Permits

3.60    Trees on City Property and Public Rights-of-Way

3.70    City Cemetery

3.80    Right-of-Way Vacation

3.90    Street Names and Address Numbers


Chapter 3.05 BEND MUNICIPAL AIRPORT

Sections:

3.05.010    Purpose and Scope.

3.05.020    Use of Airport.

3.05.030    Leases of Airport Property.

3.05.040    Airport Planning.

3.05.050    Competition.


3.05.010 Purpose and Scope.

The City of Bend owns the Bend Municipal Airport. The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance and standards for the development of the airport. The airport is currently outside the City limits. The City has authority as the owner of the facility and as the operator of an airport receiving Federal Aviation Authority to adopt the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013]


3.05.020 Use of Airport.

The primary purpose of the airport is to facilitate aviation-related activities. The airport has runways and taxiways available for public use, as well as various aids to navigation. The airport also contains parking, driveway and landscaping. Apart from the areas needed for runways, taxiways, aids to navigation, and parking, driving and landscaping areas and setback areas, the rest of the airport is intended to be leased for aviation-related purposes. Leases may either be ground leases of areas on which the tenant will erect structures or leases of developed areas. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013]


3.05.030 Leases of Airport Property.

Because airport property other than runways, taxiways, aids to navigation, parking, driving and landscaping areas and surrounding setbacks exists to allow development of hangars and other aviation-related facilities and uses, the City may lease any portion of the airport not needed for direct aviation use without declaring the property surplus. Any leases shall comply with BC Chapters 1.30 and 1.50. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013]


3.05.040 Airport Planning.

The City is required by federal regulations to adopt an Airport Master Plan as the owner and operator of the airport. Airport Master Plans shall be adopted by Council. Airport Master Plans are intended to provide guidelines for growth and development of the airport. Airport Master Plans may be submitted to Deschutes County for approval as a planning document. Airport Master Plans are conceptual and shall not be used to preclude any airport tenant from legal use of the tenant’s leased space. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013]


3.05.050 Competition.

Consistent with Federal regulations, the City encourages competition among private providers of services at the Bend Municipal Airport and shall not take action to discourage or restrict competition. [Ord. NS-2207, 2013]




Chapter 3.10 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS

Sections:

3.10.010    Public Works Standards.


3.10.010 Public Works Standards.

A.    The City of Bend adopts the City of Bend Standards and Specifications dated July 1, 2011. All public works and public improvements, including but not limited to all portions of the City’s street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water systems, and any other construction within City rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. The requirement to comply with the City of Bend Standards and Specifications applies to improvements constructed or contracted for by the City and to improvements constructed by or for private developers. The City may impose additional or different standards to cover situations not expressly addressed by the City of Bend Standards and Specifications or to account for unique conditions. A copy of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications is available at City Hall and at the Public Works Department. The City of Bend Standards and Specifications may be amended as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section.

B.    The City Manager may amend technical provisions and standards of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. Public notice of technical amendments shall be posted in City Hall 30 days prior to the effective date of the amendments.

C.    Any provision of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications may be amended by resolution of the City Council.

D.    The City Manager is authorized to enforce all the provisions of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. The City Manager shall have the power to issue written and oral interpretations of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. The City Manager is authorized to issue stop work orders as needed in the enforcement of these standards. The City Manager may approve deviations from the City of Bend Standards and Specifications based on written findings documenting the need for the deviation.

E.    Any construction in violation of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications shall constitute a Class A civil infraction. Each day that a violation exists is a separate infraction. For purposes of this section, defects in design or construction that are corrected within the time established for correction by the City shall not constitute a violation. Construction in accordance with a City-approved deviation from the standards is not a violation of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

F.    Any uncorrected violation of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this code.

G.    The City Manager may delegate the authority provided in this section. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012; Ord. NS-2162, 2011]


Chapter 3.20 UTILITY LICENSE FEE AND USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY Revised 6/19

Sections:

3.20.010    Definitions.

3.20.020    Fees and Payment. Revised 6/19

3.20.040    Records and Reporting.

3.20.050    Use of Rights-of-Way.

3.20.060    Penalties.


3.20.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter.

A.    Gross operating revenue, except as otherwise provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section, means any revenue received from sources within the City limits by the utility; including revenue from the use, rental or lease of operating facilities of the utility and from the provision of services by the utility. There shall be no deduction for the cost of the commodity furnished or sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery cost, taxes or other expense. Gross revenue does not include revenue paid directly by the United States of America or its agencies.

1.    To the extent that the City’s authority to tax or impose a fee on gross revenues of an entity is limited by ORS 221.410 through 221.655, the City shall apply the statutory limitations to the definition of “gross revenues.”

2.    Nonprofit mutual or cooperative associations providing electric power to their members may deduct the cost of power from gross revenues.

B.    Utility means any entity, including cooperatives, that supplies electrical energy, water, gas, heat, communications including cable or sewer services by using facilities in rights-of-way. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.20.020 Fees and Payment. Revised 6/19

A.    Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, utilities with facilities in rights-of-way shall pay the City a utility license fee based on a percentage of their gross operating revenue as follows:

1.    Water and sewer utilities: five percent through June 30, 2020, six percent thereafter.

2.    Utility services that are subject to ORS 221.410 through 221.655: seven percent.

3.    Electric utilities other than cooperatives: seven percent.

4.    Natural gas utilities: seven percent.

5.    All other utilities: five percent.

B.    To the extent that Federal or State law imposes limitations on the amount that the City can charge as a utility license fee that is less than the fee established in subsection (A) of this section, the utility license fee shall be the maximum amount allowed by applicable law.

C.    If an entity provides services that are subject to ORS 221.410 through 221.655 or are subject to State or Federal limitations and also provides other services that are subject to the utility license fee without limitation, it shall calculate and pay both any amount subject to any limitation and any amount not subject to the limitation.

D.    Utilities that pay a franchise fee may deduct the amount of the franchise fee payments from the amount due for the utility license fee. Nothing in this section limits the City’s authority to establish a franchise fee that is greater than the utility license fee. [Ord. NS-2335, 2019; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.20.040 Records and Reporting.

A.    Each utility subject to this chapter shall:

1.    File within 35 days of the end of each month a report of the gross revenues of the utility, accompanied by payment of the required fee.

2.    Maintain records that accurately reflect the amount of gross operating revenue for at least seven years.

B.    The City may conduct an investigation into the accuracy of the revenues listed in the revenue report. The utility shall make available for investigation all records and books of the company for verification of the reports of the company and the fees paid by the company.

C.    If the City finds that the license fee paid is insufficient, the City shall send a statement to the licensee showing the amount underpaid and demanding payment of that amount within 10 days of the date of the statement. If the City determines that a utility has overpaid its license fee, the City shall refund the amount overpaid to the utility.

D.    A utility may appeal the City’s demand for payment to the City Council. The appeal must be in writing and specify the grounds for the appeal. The Council will hold a hearing on the appeal. If the Council determines that the utility is required to pay any additional amount, the utility shall pay the amount owing within 24 hours of the Council’s decision. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.20.050 Use of Rights-of-Way.

A.    Utilities that use public rights-of-way within the City shall do so in a manner that does not interfere with the use of the right-of-way as a street, road, alley, bike path or sidewalk, except as specifically permitted by the City.

B.    The City may require a utility, at the utility’s expense, to change the location of or to remove any pole, conduit, line, structure or facility within the public right-of-way when the change or removal is in the public interest. If the utility refuses to make a change requested by the City, the City may make the change and the utility shall reimburse the City for the cost of making the change.

C.    All utilities must comply with all provisions of State and local law concerning their use of public rights-of-way and the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.20.060 Penalties.

A.    The City shall assess a late penalty of one percent of the gross revenues upon which the license fee is based for failure to timely pay the license fee. The penalty shall be doubled for every month that the fee remains delinquent.

B.    Violations of this chapter are a Class A civil infraction, and each day a violation remains uncured is a separate violation. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 3.30 SIDEWALKS

Sections:

3.30.010    Definitions.

3.30.020    Sidewalk Maintenance and Liability.

3.30.030    Curb, Sidewalk and Driveway Approach Construction and Repair.

3.30.040    Vegetation.


3.30.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Driveway approach is the area or improvement between an improved street and a property that provides vehicular access from the street to a driveway or parking area on the property.

B.    Sidewalk means the portion of the right-of-way intended for the use of pedestrians and improved by surfacing, including the curb if the sidewalk abuts the curb. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.30.020 Sidewalk Maintenance and Liability.

Property owners shall maintain sidewalks adjacent to their property in good repair and unobstructed. Property owners are liable for personal injury or property damage arising from the condition of the adjacent sidewalk. If the City is required to pay damages for personal injury or property damage relating to the condition of a sidewalk, the adjacent property owner shall compensate the City for the full amount of the damages paid and the City’s legal fees. The City may take legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.30.030 Curb, Sidewalk and Driveway Approach Construction and Repair.

The City Council may order adjacent property owners to construct, alter, repair or remove curbs or sidewalks or driveway approaches. The City will provide written notice to the adjacent property owner, giving the property owner at least 30 days to complete the work. The time period may be shortened if needed to remove a safety hazard. The notice shall state that the City will perform the required work if not timely completed by the property owner and impose the cost of the City’s work, including administrative costs, as a lien on the adjacent property. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.30.040 Vegetation.

Property owners shall trim vegetation on their property so that it does not extend into the area above any public sidewalk from the surface of the sidewalk to a point eight feet above the sidewalk level. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


Chapter 3.40 RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS

Sections:

3.40.005    Permit Requirement.

3.40.010    Applications.

3.40.015    Permitted Work.

3.40.020    Conduct of Work.

3.40.025    Inspection, Maintenance and Warranty Security.

3.40.030    Compliance.

3.40.035    Traffic Control Barricades.

3.40.040    Utilities.

3.40.045    Emergencies.

3.40.050    Coordination of Construction.

3.40.060    As-Built Drawings.

3.40.070    Restoration of Rights-of-Way and City Property.

3.40.080    Right-of-Way Preservation and Restoration Policy.

3.40.090    Regulations.

3.40.100    Enforcement.


3.40.005 Permit Requirement.

A.    No person other than the City and its agents may dig, cut, drill (vertical, horizontal, directional, or other), excavate (mechanical, hydro- or other), install, or construct anything within any right-of-way or property owned or controlled by the City, including public easements, without a City right-of-way permit. No person other than the City may remove, alter, or construct any curb, sidewalk, driveway approach, gutter, pavement, or other improvement in any public right-of-way or property owned or controlled by the City without a City right-of-way permit. No person other than the City may wholly or partially reserve, occupy, or close a sidewalk, vehicle lane, or bike lane in a City-administered right-of-way without a right-of-way permit. A traffic control plan consistent with the City of Bend Standards and Specifications must be submitted with any application for a right-of-way permit that will include a lane closure.

B.    A right-of-way permit may be issued if the proposed improvement complies with this code, the Standards and Specifications, the Bend Development Code, and if the applicant is in compliance with all outstanding right-of-way permits. The City may deny an application for a right-of-way permit or impose conditions of approval to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations or to preserve infrastructure. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, restoration of surfaces, timing of the work to be performed, utility coordination, and traffic control requirements. The conditions relating to timing may include specific penalties for failure to comply. The right-of-way permit shall specify the extent of any permitted lane closure. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.010 Applications.

A.    Right-of-way permit applications must be submitted on City forms.

B.    The application shall include the applicant’s name and address, the date the work is to start, the date the work is to be completed, the location of the work, the nature of the street involved, the purpose of the work, the size and nature of the work, including construction plans, and other information required on the application form. Only utility franchisees and contractors on the City’s list of qualified contractors for work in the right-of-way may submit permit applications. All franchisees and private development work must use City-qualified contractors for any work performed within the rights-of-way. The permit application shall indicate if work is to be performed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. If work is to be performed within those hours, the applicant must also apply for a noise permit under BC 5.50.035. The City reserves the right to limit or change all working hours to avoid conflict with other work or activities. Permission for night work must be requested at the time of application.

C.    The City may require the applicant to provide a performance bond or equivalent security in an amount sufficient to protect and ensure completion of the work and restoration of the right-of-way.

D.    The application shall be accompanied by the permit fee in the amount established by Council resolution unless prohibited by a franchise ordinance or agreement or State law. The resolution establishing the permit fee may establish different fees for different categories, types, or tiers of right-of-way permits. The permit fee shall be set at an amount sufficient to cover cost of reviewing, issuing, and administering the permit application and performing inspections. If additional costs are occurred as a result of multiple inspections or engineering reviews, the City reserves the right to charge the applicant for these additional costs.

E.    The applicant and its contractor/subcontractors must provide a certificate of insurance showing liability insurance with policy limits at least equal to the City’s tort liability limits. The certificate of insurance must list the City as an additional insured.

F.    The applicant must agree to indemnify the City as to liability of any kind resulting from or in connection with the permitted activities. The permittee is responsible for injury to any person or property resulting from the permitted excavation, construction, or related work.

G.    The City may require an applicant to submit plans prepared by a licensed professional engineer for large or complex projects or those that may have an effect on other work, utilities, or the City’s infrastructure and transportation system. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.015 Permitted Work.

The City may issue the permit if a complete application is received and the work will comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including the Standards and Specifications. All permits shall include an expiration date. The City may deny a permit if the application does not demonstrate compliance with this chapter or if the applicant is not compliant with any previously issued City permit or has failed to pay a civil penalty imposed relating to a previously issued City permit. The permit may contain conditions or restrictions, including but not limited to the following:

A.    Requiring that access to fire hydrants be available at all times.

B.    Requiring that the actual work be confined to the hours of specific hours (typically 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.) or to certain days.

C.    Setting forth the maximum length of breaks or excavation to be open at any one time.

D.    Requiring that access to driveways be maintained.

E.    Requiring that the permittee reimburse the City for the cost of relocating or reestablishing City monuments and the giving of notice where the work will interfere with monuments.

F.    Requiring that provision be made for traffic operations and safety, including an engineered traffic control plan that includes specific detour routes, work zone limits, coordination with other right-of-way work or special events in the area of the work, and requiring the use of traffic control barricades.

G.    Relating to the care and disposition of excavated material during construction.

H.    Making provision for watercourses during excavation.

I.    Setting forth minimum and/or maximum depths of excavation or structures.

J.    Providing for control of noise, dust, and debris during excavation.

K.    Requiring proper backfill and pavement resurfacing, including temporary surfacing if necessary, consistent with the Standards and Specifications, and imposing timelines for replacing temporary surfacing with permanent surfacing.

L.    Providing timelines or deadlines for conducting the work and establishing penalties for noncompliance.

M.    Requiring erosion control and best management practices be used on all sites and to require that all work be completed in accordance with applicable local, State and Federal requirements for erosion control and stormwater management. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.020 Conduct of Work.

A.    Work under the permit shall be done in conformity with this code, the Standards and Specifications, the permit, and all applicable laws. Permittee shall give the City a minimum of 48 hours’ notice prior to starting any work and requesting any required inspections. No excavation may be done under any permit unless the permittee has complied with all requirements for locating existing underground facilities in the area to be excavated. For purposes of this section, excavation includes drilling and directional drilling. The work shall be performed without delay. All work must be performed by contractors who are on the City’s list of qualified contractors. The work shall not interfere with access to fire hydrants or with City or public utilities.

B.    An immediate patch must be placed within 48 hours of completion of the work, any excavation shall be filled, compacted, and the street surface restored to as good or better condition than before the work and in conformity with City standards. Final pavement restoration will be completed within 30 days. For work on arterial and collector roadways, additional conditions may be placed on the permit requiring interim paving restoration prior to the entire scope of work being completed.

C.    Cold-mix asphalt patching will only be allowed as a temporary measure during adverse weather conditions and the permanent patching shall be placed as soon as weather permits. During periods of the year when hot asphalt material is not available, the contractor shall submit a Material Exception form for approval and shall perform the final paving restoration as soon as reasonably possible when the material becomes available and no later than June 15 of each year.

D.    Traffic signs or signals, or other signs shall be returned to their prior location and condition, unless otherwise directed. If any traffic signs are required to be removed and reinstalled, or relocated, they should be brought up to current Standards and Specifications.

E.    Work performed under a right-of-way permit may be performed only by contractors on the City’s list of qualified contractors. The City, at its discretion and upon review of required qualifications, may place a contractor on the list of qualified contractors if the contractor provides information that the contractor is responsible and has sufficient experience, knowledge, skill and resources to properly perform work in rights-of-way. The list may specify specific types of work that the contractor is qualified to do. The City may deny a request to be placed on the list or remove a contractor from the list if the City determines that the contractor lacks the necessary experience, knowledge, skill, or resources to properly perform work in rights-of-way or if the contractor has a history of poor performance. Poor performance includes, but is not limited to: delays or lateness in work, poor quality work, failure of work to last through warranty periods, lack of proper project management, or other defects in performance. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.025 Inspection, Maintenance and Warranty Security.

The permittee shall notify the City within 48 hours after completion of the work. Additional reporting and inspections may be required depending on the scope of work. The required reporting and inspections shall be identified at the time of permit issuance. The City, at their discretion, will inspect the work and require correction of any deficiencies. If no deficiencies are detected the City will accept the work. The permittee shall be required to maintain the area in good condition for a period of one year from acceptance. Upon request by the City, the permittee shall provide security in a form acceptable to the City to cover any defects discovered in that one-year period. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.030 Compliance.

The City may revoke a permit and issue a stop work order if the permittee fails to comply with the permit or any City codes or regulations. All permits shall be deemed to contain a provision that the work must be consistent with the approved application and plans. The permittee must have the approved permit on site at all times while construction is underway. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.035 Traffic Control Barricades.

The permittee shall provide temporary traffic control barricades in compliance with the Standards and Specifications and the MUTCD, as required to protect from risks associated with obstructions or excavations. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.040 Utilities.

Before starting work, the permittee shall provide written notice to all public utilities that have or may have facilities in the affected area. If the work includes the placement of utility lines and facilities, the permittee will provide “as-built” drawings to the City. The permittee is responsible for coordinating and paying for all utility relocations affected by the permit. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.045 Emergencies.

Excavations in rights-of-way may proceed in case of an emergency. The permit must be applied no later than the close of the next business day. Depending on the severity of the emergency the City may extend this timeline on a case-by-case basis. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.40.050 Coordination of Construction.

A.    All permittees will make every effort to coordinate their construction schedules with those of the City and other users of the rights-of-way. The City Engineer will resolve conflicts and determine priorities for any permitted work in the right-of-way. City projects take precedence.

B.    Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City at least 60 days prior to the start of work in a right-of-way that includes a cut or opening in the street of one block or 400 linear feet, whichever is less, the person intending to perform the work shall provide notice to the City and all other utilities identified by the City as utilities that are franchised or permitted to place facilities within the project area. The notice shall comply with the following:

1.    The notice must be provided in a manner which documents receipt of notice by utilities.

2.    The notice shall state the anticipated location, project schedule, and general description of the proposed work.

3.    No permits for work shall be issued until notice has been given.

C.    All utilities performing work in the rights-of-way subject to the notice requirement set forth in subsection (B) of this section will make every effort to cooperate with other utilities with permits to do work in the same location at or near the same time to coordinate construction and co-locate facilities.

D.    Nothing in this section shall require a utility to reveal proprietary information. A utility shall signify any proprietary information as such and the City will protect such information from disclosure to the extent allowed by law.

E.    The notification requirement set forth in subsection (B) of this section shall not be required for the installation of facilities in new developments that are being processed through the private development review process. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.40.060 As-Built Drawings.

Upon request by the City, a permittee will provide City with an electronic set of engineered plans in a form acceptable to the City showing the location of the facilities the permittee installed or constructed within the rights-of-way pursuant to the permit. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.40.070 Restoration of Rights-of-Way and City Property.

A.    When a permittee does any work in or affecting any right-of-way or City property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions and restore the right-of-way or property as required by the Standards and Specifications.

B.    If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected right-of-way or property. Temporary restoration shall be at permittee’s expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.

C.    If the permittee fails to restore right-of- way or property to good order and condition, the City shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding 30 days, to restore the right-of-way or property. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken within the notice period, the City shall cause the restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.40.080 Right-of-Way Preservation and Restoration Policy.

The City’s policy is to limit cuts in newly reconstructed or paved streets. All cuts in paved streets shall be conducted in accordance with the Standards and Specifications, which may include standards based on the Pavement Condition Index or date of most recent reconstruction or repaving. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.40.090 Regulations.

The City Manager may adopt regulations implementing any or all provisions of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.40.100 Enforcement.

Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or a permit issued under this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. The City may order any person occupying, using, excavating, or otherwise working in a City-administered right-of-way to cease and desist, to remove any obstruction, and to restore any disturbed surface to the Standards and Specifications. The City may remove any obstruction and do work as necessary to abate and/or mitigate any violation of this chapter; the person responsible for the violation shall be responsible for the City’s costs of abatement and mitigation in addition to any civil penalty or other legal remedy that may be imposed. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


Chapter 3.50 REVOCABLE RIGHT-OF-WAY AND CITY PROPERTY PERMITS

Sections:

3.50.010    Permit Required for Use or Closure of Rights-of-Way or City Property.

3.50.020    Permit Conditions.

3.50.030    Fees.

3.50.040    Liability and Indemnity.


3.50.010 Permit Required for Use or Closure of Rights-of-Way or City Property.

A.    Except as otherwise authorized by this code, no person other than the City may place any landscaping material, fill, rocks, goods, structures, or any other material in any right-of-way or City property, close or reserve for exclusive use any portion of any right-of-way or City property without a permit issued by the City. Permits issued under this section shall be revocable.

B.    Landscaping within planter strips by the adjacent property owner or a homeowners association is exempt from the permit requirement of subsection (A) of this section. Landscaping within a planter strip shall comply with BC Chapter 3.60, Trees on City Property and Public Rights-of-Way, and applicable clear vision area requirements. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.50.020 Permit Conditions.

The City may include conditions in permits issued under this chapter. The conditions shall clarify the actions allowed under the permit. Conditions may require compliance with this code or other laws or regulations. Although permits shall list an expiration date, all permits issued under this chapter are revocable and may be terminated by the City at any time on 30 days’ notice.

Except as expressly provided to the contrary in a permit, the City may require any item placed in a right-of-way to be removed within 14 days of notice by the City. If the item is not removed, the City may remove the item and the permittee shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the cost of removal. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.50.030 Fees.

The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution to cover the costs of permit processing and administration, including inspection and oversight. In addition, if the permit authorizes ongoing use of rights-of-way or City property, the City may collect an additional amount not to exceed fair market rental value for the duration any area is occupied by the permittee. The City shall require payment of the fair market rental value if the permittee uses the area for commercial purposes. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.50.040 Liability and Indemnity.

Permittees are liable for personal injury or property damage arising from the items they place in rights-of-way. If the City is required to pay damages for personal injury or property damage relating to items placed in rights-of-way under a permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall compensate the City for the full amount of the damages paid and the City’s legal fees. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


Chapter 3.60 TREES ON CITY PROPERTY AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

3.60.010    Purpose.

3.60.020    Definitions.

3.60.030    Applicability and Jurisdiction.

3.60.040    Tree Permit.

3.60.050    Responsibility of Adjacent Property Owners.

3.60.060    Work Standards and Specifications.

3.60.070    Downtown Street Tree Replacement.

3.60.075    City Action.

3.60.080    Prohibited Activities.

3.60.090    Penalties and Process.


3.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote a diverse, healthy and sustainable urban forest and to provide for the general welfare of Bend’s citizens by managing, conserving and enhancing the existing and future trees located on City property; enhancing the appearance of the City; and providing ongoing education regarding the preservation, health and benefits of trees and Bend’s urban forest. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter.

City property means real property owned or controlled by the City, including rights-of-way administered by the City.

Crown means the leaves and branches of a tree from the lowest branch on the trunk to the top of the tree.

Damage means injury to a tree that compromises its health or longevity, or causes its death, including direct or indirect injury caused by insect, disease, human or animal.

DBH means diameter measured at a point four and one-half feet above ground level.

Hazardous tree means a tree or tree part that has a high potential to fail and cause damage or injury to people or property.

Major pruning means the removal of over 20 percent of a tree’s crown.

Pruning means the selective removal of plant parts to meet specific goals and objectives.

Topping means cutting a stem more than two years old at an indiscriminate location or back to a lateral branch too small to keep the cut stem vital (typically less than one-third the diameter of the cut stem).

Tree means a woody perennial plant that has attained or will attain a height of 12 feet or a trunk diameter of at least two inches at four and one-half feet above natural grade.

Tree Board means the City Council or designee.

Urban Forest Management Plan means a management plan for trees on City property and in public rights-of-way administered by the City. The plan has two components, a long-term plan and an annual work plan. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.030 Applicability and Jurisdiction.

This chapter applies to trees that are wholly or in part on City property. Any portion of a tree that extends over City property is considered to be on City property. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.040 Tree Permit.

No person other than the City may plant, remove, or conduct major pruning of a tree on City property without a City tree permit.

A.    The permit application, accompanied by the fee established by Council resolution, must be submitted to the City Permit Center at least three working days before the intended activity. Only adjacent property owners may apply for a permit to plant, remove or conduct major pruning on City property.

B.    The permit will be issued only if it meets the standards of this chapter, the Development Code and City Standards and Specifications. The City may impose a condition of approval requiring removal or major pruning be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed and bonded professional arborist.

C.    Work done under a tree permit shall be performed consistent with this chapter and with applicable provisions of the Development Code and the City’s Standards and Specifications.

D.    Permits shall be valid for a maximum of 90 days.

E.    A permit for tree removal may include a requirement for mitigation, including tree replacement, long-term maintenance contract and/or tree value reimbursement. Permits for tree removal in the Central Business District may only be granted if tree replacement and tree value reimbursement are provided under BC 3.60.070.

F.    Public utility companies holding a current franchise agreement with the City are exempt from this permit requirement. All activities shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

G.    Tree planting, removal and major pruning by the City must be coordinated with the Public Works Department.

H.    The City may remove any tree on City property determined to be hazardous. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.050 Responsibility of Adjacent Property Owners.

A.    The owners of adjacent property are responsible for maintaining the health of trees in rights-of-way between their property and the nearest travel lane. Responsibility includes watering, pruning, and protection against damage in conformance with this chapter and City’s Standards and Specifications.

B.    The City may accept ongoing or project specific responsibility for maintaining, removing or planting tree(s) located on the public rights-of-way by agreement with the owner of the adjacent property. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.060 Work Standards and Specifications.

A.    Work done on and near trees located on City property shall be performed in accordance with this chapter and the City’s Standards and Specifications.

B.    The City recognizes the American National Standards Institute A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations as the appropriate standard for tree care. ANSI A300 standards for pruning shall apply to any person or entity engaged in the performance, business or trade of repairing, maintaining or preserving trees on City property.

C.    Except for immature trees of insufficient height to maintain a crown above the required height, trees shall be pruned to maintain at a minimum a clearance height of eight feet over public sidewalks and local streets and 14 feet over arterial and collector streets.

D.    Any excavation, demolition or construction within 15 feet of a tree on City property shall include protective measures to avoid harm to the tree, as determined by the City and consistent with the City’s Standards and Specifications. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.070 Downtown Street Tree Replacement.

This section applies to removal and replacement of trees in City rights-of-way in the Central Business District.

A.    Trees may be removed only if replacement is provided. Replacement trees shall be consistent with the Downtown Street Tree Plan.

1.    On Wall and Bond Streets, street trees shall be Bowhall Maples.

2.    On Franklin, Minnesota and Oregon Avenues and on Brooks Street, street trees shall be flowering trees allowed under the Downtown Street Tree Plan.

B.    Replacement trees shall be the largest available size, with a minimum DBH of four inches.

C.    Trees shall be planted within an approved tree grate located no closer than three feet from the curb. Trees shall be installed using a root barrier to protect the City’s sidewalk, curb and street.

D.    The trees shall be installed with an approved irrigation system in conformance with the City’s Standards and Specifications.

E.    Tree value reimbursement must be paid for removal of street trees in the Central Business District according to the following schedule.

1.    Less than six-inch DBH: $1,000.

2.    Between six-inch and 10-inch: $1,500.

3.    Greater than 10-inch: $2,000.

F.    The permittee shall provide a performance and maintenance bond to ensure the planting of the new tree(s) and their care during the first two years after planting. The amount of the bond shall be 120 percent of the actual replacement tree cost. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.075 City Action.

While trees are an important amenity in rights-of-way and on other City property, transportation and other public needs may require removal or trimming of trees by the City. The City’s decision on removal or trimming of trees by the City on City property, and the City’s actions in removing or trimming trees on City property and other City actions near trees, shall be final and not subject to BC 3.60.060, 3.60.080 or 3.60.090. [Ord. NS-2282, 2016]


3.60.080 Prohibited Activities.

A.    No person shall top a tree located on City property.

B.    No person shall attach or keep attached to any tree located on City property any ropes, wires, chains or other device. Seasonal holiday lights are permissible for up to 90 days.

C.    No person shall damage any tree located on City property, allow any harmful substance to come into contact with a tree on City property, or permit any fire to burn in a way that will damage a tree on City property.

D.    Actions otherwise prohibited by subsection (A) or (B) of this section may be permitted under a tree permit if the City determines the action is needed to prevent interference with utility service, or that the action is in the public interest and is not inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.60.090 Penalties and Process.

A.    A violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction.

B.    Any decision under this chapter may be appealed to the Tree Board by filing a written appeal with the City Recorder within 10 working days of the decision. The appeal shall clearly state the reasons for the appeal. The Tree Board will hold a hearing and issue a final written decision. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 3.70 CITY CEMETERY

Sections:

3.70.010    Pilot Butte Cemetery.

3.70.015    Use of Cemetery.

3.70.020    Rules and Regulations.

3.70.025    Fees.

3.70.030    Records.

3.70.035    Conveyance of Cemetery Lots.

3.70.040    Sale of Cemetery Spaces.

3.70.045    Use of Burial Spaces.

3.70.050    Burial and Disinterment Permits.

3.70.060    Permanent Maintenance Fund.

3.70.065    Monument and Marker Permits.


3.70.010 Pilot Butte Cemetery.

The City owns and operates the Pilot Butte Cemetery. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.015 Use of Cemetery.

The Pilot Butte Cemetery shall be used for the burial of human bodies or ashes only. The burial of nonhuman remains is prohibited and nonhuman remains may be removed by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.020 Rules and Regulations.

The City Manager may adopt and enforce regulations governing the care, protection, and use of the cemetery. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.025 Fees.

Fees for lots, monument and marker permits and permanent and annual maintenance and other goods and services provided by the cemetery shall be set by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.030 Records.

A.    For each lot, the City shall keep a record showing:

1.    The name of the deceased.

2.    Date of burial or disinterment.

3.    Number of lot in which burial or from which disinterment is made.

4.    Number of interment permit.

B.    The City shall keep an up-to-date map of the cemetery showing all lots and graves. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.035 Conveyance of Cemetery Lots.

Every conveyance of a lot or grave space in the cemetery shall be by certificate executed by the City. The conveyance shall only have the effect of giving the perpetual use of a lot for burial purposes subject to the State law and City code and regulations. The certificate will not be issued until the price of the space or lot and permanent maintenance is paid in full. The City shall keep a record of all certificates issued, giving name of purchaser, date of sale, number of space and price of each space or spaces. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.040 Sale of Cemetery Spaces.

The City may sell spaces in the cemetery in either full spaces five feet by 10 feet, half spaces five feet by five feet or by quarter spaces five feet by two and one-half feet. No burial permit shall be issued nor interment allowed if the City has not received payment in full for all cemetery charges. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.045 Use of Burial Spaces.

A.    Human remains may be buried in a full space. No more than two burials of ashes may be made per quarter space. Infants may be buried in any space sufficient to facilitate the burial as determined by the City but not less than a half space shall be used. Burials between spaces where certificates are owned by the same person or family may be made if allowed by the City.

B.    The City shall prepare all burial and disinterments. Only the City may open or close graves in the cemetery. The City shall supervise the setting of all markers, stones, or monuments in the cemetery. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.050 Burial and Disinterment Permits.

A.    A permit is required for any burial or disinterment. The application for a burial permit must include the following, if known:

1.    The full name of the deceased.

2.    Place of birth.

3.    Age.

4.    Date and place of death.

5.    Date of interment and location of grave.

6.    Name of mortuary.

7.    Outside size of coffin or box.

8.    Cause of death.

B.    An application for disinterment must provide evidence that the human remains will be properly disposed of and that the applicant has authority to take the action. Representatives of a funeral home must be present at the disinterment.

C.    The owner of a permanent maintenance certificate may allow the interment of the remains of any person in the lot, but may not do so for compensation.

D.    A permit is required to move a body from one location in the cemetery to another. When bodies are brought from other cemeteries, the burial standards and procedures apply. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.060 Permanent Maintenance Fund.

The City’s Permanent Maintenance Cemetery Fund shall be used solely for cemetery upkeep. All proceeds from cemetery operations not used for operation and maintenance costs shall be paid into the Permanent Maintenance Cemetery Fund. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


3.70.065 Monument and Marker Permits.

A.    A City permit is required to place monuments or markers in the cemetery. The permit application shall state the dimensions of the monument or marker and the lot where the monument or marker is to be placed.

B.    Monuments and markers shall comply with the cemetery regulations.

C.    The City reserves the right to remove any markers, stones, or monuments placed in violation of this section. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 3.80 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION

Sections:

3.80.010    Policy.

3.80.020    Vacation Petitions.

3.80.030    Review of Petition.

3.80.040    Review Standards and Guidelines.

3.80.050    Grant or Denial.

3.80.060    Satisfaction of Conditions.

3.80.070    Recordation.

3.80.080    Relationship to State Law.


3.80.010 Policy.

Vacations of public rights-of-way are not favored by the City. A person proposing a vacation has the burden of showing the vacation will serve the public interest. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.020 Vacation Petitions.

A.    Any person may file a petition with the City Recorder for vacation of any property dedicated to or owned by the public. The petition must include a description of the property proposed to be vacated, the purpose for which the vacated property ground is proposed to be used and the reason for the vacation.

B.    The person petitioning to vacate a public right-of-way shall deposit with the City the amount set by Council resolution for the cost of publishing and posting notices of the proposed vacation and other expenses. If the actual cost exceeds the amount of the deposit, the petitioner shall pay the deficiency before the vacation is completed. If the actual costs are less than the amount deposited, the excess shall be refunded.

C.    The petition shall contain the information required by State law, and:

1.    A title report showing ownership of the property abutting the area proposed to be vacated and in the affected area; and

2.    A tax map showing the area proposed to be vacated and the affected area.

D.    The City Manager has authority to give or withhold consent as to any property owned by the City.

E.    The City Council may initiate a vacation. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.030 Review of Petition.

A.    On receipt of a petition, the City Manager shall place the matter on the Council agenda for initial consideration. The City Manager may include a recommendation as to whether the Council should reject or deny the petition. If the recommendation is to reject the petition, notice to the petitioner shall be provided prior to Council’s consideration of the matter. On initial consideration, the Council may accept the petition and require staff to process the petition, or reject the petition without consideration. Rejection may occur only after notice to the petitioner.

B.    If Council accepts the petition, it shall be reviewed by City staff for a determination of whether payment is appropriate to service the public interest and, if so, the amount of the payment. Staff shall notify all affected public utility companies of the petition. Any responses from the utility companies shall be included in the materials provided to Council at or prior to the hearing required by BC 3.80.050. [Ord. NS-2187, 2012; Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.040 Review Standards and Guidelines.

The standards and guidelines in this section are not intended to be exclusive. The City Council, in its sole discretion, on consideration of any factor it determines relevant, must determine whether or not a proposed vacation would be in the public interest.

A.    Right-of-way will not be vacated if it is in use for right-of-way purposes unless the vacation involves a trade of property and the creation of an alternate right-of-way that will be used in place of the existing right-of-way.

B.    Right-of-way will not be vacated if there is a reasonable possibility it will be used for right-of-way purposes at any time in the future, unless the potential future use can be preserved by an easement or other means.

C.    Right-of-way purposes include:

1.    Streets;

2.    Bike paths;

3.    Trails, paths or sidewalks;

4.    Public utilities.

D.    The City may consider the current use, if any, of the right-of-way in determining whether it should be vacated.

E.    The City may consider the history of the property proposed to be vacated, how it was acquired by the public, the cost of acquisition, current value, and the benefit to any adjacent property to which the vacated property will be attached. [Ord. NS-2187, 2012; Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.050 Grant or Denial.

A.    The Council shall conduct a public hearing. At the hearing, the affected property owner(s) and any other person may present evidence regarding any aspect of the vacation. The Council may approve the vacation in whole or in part if it finds it in the public interest to do so, and must deny the vacation if it finds that the vacation is not in the public interest. Approval of a vacation is by ordinance, denial may be by resolution. Any approval may include conditions or reservations to protect the public interest. Conditions may include a requirement that other property be dedicated or that payment be made. Any payment received shall be used only for the acquisition of right-of-way. Reservations may include reservations of utility and access easements.

B.    If the petition is wholly denied, the City may retain from the deposit only the cost of publishing and posting. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.060 Satisfaction of Conditions.

A vacation ordinance that contains conditions of approval shall not be effective and may not be recorded until the conditions are fully complied with. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.070 Recordation.

A.    A certified copy of a vacation ordinance shall be filed for record with the County Clerk by the City Recorder after all conditions are met. The Recorder shall also provide a copy of the ordinance after it is recorded with the County Assessor, County Surveyor and each affected public utility.

B.    No vacation shall be effective until the ordinance vacating the property is recorded by the City Recorder with the County Clerk. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.80.080 Relationship to State Law.

The provisions in this chapter are in addition to the provisions of ORS 271.080 through 271.230, but do not supersede them. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


Chapter 3.90 STREET NAMES AND ADDRESS NUMBERS

Sections:

3.90.010    Purpose.

3.90.020    Definitions.

3.90.030    Authority.

3.90.040    Map.

3.90.050    Addresses.

3.90.060    Numbering.

3.90.070    Street Naming.

3.90.080    Size and Placement of Address.

3.90.090    Request for New Street Name.

3.90.100    Renaming Streets.

3.90.110    Violation.


3.90.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and processes for assigning street names and address numbers. Accurate and identifiable street names and building numbers facilitate the location of buildings by emergency service providers and others. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.020 Definitions.

A.    Address means a unique site location identifier of a property. If there is more than one building on a property, the separate buildings may have separate addresses.

B.    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

C.    Occupancy means an area of a building used for a separate purpose or by a different owner or tenant. Examples of occupancies include apartment units and individual retail stores on a multi-store property. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.030 Authority.

Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the Community Development Director has authority to approve street names and addresses and has full discretion to approve exceptions to these standards or apply alternate standards on a case-by-case basis. The Community Development Director has authority to enforce this chapter. No street or alley may be named or address assigned without approval of the Community Development Director. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.040 Map.

The City shall maintain a map of streets, address numbers and districts within the City. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.050 Addresses.

A.    At least one address shall be assigned to each property. Additional buildings on a property may have separate addresses when approved by the City. Separate occupancies shall have separate unit numbers that will be assigned by the City.

B.    Addresses shall be assigned based on the street fronting the building’s main entrance if practical. For vacant lots, the address shall be assigned based on the most probable entrance location. For multiple buildings on a property, the addresses shall be based on the location of the main access driveway if practical.

C.    Duplexes, triplexes, and multifamily residential buildings shall be assigned one address per building with separate unit numbers for each unit. Manufactured home parks shall be assigned one address for the park with space numbers for each manufactured home. Larger apartment and condominium complexes shall be assigned a minimum of one address per complex, and may be assigned additional addresses if the complex contains more than one building.

D.    Commercial and industrial complexes shall be assigned one address for each building. Unit numbers may be used to differentiate between occupancies in each building.

E.    Addressing and street naming may be coordinated with Deschutes County to eliminate the potential for inconsistencies with Deschutes County address numbers and to avoid duplication of street names. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.060 Numbering.

A.    The City’s four address districts are the northeast, the northwest, the southeast and the southwest districts which shall be used for address prefixes (NE, NW, SE and SW). All street signs shall indicate the district in which the street is located. The district shall be used as a prefix preceding the name of the street.

B.    Both sides of the same street shall be in the same series of numbers whenever practicable and the numbers shall increase away from the division lines. The address number shall be determined by where the building’s main entrance faces a public street or an approved signed private road. An occupancy may have an address on a public alley if an occupancy’s only frontage is on the alley with City approval.

C.    For irregular or winding blocks and streets, numbers shall be assigned and placed corresponding to the general direction of the street.

D.    Loop streets shall be numbered progressively as if they were a section of the street they are accessed from, regardless of any change of direction.

E.    Properties on the north and east side of streets shall have even numbers and properties on the south and west side of the streets shall have odd numbers. If a street changes direction, the odd and even sides shall be assigned to reflect the general direction (north-east or south-west) of the street. Odd and even sides shall remain the same for the entire length of the street, regardless of changes in direction. A circle street or loop street shall have even numbers on the inside of the circle or loop and odd numbers on the outside.

F.    Where a building has several entrances for use by different occupancies, a separate unit number may be assigned to each occupancy.

G.    Address numbers assigned to sites with new construction shall be displayed on site when construction begins.

H.    If an address is found to be incorrect or inconsistent, the City has full authority to make the necessary changes to the address and will communicate these changes to the owner and applicable agencies. Address numbers that are changed must be displayed within 30 days from the date on which the address becomes effective. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.070 Street Naming.

A.    All new public and private streets must be named consistent with this chapter.

B.    The name shall be limited to a maximum of two words not including the directional or street suffix.

C.    Street names shall be continuous. When a new development puts in a street that connects to an existing street, the existing street name will be continued.

D.    The street name shall not be a duplicate of a street name already in use (unless it is a small court off of that street), even if the suffix (avenue, street, etc.) is different, unless it is likely that the street sections will be connected in the future. New streets shall be designated as numbered streets only if they fall on the gridline and it is likely that they will connect with another section of the numbered street. Public and private streets shall have the following designations:

1.    Continuous north-south streets shall be designated “street.”

2.    Continuous east-west streets shall be designated “avenue.”

3.    Short or interrupted streets shall be designated “place.”

4.    Short or interrupted streets with no outlet shall be designated “court.”

5.    Streets that intersect the same street twice at different locations shall be designated “loop.”

6.    Short or interrupted diagonal streets shall be designated “way.”

7.    Continuous meandering streets shall be designated “drive.”

8.    Short or interrupted meandering streets shall be designated “lane.”

9.    Streets that flow in a circular pattern and intersect the same street at only one location shall be designated “circle.”

10.    A court that comes off a street at a perpendicular may take that street’s name, but with a “court” designation.

11.    Public alleys shall not be named except in special situations with City approval.

12.    Designations such as “highway,” “road,” and “terrace” may be used only in special situations with City approval. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.080 Size and Placement of Address.

Except for accessory structures that do not require an address, a building’s assigned address number shall be placed at the main entrance. Separate occupancies with assigned units must display the unit numbers at the main entrance for each occupancy. The address number must be clearly visible from the street on which the property is addressed or in another location allowed by this chapter or approved in writing by the City. The address number shall be included on any primary freestanding sign for commercial buildings, but shall not be considered part of the sign area.

A.    The figures in the numbers shall not be less than four inches high and have a minimum stroke width of one-half inch, shall be a contrasting color to the background visible both day and night, shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters and shall be affixed permanently in a conspicuous place at the main entrance and clearly visible from the street to which the property is addressed.

B.    The owner or occupant of any building may place address numbers on the street curb in front of the building, in addition to the required posting at the main entrance.

C.    If the building is not visible from the street, the City may require that the address number be posted so that it is visible from the street where addressed to ensure that emergency vehicles will be able to locate the building.

D.    Commercial buildings and commercial complexes addressed from a main street and not the driveway access shall have adequate signage indicating access. The City may require that the address number be placed at the access to the complex. The address number on each building shall be on the facade or entrance of the building facing the street from which the address is taken.

E.    Construction sites or buildings under construction shall display the address number or subdivision lot number visible from the street to which the property is addressed. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.090 Request for New Street Name.

A.    New street names must be approved by the City. The request for a new street name shall contain the proposed street name and a map showing the location of the proposed street and shall be submitted to the City in a format established by the Community Development Director.

B.    The application must be accompanied by the fee in the amount prescribed by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.100 Renaming Streets.

A.    Process. The Bend City Council or the Planning Commission may initiate changing the name of any street within the City. A property owner may request a change in the name of a street on which they own property by filing an application with the City. A request for a street name change shall be first considered by the Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to City Council after a public hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the Planning Commission recommendation and adopt any street name change by resolution. The new name will become effective 30 days after the resolution is approved for residential properties and 90 days after approval for commercial and industrial properties.

B.    A property owner initiated application for a street name change shall be submitted in a format established by the Community Development Director and shall contain the following information:

1.    Name of applicant;

2.    Proposed street name, with two alternative choices;

3.    Reason for request;

4.    A map showing the location of the street;

5.    List of the names and addresses and Zip Code of each owner of all property abutting the street;

6.    Signature of at least 51 percent of the property owners abutting the street proposed to be changed, signifying they agree with the proposed name change.

C.    The application for a street name change must be accompanied by the fee set by Council resolution.

D.    Criteria for Name Selection When a Street Has More Than One Name. The Planning Commission and City Council shall base their decision to change the name of a portion of a street so that the name is consistent with other portions of the street based on the following criteria:

1.    The least number of addresses that will need corrections;

2.    The name that was platted first;

3.    The street with the longest segment length;

4.    Consistency with other street names in the area (e.g., Oak Street over Madison in an area with streets named after trees, but Madison over Oak in an area with streets named after presidents);

5.    The use of historical names;

6.    The street segment name with the heaviest travel;

7.    Highest street classification.

E.    Criteria for Name Selection When an Existing Street Name Is Changed. The Planning Commission and City Council shall base their decision on the following criteria in determining whether or not an existing street name shall be changed:

1.    The street name causes confusion and a new name will improve or clarify the identification of the area.

2.    The street name sounds like another street name or is spelled similarly and causes confusion.

3.    The street name is a word other than a proper name that is deliberately misspoken or misspelled to emphasize a pun or other frivolous association with another word or slang term, resulting in confusion.

4.    The street is known by more than one name.

5.    The street is different than the name of the street of which it is a continuation or the street is in more than one section interrupted by topographical barriers.

F.    Person(s) receiving notice of the street name change shall promptly notify tenants or other occupants of the approved name change. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


3.90.110 Violation.

A violation of this chapter is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 PUBLIC PROTECTION Revised 1/19 Revised 9/19

Chapters:

5.10    Airport

5.15    Alcoholic Liquor

5.20    Animals

5.25    Equal Rights

5.30    Fire Regulations

5.35    General Infractions

5.40    Major Infractions

5.45    Chronic Nuisance Property

5.50    Noise

5.55    Parks

5.60    Additional Tenant Protections

5.65    Repealed Repealed 9/19


Chapter 5.10 AIRPORT

Sections:

5.10.000    Regulations.

5.10.005    Violation.


5.10.000 Regulations.

Any person using the Bend Municipal Airport and its facilities shall do so in compliance with the City’s Airport Regulations. For the purpose of this section, Airport Regulations includes any lawful order of the City Manager implementing a duly adopted regulation. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.10.005 Violation.

A violation of this chapter is a Class B civil infraction. Any persons violating this section may be removed from the property as a trespasser following procedures required by State law. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.15 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR

Sections:

5.15.000    Definitions.

5.15.005    Drinking on Unlicensed Premises.

5.15.010    Prohibition of Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on or in the Deschutes River.


5.15.000 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases mean:

A.    Alcoholic beverage means liquids containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume intended or used for human consumption. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.15.005 Drinking on Unlicensed Premises.

A.    No person shall drink or be in possession of an open container of alcoholic beverages in a public place or premises open to the public unless the place or premises has been licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to sell intoxicating liquor for consumption or on premises for which a permit has been issued by the City.

B.    Except when authorized by the Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District, no person shall drink or be in possession of an open container of alcoholic beverages in a park under the control of Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District without having first obtained an alcohol consumption permit referenced in BC Chapter 5.55.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.15.010 Prohibition of Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on or in the Deschutes River.

A.    No person may possess or consume any alcoholic beverage while on or in the Deschutes River within the City limits of Bend. This prohibition applies to both open and closed containers of alcoholic beverages but does not apply to persons crossing the river on a bridge.

B.    Violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.20 ANIMALS

Sections:

5.20.000    Definitions.

5.20.005    Exemption for Law Enforcement Animals.

5.20.010    Owner/Keeper Responsibility for Animal.

5.20.015    Animal Waste.

5.20.020    Dog Licensing.

5.20.025    Animal at Large.

5.20.030    Off-Leash Areas.

5.20.035    Dangerous Animals.

5.20.040    Animal Nuisances.

5.20.045    Impound.

5.20.050    Unclaimed Animals.

5.20.055    Warrant for Seizure of Animals.

5.20.060    Rabid Animals.

5.20.065    Procedures and Penalties.

5.20.070    Destruction of Animals/Termination of Owner Rights.

5.20.075    Undertaking on Appeal.


5.20.000 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A.    Animal means domestic and exotic pets and livestock.

B.    Dangerous animal means any animal that has been found by the Judge to have:

1.    Without provocation, placed a person in reasonable fear of imminent physical injury; or

2.    Attacked a person or domestic animal without provocation; or

3.    Been trained for or used in animal fighting.

C.    Exotic pet means an animal kept and maintained as a pet excluding dogs and domestic cats.

D.    Judge means a Bend Municipal Court Judge, including any pro-tem Judges.

E.    Keeper means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, a person, firm, association or corporation which is in possession of, in temporary control of, or who is responsible for the care of an animal. The term “keeper” also means the parent or guardian of the owner of an animal, if the owner is under the age of 18 years and the owner resides with the parent or guardian on the date of the alleged violation.

F.    Off-leash area means an area designated by the Bend City Council pursuant to BC 5.20.030 as an area where dogs are not required to be leashed.

G.    Owner means a person, firm, association or corporation that owns an animal.

H.    Physical injury means impairment of physical condition or substantial pain.

I.    Run at large means to be off the private premises where the animal is allowed to be by the person in charge of those premises and not under the complete, tethered control of the owner or keeper by adequate leash or bridle. Any animal in a vehicle shall not be considered to be “at large.” [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.005 Exemption for Law Enforcement Animals.

An animal owned by a law enforcement agency is exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the animal is under the care and control of a law enforcement officer. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.010 Owner/Keeper Responsibility for Animal.

The owner or keeper of an animal which violates the provisions of this chapter is responsible for the animal’s acts and condition and the owner or keeper is subject to the penalties provided in BC 5.20.065 for the animal’s violations of any provision of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.015 Animal Waste.

It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of an animal other than a domestic cat to allow it to deposit solid waste matter on any property other than the property of the owner or keeper of the animal. It shall be a defense to this action if the owner or keeper of the animal promptly removes the solid waste deposited by the animal. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.020 Dog Licensing.

A.    Every dog within the City that has a set of permanent canine teeth shall be licensed. The license tag shall be attached to a collar worn by the dog. The owner and/or keeper of the dog shall be found in violation of this chapter if the dog is not wearing its collar and tag or if the tag is not present on the dog’s collar at any time.

B.    An owner or keeper of a dog within the City shall license the dog not later than 30 days after the person becomes the owner or keeper of the dog or establishes residence within the City.

C.    Licenses shall not be required for dogs owned by dealers, breeders or exhibitors if the dogs are kept in kennels exclusively for sale or exhibition purposes, or while such dogs are being transported by dealers, breeders, or exhibitors to and from a dog show or fair. Licenses are not required for dogs that are used as service animals for persons with disabilities. A companion or therapy animal is not a service animal unless the animal has been individually trained to perform one or more tasks for a person with disabilities and trained to behave in public. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.025 Animal at Large.

No animal other than a domestic cat may run at large. The owner or keeper of an animal is responsible for an animal at large. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.030 Off-Leash Areas.

A.    The Bend City Council may, in its discretion, designate certain areas of public parks which are owned and operated by the Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District (BMPRD) as areas where dogs are not required to be leashed, subject to the other provisions of this section.

B.    A designation of an area as an off-leash area by the Bend City Council shall not be effective unless the BMPRD Board provides prior written notice to the Bend Chief of Police. Owners must comply with the BMPRD regulations applicable to all off-leash areas.

C.    The owner or keeper of a dog that is in an off-leash area must control the dog at all times. The owner or keeper of a dog shall not allow a dog to engage in fighting with other dogs, or harass, bark at, bite, threaten or injure a person or animal.

D.    If a dog or an owner or keeper is found to be in violation of this section, the dog may be excluded from the off-leash area for up to 24 hours. If a citation is issued for animal nuisance under BC 5.20.040, the dog shall be excluded from all off-leash areas, pending a review of and determination on the citation by the Judge. Returning an animal to an off-leash park after being excluded is a Class A civil infraction.

E.    Dangerous animals shall not be permitted in an off-leash area under any circumstances.

F.    Any owner or keeper of a dog shall be subject to a Class A civil penalty for violation of the terms and conditions of an off-leash area as provided in this section. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.035 Dangerous Animals.

An animal may be designated as a dangerous animal by order of the Judge. If an animal is designated as a dangerous animal, the Judge may impose any or all of the following restrictions:

A.    The owner or keeper of the dangerous animal shall cause the animal to be confined on the premises of the owner or keeper, either securely indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or similar structure; such pen or structure must be securely constructed and must be adequate to ensure the confinement of the animal.

B.    No owner or keeper of a dangerous animal shall permit the animal to go beyond the premises of the person unless the animal is humanely muzzled and either securely leashed or otherwise securely restrained and led by a person physically capable of handling the animal.

C.    A requirement that the animal’s owner or keeper post signs on the premises where the animal is kept indicating that the animal is a dangerous animal.

D.    If the animal designated as a dangerous animal is a dog, then the dog shall at all times be required to wear a special dog tag indicating that the dog is a dangerous animal and will be required to be microchipped. The owner shall be responsible for payment for the special tag and microchip.

E.    Dangerous animals are prohibited in all public parks. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.040 Animal Nuisances.

A.    An animal other than a domestic cat is a nuisance if it:

1.    Bites, injures or attacks a person without provocation;

2.    Places a person in reasonable fear of imminent physical injury, without provocation;

3.    Injures or kills an animal belonging to a person other than the owner or keeper of the animal;

4.    Is trained for or used in animal fighting;

5.    Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises;

6.    Chases vehicles or obstructs traffic;

7.    Chases people;

8.    Damages property belonging to a person other than the owner or keeper of the animal;

9.    Scatters garbage;

10.    Attends a special event as defined in BC Title 7;

11.    Its owner or keeper has failed to comply with BC 5.20.030(C) or off-leash regulations at an off-leash area.

B.    A domestic cat is a nuisance if it:

1.    Bites, injures or attacks a person without provocation;

2.    Places a person in fear of imminent physical injury, without provocation;

3.    Is trained for or used in animal fighting;

4.    Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises;

5.    Attends a special event as defined in BC Title 7. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.045 Impound.

A.    An animal that has violated BC 5.20.025, 5.20.035 or 5.20.040 or that lacks a required license may be seized and impounded by an officer of the Bend Police Department.

B.    If an officer of the Bend Police Department is unable to apprehend such animals without risking injury to the officer or other people, the officer may kill the animal if other means to control the animal are ineffective or likely to be.

C.    An impounded animal shall be placed in the animal shelter under contract with the City of Bend Police Department and shall be held by that animal shelter until the release has been authorized by the Bend Police Department, any citations issued to the animal’s owner or keeper have been resolved by the court system or until the shelter has received a court order directing the shelter to release or humanely destroy the animal.

D.    When an animal is impounded, the owner or person responsible for the animal shall pay processing and boarding fees to the Bend Police Department in an amount set by City Council. The processing fee shall cover the costs of collecting and transporting the animal to the animal shelter, and the costs of administering the release of the animal. The owner or responsible person for the animal shall be responsible for any veterinary expenses necessary for the health and safety of the animal or staff. The processing and boarding fees shall be paid before the animal may be released. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.050 Unclaimed Animals.

A.    If an impounded animal has not been claimed for five or more days, the owner’s rights will be forfeited, and the animal may be handled according to the animal shelter’s policies, rules and regulations, including humane destruction of the animal.

B.    If an animal has been impounded and one or more citations have been issued to the animal’s owner or keeper, but the animal’s owner or keeper does not make a personal or written appearance on the citation(s) in the Bend Municipal Court within the time required by the citation(s), then the owner’s rights will be forfeited, and the animal may be handled according to the animal shelter’s policies, rules and regulations, including humane destruction of the animal.

C.    If an animal has been impounded and the owner or keeper of the animal makes a first appearance in the Bend Municipal Court, but the owner or keeper later fails to appear as required by the Municipal Court, then the owner’s rights will be forfeited, and the animal may be handled according to the animal shelter’s policies, rules and regulations, including humane destruction of the animal.

D.    Any animal taken to the shelter as a safekeeping for the owner shall remain under care of the shelter for 10 days. If the owner of the animal does not arrange the reclamation of the animal before the eleventh day, the animal will be handled according to the animal shelter’s policies, rules and regulations, including humane destruction of the animal. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.055 Warrant for Seizure of Animals.

A.    Any member of the Bend Police Department, including community service officers, may apply to the Bend Municipal Court for a warrant authorizing the search for and seizure of any animal that has violated BC 5.20.040. The Bend Municipal Court Judge may issue the warrant based on a prima facie case that the violation has occurred.

B.    Nothing in this section is intended to limit the search and seizure authority of City police officers otherwise provided by law. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.060 Rabid Animals.

Management and disposition of rabid animals shall be as prescribed by Oregon law. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.065 Procedures and Penalties.

A.    Violations of BC 5.20.030, 5.20.035 and 5.20.040 are Class A civil infractions.

B.    Violations of other provisions of this chapter are Class B civil infractions.

C.    Reimbursement of Impound Costs. The Bend Municipal Court Judge may order the owner or keeper of an animal that violates any provision of this chapter to reimburse the City of Bend for any and all impound costs in excess of the fees imposed by BC 5.20.045.

D.    Exclusion from Off-Leash Areas. If an animal is found in violation of the provisions of this chapter and the violation occurred in an off-leash area, the Bend Municipal Court Judge may order that the animal be excluded from all off-leash areas. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2202, 2013; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.070 Destruction of Animals/Termination of Owner Rights.

A.    If an animal has been found to have violated BC 5.20.040(A)(1) or (B)(1) the Judge shall enter an order terminating the animal owner’s rights to the animal and/or requiring that the animal be humanely destroyed.

B.    If an animal has been found to have committed two or more violations of BC 5.20.040(A)(2), (3) or (4) within a five-year period, the Judge shall enter an order terminating the animal owner’s rights to the animal and/or requiring that the animal be humanely destroyed.

C.    The Judge may terminate an animal owner’s right to the animal and direct that the animal be placed in an animal shelter for possible adoption and/or prohibit the owner from owning or possessing animals in the City if:

1.    The Judge determines that an animal’s violation of BC 5.20.040(A)(1), (2), (3), or (4) or (B)(1), (2), or (3) was caused by the neglect, abuse or tormenting of the animal by its owner-keeper.

2.    The animal or the owner of the animal has committed two or more violations of BC 5.20.040 within a one-year period.

3.    In deciding whether to terminate an owner’s rights to an animal under this section, the Judge shall consider the extent to which each violation was attributable to an action of the owner.

4.    Violation of an order issued under this section is a Class A civil infraction.

D.    The Judge may suspend any orders in subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section for a period of up to five years, subject to conditions, which may include:

1.    A requirement that neither the animal nor the animal’s owner or keeper commit any further violations of this chapter.

2.    A requirement that the animal’s owner or keeper pay Court ordered penalties resulting from the animal’s violation of this code.

3.    A designation of the animal as a dangerous animal that is subject to the dangerous animal restrictions described in BC 5.20.035(D).

4.    A provision that allows law enforcement officers, upon a future violation of BC 5.20.025, 5.20.035 or 5.20.040 by the animal, to take the animal into custody pending further review and order by the Judge.

5.    Any other condition that the Judge deems appropriate. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.20.075 Undertaking on Appeal.

If an animal has been impounded and the owner or keeper has filed an appeal of an order of the Bend Municipal Court, then the owner or keeper of the animal must provide a bond, deposit or other security to assure payment of the cost incurred by the City for housing the animal pending appeal. The bond, deposit or other security shall be set in an amount not less than the cost of impounding the animal for six months at the rate charged the City by the animal shelter. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2151, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.25 EQUAL RIGHTS

Sections:

5.25.005    Definitions.

5.25.010    Discrimination in Employment Prohibited.

5.25.015    Discrimination in Selling, Renting or Leasing Real Property Prohibited.

5.25.020    Discrimination in Places of Public Accommodation Prohibited.

5.25.025    Exceptions.

5.25.030    Enforcement.


5.25.005 Definitions.

A.    Employer means any person who, directly or through an agent, engages or uses the personal service of one or more employees, within the City of Bend, reserving the right to control the means by which such service is or will be performed.

B.    Gender identity means a person’s actual or perceived sex, including a person’s identity, appearance, expression, or behavior with respect to actual or perceived sex, whether or not that identity, appearance, expression or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person’s sex at birth.

C.    Sexual orientation means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.

D.    Any terms used but not defined in this chapter are to be defined as in ORS Chapter 659A. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.25.010 Discrimination in Employment Prohibited.

A.    It shall be unlawful to discriminate in employment on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex, national origin, marital status, age (if the individual is 18 years of age or older), or physical or mental impairment by committing any of the acts made unlawful under the provisions of ORS 659A.030 and 659A.112.

B.    In addition, it shall be unlawful to discriminate in employment on the basis of an individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts already made unlawful under ORS 659A.030 when committed against the categories of persons listed therein. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.25.015 Discrimination in Selling, Renting or Leasing Real Property Prohibited.

It is an unlawful real property transaction practice for any person to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, marital status, familial status, domestic partnership, national origin, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.145 or 659A.421. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.25.020 Discrimination in Places of Public Accommodation Prohibited.

It is an unlawful public accommodation practice for a person to discriminate on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex, marital status, familial status, domestic partnership, national origin, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.142 or ORS 659A.400 to 659A.409. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.25.025 Exceptions.

A.    The prohibitions in this chapter do not apply to an organization whose primary purpose and function is religious.

B.    The housing prohibitions in this chapter do not apply to renting space in a single housing unit or to renting of space in a building which is owner occupied and which has fewer than four units.

C.    Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent an employer from enforcing an otherwise valid dress code. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.25.030 Enforcement.

A.    Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory act under the provisions of this chapter may file a complaint with the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor and Industries under procedures established in ORS 659A.820. The Commissioner shall have the same power to enforce the provisions of this chapter as the Commissioner has to enforce alleged violations within the Commissioner’s statutory authority.

B.    Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory act under the provisions of this chapter shall have a cause of action in any court of competent authority. Election of remedies and other procedural issues relating to the interplay between administrative proceedings and private rights of action shall be handled as provided for in ORS 659A.870 through 659A.880. The court may grant such relief as is provided in ORS 659A.885. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.30 FIRE REGULATIONS

Sections:

5.30.000    Fireworks.

5.30.005    Open Burning Prohibited.


5.30.000 Fireworks.

A.    The sale, offer for sale, possession, and use of fireworks shall conform to Oregon law, as supplemented by this chapter.

B.    No person under the age of 18 may sell, keep, possess, use, or explode any fireworks within the City.

C.    No person shall sell or provide fireworks to a person under the age of 18 years.

D.    The City may confiscate, destroy, remove, or have removed at the owner’s expense all stocks of fireworks in violation of this section, when necessary for the preservation of the public safety.

E.    Violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction for persons over the age of 18 and a Class C civil infraction for persons under the age of 18. [Ord. NS-2354, 2019; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.30.005 Open Burning Prohibited.

A.    Except as authorized by this section, no person shall start or maintain an outdoor fire within the boundaries of the City of Bend for the following purposes:

1.    The burning of any refuse, garbage, or other waste products as described in the City of Bend Fire Department Outdoor Burning Regulations;

2.    The burning of any yard debris including but not limited to branches, leaves and pine needles;

3.    The burning of any construction or demolition waste;

4.    Field, ditch or weed burning.

B.    The following open burning is allowed subject to compliance with the provisions in the most recent fire code as adopted by the City of Bend and the Fire Department’s Outdoor Burning Regulations:

1.    Fires initiated by the Fire Department for training purposes which are approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality;

2.    Campfires, warming fires, cooking fires, outdoor fireplaces, outdoor kiln fires and other approved similar type fires that are not more than three feet in diameter;

3.    Cooking pits approved by the City of Bend Fire Department;

4.    Weed control by the City, County, or State within developed streets.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.35 GENERAL INFRACTIONS

Sections:

5.35.000    Diving and Ice Skating on Deschutes River.

5.35.005    Curfew for Minors.

5.35.010    Persons Confined in Vehicles.

5.35.015    Public Urination or Defecation.

5.35.020    Snow and Ice.

5.35.025    Smoking and Tobacco Use Prohibited on City Campuses.

5.35.030    Watershed Protection Area.


5.35.000 Diving and Ice Skating on Deschutes River.

A.    No person shall operate a motor propelled boat on the Deschutes River within the limits of the City of Bend.

B.    Diving, jumping, or otherwise launching oneself or any other person or object off a bridge into a river or canal is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to normal fishing activities.

C.    Ice skating on the Deschutes River is prohibited.

D.    No person shall place, leave or abandon a duck or goose along the banks of the Deschutes River or in any park along the Deschutes River.

E.    The prohibitions in this section do not apply to government employees in the commission of their duties or to others with the written permission of the City Manager.

F.    Violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.35.005 Curfew for Minors.

A.    No minor under the age of 18 years shall be in or on a street, highway, park, alley, or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following morning if the following morning is that of a school day in the Bend public school system, and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. on other days.

B.    No parent, guardian, or person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall allow the minor to be in or on any street, highway, park, alley or other public place in violation of subsection (A) of this section.

C.    Enforcement. Peace officers and other law enforcement officers may take or send the minor to the minor’s residence and notify the parents, guardian or person having care and custody of the minor concerning the violation.

D.    Exceptions. This section shall not apply:

1.    If the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or other person 21 years of age or older and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and custody of the minor;

2.    If the minor is engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which requires his presence in public places during the hours specified in this section;

3.    To minors in motor vehicles engaged in direct intrastate or interstate travel;

4.    If the minor is emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558.

E.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.35.010 Persons Confined in Vehicles.

A.    No person, who has under their control or guidance a minor child, under eight years of age, or any other person who is incapable of exiting the vehicle by themself, shall at any time lock or confine, or permit to be locked or confined, or leave the person unattended in a vehicle for a period of time longer than 10 minutes. It is lawful for a peace officer, finding a person confined in violation of this section, to enter the vehicle and remove the person. The officer may, if necessary, break the doors or windows of the vehicle in order to save the life of the person or to save the person from mental or physical suffering.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.35.015 Public Urination or Defecation.

A.    No person shall urinate or defecate in areas open to the public or in public view except in urinals and washrooms provided for that purpose.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.35.020 Snow and Ice.

No owner or person in charge of property improved or unimproved abutting a public sidewalk shall allow:

A.    Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first six hours of daylight after the snow has fallen or otherwise accumulated in commercial areas and one day in all other areas.

B.    Ice to remain on the sidewalk for more than six hours of daylight in commercial areas and one day in all other areas after the ice has formed unless the ice is covered with a suitable material to assure safe travel.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction for violation in all areas except for residential property. The penalty in residential areas is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.35.025 Smoking and Tobacco Use Prohibited on City Campuses.

A.    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

1.    City campuses means any City or Bend Urban Renewal Agency (BURA) owned/leased facility where official business is conducted. This includes the interior and exterior of City/BURA buildings including but not limited to City Hall, Public Works/Police, Fire Departments, Municipal Airport, Riverfront Plaza and Hawthorne Station site and the exterior of buildings from the edge of the building to the public sidewalk including parking lots.

2.    City parking structure means any city-owned structure used for motor vehicle parking, but not including surface parking lots.

3.    Tobacco product means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation, or other means of ingestion.

4.    Smoking means any inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of any lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or similar product containing tobacco, cannabis, or any similar substance.

B.    The City of Bend prohibits smoking and the use of tobacco products throughout all City campuses and City parking structures.

C.    Exceptions. The prohibition on smoking and the use of tobacco products does not apply to the following areas:

1.    Public sidewalks within the public right-of-way.

2.    Areas specified as a designated smoking area.

3.    Within a vehicle in a City parking structure.

D.    “Tobacco Free Campus” signs will be posted at all City campus entrances and signs shall be posted in City parking facilities indicating that smoking and tobacco use are prohibited.

E.    Tobacco receptacles will be placed at the “Tobacco Free Campus” sign locations at entrances to City campuses as a receptacle for tobacco products.

F.    Any City police officer, City code enforcement officer, City Manager or designated representative shall have the authority to request that City employees or members of the public discontinue smoking or other use of tobacco products on City campuses. Any person who fails to discontinue the use of their tobacco products immediately upon request is required to immediately leave the City campus. Failure to comply with an order to discontinue smoking or other tobacco use or leave a City campus constitutes criminal trespass in the second degree (ORS 164.245).

G.    Violation of this section is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2184, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.35.030 Watershed Protection Area.

It shall be a Class A civil infraction for any person, firm or corporation to impair the purity of the City’s Bridge Creek water source. The following actions are prohibited:

A.    Causing pollution or causing or allowing any waste to be placed in a location where such wastes are likely to escape or be carried into the waters of Bridge Creek or the City’s water distribution system.

B.    Engaging in any activity on the City’s Bridge Creek watershed that will or may tend to reduce the water quality within the Bridge Creek watershed.

C.    Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

D.    Any violation of this section shall also constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by law. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.40 MAJOR INFRACTIONS

Sections:

5.40.005    Acquisition and Retention of Articles Missing Serial Numbers.

5.40.010    Civil Exclusion Zones.

5.40.015    Civil Exclusion.

5.40.020    Exclusion Enforcement.

5.40.025    Issuance of Exclusion Notices.

5.40.030    Procedure for Exclusion.

5.40.035    Appeal and Variance.

5.40.040    Discharge of Weapons.

5.40.045    Interfering with a Police Dog.

5.40.050    Misrepresentation of City of Bend Affiliation.

5.40.085    Trespass to Vehicle.


5.40.005 Acquisition and Retention of Articles Missing Serial Numbers.

A.    No person shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal, or possess any item of value from which the manufacturer’s nameplate, serial number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark has been intentionally removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed.

B.    It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge brought under subsection (A) of this section that the defendant is the owner of the property.

C.    The Bend Police Department shall treat the property described in subsection (A) of this section as stolen. Prior to being disposed of or being returned to the owner, the Police Department may attach an identification mark on the item.

D.    Subsection (A) of this section does not apply if the identification has become illegible or unattached through normal wear.

E.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.010 Civil Exclusion Zones.

Civil exclusion zones are designated to protect the public from those whose illegal conduct poses a threat to safety and welfare.

A.    Civil exclusion zones include the following places:

1.    Public Places. The breezeway between the western terminus of Minnesota Street to and through the Riverfront Plaza; and all publicly owned property from the eastern side of Brooks Alley to Drake Park between Franklin Avenue and Oregon Avenue.

2.    Public Parks. All public parks, including parks owned and/or managed by the Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District.

3.    Downtown District. The Downtown District described as follows:

Beginning at the northeast side of Newport/Greenwood Avenue and the Deschutes River, thence southwest along the Deschutes River to the boundary of Drake Park, then southeast and then southwest along the Drake Park boundary to Franklin Avenue, then northwest along Franklin Avenue to the northwest corner of Franklin Avenue and Broadway Street, then southwest on the northwest side of Broadway Street to the southwest side of Idaho Avenue, thence southeast on Idaho Avenue to the southeast side of Bond Street, thence northeast on Bond Street to the southwest side of Kansas Avenue, then southeast on Kansas Avenue to the southeast side of Lava Road, thence northeast on Lava Road to the south side of Franklin Avenue, thence east to the west side of Harriman Street, thence north on the east side of Harriman Street to the north side of Greenwood Avenue, thence west on Greenwood Avenue to the point of beginning (as shown on Map A). [Ord. NS-2245, 2015; Ord. NS-2144, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.015 Civil Exclusion.

A person is subject to exclusion for a period of 90 days from entering or remaining within a civil exclusion zone if that person has been cited to appear, arrested or otherwise taken into custody within a civil exclusion zone for:

A.    Any assault, as defined by ORS 163.160 through 163.185 and 163.208;

B.    Strangulation, as defined by ORS 163.187;

C.    Menacing, as defined by ORS 163.190;

D.    Harassment, as defined by ORS 166.065 and 166.070;

E.    Disorderly conduct, as defined by ORS 166.023 and 166.025;

F.    Recklessly endangering, as defined by ORS 163.195;

G.    Coercion, as defined by ORS 163.275;

H.    Any sexual offense, as defined by ORS 163.355 through 163.465;

I.    Endangering the welfare of a minor, as defined by ORS 163.575;

J.    Any offense under State law governing the possession, distribution, sale or manufacture of a controlled substance;

K.    Any offense under State law governing the possession, use, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages;

L.    Possession or using a weapon in violation of ORS 166.180, 166.190, 166.220, 166.240, 166.250 or 166.272 or BC 5.40.040;

M.    Any degree of criminal mischief, as defined by ORS 164.305 through 164.365;

N.    Graffiti as defined in ORS 164.381 through 164.386;

O.    Arson or reckless burning as defined in ORS 164.305 through 164.335;

P.    Theft as defined in ORS 164.015 through 164.095;

Q.    Littering, as defined in ORS 164.775 through 164.805;

R.    Possession of tobacco by a minor in violation of ORS 167.400;

S.    Two or more citations for drinking at an unlicensed premises within 12 months;

T.    Violation of Section 47, 49, 54, 56, 57 or 73 of 2014 Oregon Ballot Measure 91;

U.    Two or more violations of BC 5.20.025, 5.20.035 or 5.20.040 within 12 months. [Ord. NS-2245, 2015; Ord. NS-2144, 2010; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.020 Exclusion Enforcement.

If a person excluded from a civil exclusion zone is found within the perimeter of the civil exclusion zone during the exclusion period, that person may be arrested for trespass in the second degree, as defined by ORS 164.245. A person is not considered to be within the civil exclusion area if the person is within a vehicle that is passing through the exclusion area. [Ord. NS-2245, 2015; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.025 Issuance of Exclusion Notices.

The Chief of Police is designated as the person in charge of civil exclusion zones for the purpose of issuing exclusion notices in accordance with this chapter. The Chief of Police may authorize employees of the Police Department to issue exclusion notices in accordance with this chapter. [Ord. NS-2245, 2015; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.030 Procedure for Exclusion.

A.    At the time a person is cited to appear, arrested or otherwise taken into custody within a civil exclusion zone for any of the offenses specified in BC 5.40.015, the officer making such arrest may deliver to that person a written notice excluding that person from the civil exclusion zone. Any exclusion notice shall not take effect until the sixth day after the notice is issued.

B.    The notice shall specify the area from which the person is excluded, the length of the exclusion, the penalty for entering the excluded area and contain information concerning the right to appeal the exclusion to the Judge of the Municipal Court.

C.    The person to whom the exclusion is issued shall sign a written acknowledgement of receipt of the notice. If that person refuses to sign the acknowledgement, the arresting officer shall make a written record of the refusal. [Ord. NS-2245, 2015; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.035 Appeal and Variance.

A.    The person to whom an exclusion notice is issued shall have the right to an appeal from the issuance of the notice. The exclusion notice will notify the person of the right to appeal and process for appeal.

1.    An appeal of the exclusion must be filed, in writing, within five calendar days of the issuance of the notice. The appeal must be filed with the Municipal Court. If the fifth day is a day on which the Municipal Court is not open, the appeal may be filed on the first day the Municipal Court is open for business, and the exclusion shall not take effect until the close of business on that day. A hearing on the appeal shall be held before the Judge of the Municipal Court within 20 calendar days of the appeal. The exclusion shall be stayed during the pendency of the appeal.

2.    The City shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of evidence that the exclusion was based upon the conduct proscribed by BC 5.40.015. Copies of documents in its control and which are intended to be used by the City at the hearing shall be made available to the appellant at least two days prior to the hearing.

3.    A determination by a court having jurisdiction of the matter that the officer who issued the exclusion notice at the time had probable cause to arrest the person to whom the exclusion notice was issued for the conduct described in BC 5.40.015 shall be prima facie evidence that the exclusion was based on conduct prohibited by those statutes.

B.    Variances from the exclusion may be granted at any time during the exclusion period by the Chief of Police, or by the Municipal Court.

C.    The Chief of Police or the Municipal Court shall grant a variance to any person who can establish that he or she is a resident of the exclusion zone, is employed within the exclusion zone, or will use the waiver to visit the residence of a family member, to consult with an attorney, to attend religious services or otherwise exercise a constitutional right. A variance may also be granted when, in the discretion of the Chief of Police or the Municipal Court, the exclusion order is no longer necessary to preserve public safety. The denial of a variance may be appealed within five days to the Municipal Court using the same procedures as for an appeal of the imposition of the exclusion.

D.    All variances shall be in writing, for a specific period of time and only to accommodate a specific purpose, all of which shall be stated on the variance.

E.    The person shall keep the variance on his or her person at all times the person is within the exclusion area. [Ord. NS-2245, 2015; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.040 Discharge of Weapons.

A.    Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no person other than an authorized peace officer acting in the course and scope of duty, shall fire or discharge any gun, weapon, airsoft gun; or other device which is spring or air-actuated that propels pellets, bbs, or bearings, or any weapon that propels a projectile by use of a bow, sling, or explosives.

B.    The following actions are exempt from subsection (A) of this section if conducted under circumstances that do not present an unreasonable risk of harm to any person or property:

1.    The firing or discharge of any weapon or other device at a fully enclosed range designed and constructed for the type of weapon or other device discharged.

2.    The firing or discharge of paintballs at a facility in which all participants have consented to engage in paintball activities.

3.    The firing or discharge of paintballs, airsoft guns or toys on private property so long as the projectile remains on the property from which it was discharged.

4.    The use of nail guns or other carpentry tools being used for their intended purpose.

5.    Animal control measures taken by Federal, State, county, district and local agencies. 

C.    It shall be an affirmative defense to subsection (A) of this section that the person was acting in defense of life or property and under circumstances that would warrant the use of deadly force under Oregon law.

D.    It shall be an affirmative defense to subsection (A) of this section that the person was test firing or discharging the weapon, as a necessary part of the person’s lawful business operations while utilizing a bullet trap under circumstances that did not present an unreasonable risk of harm to any person.

E.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2254, 2015; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.045 Interfering with a Police Dog.

A.    Definitions. For purposes of this code section, the following definitions apply:

1.    Peace officer means a municipal police officer, sheriff, constable, marshal, member of the Oregon State Police or investigator of the Criminal Justice Division of the Department of Justice and such other persons as may be designated by law.

2.    Police dog means a dog used in police work under the control of a peace officer.

B.    A person commits the offense of interfering with a police dog if the person intentionally or knowingly kills, disables, tortures, injures, torments, kicks, strikes, chokes, throws an object at or in any other way tampers or interferes with any police dog, knowing the dog to be a police dog, while the dog is being caged, kenneled, transported, exhibited, exercised or used in discharging or attempting to discharge any lawful duty or function as a police dog.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]




5.40.050 Misrepresentation of City of Bend Affiliation.

A.    No person or business shall market their business in any way that implies endorsement by or connection with the City of Bend.

1.    Use or depiction of Bend Police Department uniforms, vehicle(s), images or badges without approval of the Chief of Police is prohibited.

2.    No person shall create or use a uniform, vehicle or badge that is similar to those of the Bend Police Department in marketing a business.

3.    No unauthorized person shall take any action or represent themselves as being affiliated with the City of Bend.

B.    For purposes of this section, City of Bend means the governmental entity that is the City of Bend.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.40.085 Trespass to Vehicle.

A.    A person commits trespass to a vehicle if, without having a right to do so or having reasonable grounds to believe to have such a right, the person:

1.    Knowingly or intentionally climbs upon or enters the vehicle either bodily or with an instrument capable of damaging or removing property from the vehicle; or

2.    Knowingly or intentionally tampers with the locks, latch mechanisms, hood release, engine, body, trim, undercarriage, running gear, fuel tank or fuel intake, antenna, electric or electronic equipment, wheels, steering mechanism, brakes, or any part of any such equipment.

B.    It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the person engaged in the conduct described in order to prevent imminent damage to the vehicle, persons, animals or other property.

C.    A violation of the provisions of this section is a Class A misdemeanor. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.45 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY

Sections:

5.45.005    Chronic Nuisance Property.

5.45.015    Remedy.

5.45.020    Procedure.

5.45.025    Commencement of Actions – Burdens of Proof – Defenses – Mitigation of Civil Penalty.

5.45.030    Closure during Pendency of Action – Emergency Closures.

5.45.035    Enforcement of Closure Order – Costs – Civil Penalty.


5.45.005 Chronic Nuisance Property.

For the purposes of this code section, the following definitions apply:

A.    Chronic nuisance property means property upon which or within 200 feet of which any person associated with the property has three or more of the below listed offenses occur during any 30-day period as a result of three separate factual incidents that have been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency:

1.    All felony drug offenses as enumerated in ORS 475.840 to 475.980.

2.    Assault, strangulation or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.190.

3.    Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a).

4.    Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025.

5.    Alcohol violations as defined in ORS 471.410(1), (2) and (3) and ORS 471.430(1) and (2).

6.    Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165.

7.    Public or private indecency as defined in ORS 163.465 and 163.467.

8.    Any sexual offense as defined in ORS 163.305 through 163.445.

9.    Theft as defined in ORS 164.015 through 164.140.

10.    Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007, 167.012, and 167.017.

11.    Any attempt to commit as defined in ORS 161.405, or conspiracy to commit, as defined in ORS 161.455, any of the above offenses.

12.    Violation of BC Chapter 5.50, Noise.

13.    Unlawful discharge of a weapon as defined in BC 5.40.040.

B.    Control means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern conduct that occurs on that property.

C.    Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property. Owner includes, but is not limited to:

1.    A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:

a.    All or part of the legal title to the property; or

b.    All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises; or

c.    An occupant who can control what occurs on that property.

D.    Permit means to suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.

E.    Person means any natural person, agent, association, firm, limited liability company, partnership, corporation, or other entity capable of owning or using property in the City of Bend.

F.    Property means any real property including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any premises, room, house, building or structure or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.45.015 Remedy.

A.    In the event a court determines property to be chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of not less than 30 but not more than 180 days, or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.

B.    In addition to the remedies provided for in subsection (A) of this section, the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in any amount up to $100.00 a day, payable to the City, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain chronic nuisance property.

C.    In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.45.020 Procedure.

When the Chief of Police believes in good faith that the property within the City of Bend has become chronic nuisance property, he/she shall:

A.    Notify the owner(s) of record in writing that the property has been determined to be chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:

1.    The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

2.    A statement that the Chief of Police has found the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to his/her findings.

3.    A statement that the owner shall have the opportunity to respond to the notice, within 15 days from the date of the notice, describing what steps the owner has taken or will take to remedy the chronic nuisance on the property.

4.    If the owner’s response to the notice is not satisfactory to the Chief of Police, or if the owner does not respond, then another copy of the notice shall be served on the owner and their agent, if known, at least 10 days prior to the commencement of any judicial action by the City. Service shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address of the property believed to be a chronic public nuisance property, and to such other address as shown on the tax rolls of the County in which the property is located or such other place which is believed to give the owner actual notice of the determination by the Chief of Police.

5.    A copy of the notice shall be served on the occupant of the property if that person is different than the owner and shall occur not less than 10 days prior to the commencement of any judicial proceedings and be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to them at the property.

6.    A copy of the notice shall be posted at the property prior to the commencement of any judicial proceedings.

7.    The failure of any person or owner to receive actual notice of the determination by the Chief of Police shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.45.025 Commencement of Actions – Burdens of Proof – Defenses – Mitigation of Civil Penalty.

A.    In an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property, the City shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

B.    It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance property that the owner of property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the finding that the property is chronic nuisance property.

C.    In an action seeking civil penalties pursuant to BC 5.45.015(B) the City shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the conditions of that subsection are satisfied.

D.    In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors, as they may be appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable:

1.    The actions taken by the owner(s) to mitigate or correct the problem at the property;

2.    Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;

3.    The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

4.    The cooperativeness of the owner(s) with the City;

5.    The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition;

6.    Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.45.030 Closure during Pendency of Action – Emergency Closures.

In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the court for such interim relief that is deemed by the City Attorney to be appropriate. In such an event the notification procedures set forth in BC 5.45.020 need not be complied with. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.45.035 Enforcement of Closure Order – Costs – Civil Penalty.

A.    In the event that a court finds that property constitutes chronic nuisance property as defined in this chapter, the court may order the remedies set out in BC 5.45.015(A). In addition, in the event that it also finds that the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions at the property constituting a violation of this chapter and nonetheless permitted the activities to occur, the court may utilize the penalties provided for in BC 5.45.015(B).

B.    The court may authorize the City to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event that the owner(s) fail to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to affect a closure shall be made an assessment lien upon the property.

1.    The City Department(s) affecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs and the City shall submit that statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made within the period prescribed by Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure 68, a certified copy of the statement, including a legal description of the property, shall be entered in the City’s lien docket.

2.    Liens imposed by this chapter shall be collected in all respects as provided for street improvement liens, and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year from 10 days after the entry in the lien docket.

3.    Any person who is assessed the costs of closure and/or a civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment to the City. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.50 NOISE

Sections:

5.50.000    Noise Regulations.

5.50.005    Prohibition on Excessive Noises.

5.50.010    Sound Measurement.

5.50.015    Definitions.

5.50.020    Noise Limits.

5.50.025    Prohibited Noises.

5.50.030    Exceptions.

5.50.035    Permits.

5.50.040    Violation.


5.50.000 Noise Regulations.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of ORS 467.100 and the City of Bend Charter. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.005 Prohibition on Excessive Noises.

No person shall make, assist in making, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of, any noise within the City of Bend in violation of this chapter. No person shall cause or permit any noise to emanate from property under that person’s control in violation of this section. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.010 Sound Measurement.

While sound measurements are not required for the enforcement of this chapter, should measurements be made, they shall be made with a sound level meter using the A weighting network on a Type I or Type II meter. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.015 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A.    dBA means the sound pressure level in decibels measured using the A weighting network on a sound level meter.

B.    Residence or other noise-sensitive unit includes any building or portion of a building containing a residence, place of overnight accommodation, place of worship, day care center, hospital, school, or nursing care facility.

C.    Plainly audible means any sound for which the information content of that sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehensible musical rhythms or vocal sounds.

D.    Unnecessarily loud means any sound that interferes with normal spoken communication or that could reasonably disturb sleep.

E.    Daytime is any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

F.    Nighttime is any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.

G.    Property means a lot, parcel or tract including all contiguous property under common ownership, except that each residential unit shall be considered a separate property. “Property” does not include public rights-of-way, private streets or parks. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.020 Noise Limits.

It is a violation of this chapter to create noise in excess of the limits established in this section.

A.    No person may create noise on a property if that noise results in a noise level above the levels listed in this subsection when measured on a property other than the source of the sound and that contains a residence or other noise sensitive unit. 

	Zone Location	Daytime	Nighttime

	Residential	65 dBA	60 dBA

	Commercial	70 dBA	65 dBA

	Industrial	75 dBA	70 dBA

B.    No person may create noise on a property if that noise results in a noise level above 85 dBA daytime, 80 dBA nighttime when measured on a property other than the source of the sound that does not contain a residence or other noise sensitive unit. 

C.    No person may create noise in a park, street or other public place that is unnecessarily loud at a distance of 50 feet. The City Manager may designate areas of parks, streets or other public places as exempt from this restriction and may grant permits under BC 5.50.035 to exceed this restriction. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.025 Prohibited Noises.

A.    The use of exhaust brakes (jake brakes), except in an emergency or except when used by a person operating an emergency services vehicle equipped with a muffled compression braking system, is prohibited at all times within the City, regardless of noise level.

B.    Except as provided in BC 5.50.035, Permits, the following acts are violations of this chapter:

1.    The excessive sounding of any horn or signal device or any other device on any automobile, motorcycle, truck, bus or other vehicle while in motion, except as a danger signal.

2.    The operation of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle, except during sanctioned parades.

3.    The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, without a legal exhaust system, or in such a manner as to create unnecessarily loud noise at a distance of 50 feet.

4.    The use of any automobile, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or other vehicle outside of public rights-of-way where the use is unnecessarily loud.

5.    The operation of air conditioning or heating units, heat pumps, refrigeration units (including those mounted on vehicles), swimming pool or hot tub pumps, blower, power fan, internal combustion engine, electric motor, compressor or similar machinery that is not sufficiently muffled so as not to be unnecessarily loud to a person located on a property other than the source of the sound.

6.    Constructing (including excavating), demolishing, altering or repairing a building, street, sidewalk, driveway, sewer or utility line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as provided in BC 5.50.030.

7.    Using, operating or permitting to be used or operated a mechanical or electrical speaker or amplifier, either stationary or mobile, that creates noise that is plainly audible at the property line of a property with a residence or noise-sensitive unit, other than the property where the noise is generated, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This section applies to any noise generated by a speaker or amplifier, regardless of whether the sound is generated on private or public property. If the amplified noise originates from a commercial establishment, a noise meter reading shall be taken as additional evidence relating to the alleged violation.

8.    Any yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or other human-produced noise that is unnecessarily loud. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.030 Exceptions.

The following shall not be considered violations of any provision of this chapter:

A.    Amplified or nonamplified sounds created by organized athletic or similar activities, when those activities are conducted on property generally used for that type of activity, such as stadiums, parks, schools, and athletic fields, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. If an event is scheduled so that it reasonably is expected to end by 10:00 p.m. but does not do so because of weather delay, overtime/extra innings or any other reason, the exception shall remain in effect through the end of the event.

B.    Sounds caused by emergency work or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency equipment.

C.    Sounds caused by appropriate use of emergency warning devices and alarm systems for no more than 15 minutes or while the emergency remains in effect. All audible alarms shall automatically silence themselves after 15 minutes.

D.    Sounds regulated by Federal law, including, but not limited to, sounds caused by railroads, interstate motor carriers or aircraft.

E.    Sounds caused by regular vehicular traffic upon premises open to the public in compliance with State law. Regular vehicle traffic does not include a single vehicle that creates noise in excess of the standard set forth in this chapter.

F.    Sounds caused by air, electrical, or gas driven domestic tools, including lawn and construction tools, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

G.    Sounds created by community events, such as parades, public fireworks displays, street fairs, and festivals between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., but not including amplified sound generated from a fixed location.

H.    Sounds made by legal fireworks on the Fourth of July holiday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.

I.    Sounds made by City of Bend solid waste franchisees.

J.    Sounds made by the removal of snow or ice from public or private property.

K.    Sounds made by the cleaning of or routine maintenance of City streets by City employees or agents.

L.    Sounds made by the cleaning of commercial or industrial parking facilities or private roadways between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. as long as the noise from the equipment does not exceed 65 dBA at 50 feet from the edge of the property being cleaned between 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.

M.    The cumulative volume of normal speech of a group of people.

N.    Amplified or nonamplified sound generated at concerts at an outdoor amphitheater with a capacity of at least 5,000 people between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; provided, that concerts or outdoor entertainment events are a permitted land use on the property. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.035 Permits.

A.    In cases of emergency or other public necessity, the City Manager may issue a permit allowing activities described in BC 5.50.025 to take place at any hour. The permit may be for the duration of the permitted activity.

B.    The City Manager may also issue a permit for a concert or similar event allowing noise otherwise prohibited by this chapter, provided the concert or event is permitted under the applicable provisions of this code. The permit may be for a single concert or event or for a concert series. Applications for a noise permit shall be submitted at least 45 days in advance of the date they will be needed. Within five days of submitting the application, the applicant shall provide notice in a form approved by the City to property owners and residents within 500 feet of the location where the sound will be generated. Notice may be provided by email, hand delivery, door-hangers, regular mail or other means calculated to provide individual notice. The City will provide notice to the applicable neighborhood association or the Downtown Bend Business Association and post notice of the application on the City website. Any person may provide comments to the City regarding the noise permit application within 15 days of the permit application. The applicant shall provide a statement to the City at least 30 days before the scheduled event that notices have been provided as required by this section. The City will normally issue or deny the permit at least 20 days prior to the date of the event. The City Manager may waive any of the deadlines or timelines established by this section, and also may issue a permit notwithstanding the timelines based on his or her assessment of the factors outlined in this section. The City Manager shall consider written comments in making the decision whether to issue the permit, except in the rare instance where waiving a timeline makes it difficult to do so.

C.    The grant or denial of permits by the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council within 15 days after denial or permit issuance. A permit when issued remains in effect until the Council decision on the appeal unless withdrawn by the City Manager.

D.    Permit applications must include contact information, including a telephone number for a responsible person who will be available at that number while the noise is being generated.

E.    Permits may include such restrictions or conditions necessary to safeguard the public peace, including maximum noise levels and time of day restrictions.

F.    Failing to obtain a permit when one is required or failing to comply with a permit is a violation. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012; Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.50.040 Violation.

A.    A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. If noise is part of the use of a property, the property owner may be cited, as well as others responsible for generating the noise. Each day on which a violation continues is a separate violation. The maximum penalty for the first violation within a one-year period is $250.00. The maximum penalty for a second violation within one year of the first violation is $1,500. The maximum penalty for a third violation within one year of the second violation is $5,000. The maximum penalty for a fourth violation within one year of the third violation, and for each subsequent violation within a year of the previous violation, is $10,000. If the Municipal Court determines that a violation has occurred, the amount of the penalty may not be reduced by more than 50 percent.

B.    A citation issued may specify the specific section violated without citing to either this section or to BC 5.50.005. [Ord. NS-2201, 2013;  Ord. NS-2188, 2012]


Chapter 5.55 PARKS

Sections:

5.55.000    Definitions.

5.55.005    Violations.


5.55.000 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

A.    Public parks means all property owned or controlled by the City or by the Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District and operated for the public’s recreational use.

B.    Person means a person, firm, or corporation, not including City or Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District personnel or their agents. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


5.55.005 Violations.

A.    Persons using public parks and other City property shall obey the following rules and regulations:

1.    No unauthorized person shall cut, remove or damage vegetation except property owners may engage in normal landscaping activities in adjacent rights-of-way.

2.    No person shall build a fire. Portable propane camp stoves and propane barbecues may be used in the parks only if in safe operating condition and only if operated in a safe manner and in such a way as to avoid damage to park property.

3.    No person shall camp except in areas designated for camping or in connection with activities authorized by the City or the District.

4.    No person shall damage or injure a building, installation, equipment or other property in public parks.

5.    No person shall sell merchandise or services, or operate a concession in public parks without permission of the Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District and shall possess, on their person, evidence of the permission.

6.    No person shall litter in the parks or City-owned property. Garbage and refuse shall be deposited in proper receptacles provided for this purpose or carried off for disposal. Garbage and refuse shall not be brought to parks or City-owned property.

7.    No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle except on roads or designated parking areas unless a special permit has been issued by the Park District.

8.    Except as authorized by the Park District, no person shall ride or lead a horse in a public park except on a designated bridle path, except with a special permit. Horses or other animals shall not be tied to a tree or shrub in such a manner as to cause damage to the tree or shrub.

9.    No person shall project items into the air that may harm parks or people, such as golf equipment, archery equipment, discus, javelin, or shot put in parks except as permitted by the Park District.

10.    Except as authorized by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife or the Bend Metropolitan Park and Recreation District, no person shall feed, hunt, pursue, trap, kill, injure or disturb the habitat of a bird or animal.

11.    Except as authorized by State or Federal law, no person shall possess a loaded firearm in a park.

12.    No person shall dig up, deface or remove dirt, stones, rock or other substances nor make any excavation.

13.    No person shall erect signs, markers or instructions without City or District permission.

14.    No person shall wash clothing or materials or clean fish in streams or pools.

15.    No one may use any rolling device such as a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, inline skates, etc., in a manner that is likely to cause potential harm to other people, pets, wildlife or District property; or on sports fields, playgrounds, tennis courts, off-leash areas or in areas reserved for special events. This does not prohibit the use of rolling devices in designated areas.

16.    All public parks and adjacent parking lots, with the exception of Brandis Square, shall be open from 5:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. and closed from 10:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. unless otherwise authorized. Transitory use shall be exempt.

17.    Alcohol use in parks is prohibited except when allowed by a permit issued by the Park District and/or the Bend Police Department. The fee for an alcohol consumption permit when issued by the Bend Police Department shall be set by Council resolution. The permit must be available for inspection during the term of use.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2142, 2010]


Chapter 5.60 ADDITIONAL TENANT PROTECTIONS

Sections:

5.60.005    Purpose and Scope.

5.60.010    Ninety-Day Notice Required.


5.60.005 Purpose and Scope.

The protections of this chapter are intended to provide tenants in the City of Bend with protections that supplement the Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act (the Act). The provisions of this chapter apply to residential dwelling units within the City of Bend that are subject to a month-to-month rental agreement covered by the Act where the tenant has occupied the dwelling for more than one year, but do not change the amount of notice required by State law where the dwelling unit is being sold to a purchaser who intends to occupy the dwelling unit as their primary residence. [Ord. NS-2283, 2016]


5.60.010 Ninety-Day Notice Required.

A.    When a tenant has occupied a dwelling for more than one year, a landlord may terminate a rental agreement without cause specified in the Act only by delivering a written notice of termination to the tenant: (1) not less than 90 days before the termination date designated in that notice as calculated under the Act; or (2) the time period designated in the rental agreement, whichever is longer. This requirement does not apply to rental agreements for week-to-week tenancy or to tenants that occupy the same dwelling unit as the landlord.

B.    A landlord that fails to comply with any of the requirements set forth in this chapter shall be liable to the tenant for an amount up to three months’ rent as well as actual damages, reasonable attorney fees, and costs. Any tenant claiming to be aggrieved by a landlord’s noncompliance with the foregoing has a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for these damages and such other remedies as may be appropriate. [Ord. NS-2283, 2016]


Chapter 5.65 ENCOURAGING THE USE OF REUSABLE BAGS AND LIMITING USE OF CARRYOUT PLASTIC BAGS* Repealed 9/19

(Repealed by Ord. NS-2348)


Title 6 VEHICLES, TRAFFIC, AND PARKING Revised 1/19 Revised 8/19

Chapters:

6.05    General Provisions

6.10    Administration

6.15    Traffic Regulations

6.20    Parking Regulations Revised 1/19 Revised 8/19

6.25    Parking Citation and Owner Responsibility

6.30    Enforcement Revised 8/19

6.35    Bicycles

6.40    Skateboards and Roller-Skates


Chapter 6.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

6.05.000    Application of State Traffic Laws.

6.05.005    Forfeiture.

6.05.010    Definitions.


6.05.000 Application of State Traffic Laws.

All persons shall comply with the Oregon Vehicle Code and Oregon Administrative Rules related to vehicles and traffic. Violations of this chapter may be tried as authorized by State law or as a civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.05.005 Forfeiture.

The City shall comply with State law when seeking forfeiture of a vehicle or other property. Forfeiture will be sought only when authorized by law. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.05.010 Definitions.

The definitions in this section apply in this title. In addition, definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code apply.

A.    Bus stop means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign or curb marking for use by Bend Area Transit buses.

B.    Holiday means New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day.

C.    Loading zone means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign or green curb marking for loading or unloading passengers or materials.

D.    Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, forklift trucks, motorcycles, road-building equipment, street-cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, even if the vehicle is exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon.

E.    Parking facility means any property used for motor vehicle parking.

F.    Pedestrian means a person on foot or using an assisted mobility device for use by persons with disabilities.

G.    Street means any City-administered right-of-way developed for vehicular travel.

H.    Traffic lane means the area of a street used for movement of a single lane of traffic. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Chapter 6.10 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

6.10.000    Powers of Road Authority.

6.10.005    Review or Appeal of Decision or Action of City Manager.

6.10.010    Retention of Authority by Council.

6.10.015    Standards.

6.10.020    Authority of Police and Fire Officers and Others.


6.10.000 Powers of Road Authority.

A.    The City Manager is delegated the authority to take the following actions on a permanent or temporary basis and may further delegate the authority:

1.    Designate portions of rights-of-way where parking or standing is prohibited or restricted or which shall be used for bicycle lanes.

2.    Designate parking spaces and the type, hours and duration of parking permitted including valet parking.

3.    Designate through streets, one-way streets, truck routes, and streets where trucks and heavy machinery are prohibited, except as needed to perform work or deliver or pick up materials.

4.    Designate locations for traffic control devices.

5.    Establish bus stops.

6.    Designate the location of loading zones.

7.    Provide appropriate signs and marking relating traffic, traffic control, pedestrians, crosswalks, school zones, and parking.

8.    Close or restrict the use of streets and sidewalks.

B.    The City Council delegates to the City Manager the authority to make all initial decisions relating to the exercise of the powers of a road authority under State law. The City Manager may further delegate the authority granted under this section.

C.    The delegation of road authority to the City Manager does not deprive the City Council of its power to act as the City’s final road authority.

D.    The City Manager may issue permits or establish parking regulations or requirements that the City Manager determines are necessary for the effective utilization and regulation of parking within the City. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.10.005 Review or Appeal of Decision or Action of City Manager.

Any decision or action of the City Manager or designee in this chapter is subject to appeal to or review by the City Council.

A.    Any person affected by a decision or action of the City Manager or designee under this chapter may appeal the decision or action to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Recorder within 10 calendar days of the decision or action. In the event that the appellant had no reasonable basis for knowing of the decision or action, the appeal must be filed within 10 calendar days of the date the person knew or should have known of the decision or action.

B.    The City Manager or any Council member may initiate a review of any decision or action by the City Manager under BC 6.10.000 by placing the matter on the Council agenda.

C.    The Council may but is not required to give deference to the City Manager’s decision in making its decision. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.10.010 Retention of Authority by Council.

A.    The Council may on its own initiative or at the request of the City Manager make an initial decision on a matter within the road authority of the City.

B.    If the Council makes a decision either as an initial decision or on appeal or review, that decision shall be binding on the City Manager and staff for a period of five years unless the Council decision is withdrawn.

C.    The City Council retains all its authority relating to the vacation of rights-of-way. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.10.015 Standards.

City traffic regulations shall be based on:

A.    Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations.

B.    Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

C.    Other recognized traffic control standards, including the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.10.020 Authority of Police and Fire Officers and Others.

A.    It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of this code.

B.    In the event of a fire or other public emergency, police and fire officers may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this code.

C.    Parking violations may be enforced by an agent of the City authorized in writing by the Chief of Police to issue parking citations. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Chapter 6.15 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:

6.15.000    Crossing Private Property.

6.15.005    Throwing Material from a Vehicle.

6.15.010    Obstructing Public Ways.

6.15.015    Sidewalks.

6.15.020    Streets Prohibited to Trucks.

6.15.025    Removing Glass and Debris.


6.15.000 Crossing Private Property.

A.    The operator of a vehicle shall not proceed from a street to another street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to stops on the property to procure or provide goods or services.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2296, 2017; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.15.005 Throwing Material from a Vehicle.

A.    It is unlawful to throw, drop or otherwise discard any item from a vehicle onto any public right-of-way or premises open to the public.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2296, 2017; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.15.010 Obstructing Public Ways.

A.    Except as authorized in subsection (B) of this section, no unauthorized person shall obstruct a public way, including but not limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, and the breezeway from the western terminus of Minnesota Avenue to Riverfront Plaza, by depositing or storing personal property or other material on public ways or by any other manner obstructing or interfering with public ways. For purposes of this section, a person, personal property, or other material obstructs and interferes with a public way by being positioned so that the accessible passageway is less than six feet in width. Obstruction of a sidewalk is a violation, even if the adjacent street is not obstructed.

B.    Merchandise or equipment delivery is allowed for the time needed to accomplish the delivery, not to exceed 10 minutes, or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Delivery authorized under this section shall minimize obstruction of public ways to the extent possible.

C.    An authorized obstruction of a public way between sunset and sunrise shall be illuminated by warning lights or reflective materials clearly visible 200 feet in all directions.

D.    No person shall use a public way for display or sale of goods except as authorized by the City.

E.    No person shall deposit garbage, earth, debris or rubbish of any kind on a public way, in the Deschutes River or any irrigation canals within the City unless authorized by the City.

F.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. A violation of subsection (B) of this section may be cited as a parking violation. No person may be cited under this section prior to being asked by law enforcement to move or otherwise remedy the obstruction or interference. [Ord. NS-2296, 2017; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.15.015 Sidewalks.

A.    No person shall ride, drive or operate a motor vehicle on or across a public sidewalk within the City except at driveway access points.

B.    This section shall not apply to motorized vehicles used for public safety, snow removal, maintenance and repair, or mobility devices used by persons with disabilities.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2296, 2017; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.15.020 Streets Prohibited to Trucks.

A.    When the use of a street is prohibited to trucks exceeding a specified weight, no person shall operate a truck on the street contrary to the prohibition except for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering the street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and leaving by the shortest route.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2296, 2017; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.15.025 Removing Glass and Debris.

A.    A party to a vehicle crash or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be deposited on a street shall be responsible for the removal of glass or other debris from the street.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2296, 2017; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Chapter 6.20 PARKING REGULATIONS Revised 1/19 Revised 8/19

Sections:

6.20.000    Method of Parking.

6.20.005    Prohibited Parking, Stopping or Standing on Public Right-of-Way. Revised 8/19

6.20.010    Unlawful Parking of Vehicle for Sale at Private Parking Facility.

6.20.015    Use of Loading Zone.

6.20.020    Unattended Vehicles.

6.20.025    Downtown District. Revised 1/19

6.20.030    Temporary Parking Restriction Areas. Revised 8/19


6.20.000 Method of Parking.

A.    Except as authorized by subsection (B) of this section, where parking spaces are marked on a street or City-owned parking facility, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than within a single marked space, both width and length, unless authorized by the City.

B.    In areas marked for parallel parking, oversized vehicles may use up to two parking spaces as needed for vehicle length.

C.    No vehicle shall park in an angled parking stall in a manner that orients the front of the vehicle so that it is angled towards the flow of oncoming traffic in the adjacent vehicle travel lane. For purposes of this section, “angled parking stall” does not include a parking stall that is at a 90-degree angle to the curb.

D.    Vehicles parked parallel shall be parked in the direction of the traffic flow in the adjacent traffic lane. [Ord. NS-2192, 2012; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.20.005 Prohibited Parking, Stopping or Standing on Public Right-of-Way. Revised 8/19

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on public right-of-way under any of the following circumstances, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device:

A.    A truck in excess of 12,000 pounds between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in front of or adjacent to a residence.

B.    A vehicle in or blocking an alley, except for a stop of not more than 15 consecutive minutes for loading or unloading persons or materials and must display emergency flashers.

C.    A vehicle in violation of a sign placed by the City of Bend.

D.    Adjacent to a curb painted yellow by the City of Bend to designate no parking at any time.

E.    Adjacent to a curb painted green by the City of Bend to designate a loading zone unless involved in the act of loading.

F.    Adjacent to a curb painted red by the City of Bend to designate a fire lane or special security area.

G.    Parking the vehicle for the primary purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale.

H.    Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

I.    Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized by the City.

J.    Parking the vehicle for more than three business days.

K.    Parking of a vehicle with a vehicle registration that has been expired for more than 30 days.

L.    Adjacent to or within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.

M.    On a sidewalk.

N.    Any other violation of State law. [Ord. NS-2343, 2019; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.20.010 Unlawful Parking of Vehicle for Sale at Private Parking Facility.

A.    No person shall leave or park a vehicle at a private parking facility for the principal purpose of selling said vehicle if there is a sign displayed, that complies with subsection (B) of this section, in plain view at the facility.

B.    Signs prohibiting the parking of a vehicle for the purpose of sale posted after the effective date of this section shall state:

No Parking of Vehicles for Sale.

Bend Code Title 6

Signs posted under previous versions of this section shall remain effective.

C.    The provisions of this code section supplement all other remedies available to owners of parking facilities relating to unlawfully parked vehicles, including ORS 98.805 through 98.818. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.20.015 Use of Loading Zone.

No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time in a place designed as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect, except for loading or unloading persons or materials. When the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, the stop for loading and unloading shall not exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, use of the zone shall not exceed 30 minutes. Vehicles must display emergency flashers for duration of loading/unloading. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.20.020 Unattended Vehicles.

When a police officer finds an unlocked motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.20.025 Downtown District. Revised 1/19

A.    The Downtown District encompasses all public streets, alleys, parking lots and sidewalks within the following boundary description and as shown on the map following the boundary description:

Beginning at the north side of Newport Avenue and the east bank of the Deschutes River, thence southwest along the east bank of the Deschutes River to the north boundary of Drake Park, then south easterly along the north boundary of Drake Park to its northeast corner, then southwesterly along the east boundary of Drake park to the north side of Riverside Boulevard, thence along the boundary of Drake Park and Riverside Boulevard to a point directly opposite the north corner of the property at 532 NW Riverside Boulevard, thence across Riverside Boulevard to the north corner of 532 NW Riverside Boulevard, thence along the southeast side of Riverside Boulevard to the southwest side of Congress St/ Louisiana Avenue, thence south along the west side of Congress Street/ Louisiana Avenue to the south side of Louisiana Avenue, thence east along the south side of Louisiana Avenue to the west side of Broadway Street, thence south on the west side of Broadway Street to the south side of Idaho Avenue, thence east along the south side of Idaho Avenue to the east side of Bond Street, thence north on the east side of Bond Street to the south side of Kansas Avenue, thence southeasterly along the south side of Kansas Avenue to the southeast corner of the intersection of Kansas Avenue and Lava Road, thence northeast on the southeast side of Lava Street to the south side of Franklin Avenue, thence east along the south side of Franklin Avenue to the west side of the Bend Parkway, thence north on the west side of the Bend Parkway to the south side of Greenwood Avenue, thence west on the south side of Greenwood Avenue to the east side of Harriman Street, thence north (across Greenwood Avenue) to the north side of Greenwood Avenue, thence west along the north side of Greenwood Avenue to the east side of Hill Street, thence north along the east side of Hill Street to the south side of Kearney Avenue, then west across Hill Street to the west side of Hill Street, thence south along the west side of Hill Street to the north side of Greenwood Avenue, then west along to the north side of Greenwood Avenue to the east side of Bond Street, thence north along the east side of Bond Street to north side of the Bond/Wall/Vermont intersection, thence along the north side of that intersection and the north side of Vermont Place to the west end of Vermont Place, thence due west to the Deschutes River, thence south along the Deschutes River to the Point of Beginning.
[IMAGE]


B.    Within the Downtown District, the City Manager or designee shall cause each parking space in a street or within an off-street parking area to be clearly marked. The City Manager or designee shall determine the necessity for and the size and location of all parking spaces according to his or her reasonable determination of the safety, convenience and necessity of the public. Such markings may include markings to reserve one or more spaces exclusively for parking of motorbikes, motor scooters, motorcycles, bicycles, recreational vehicles, other oversized vehicles and any other legally operable vehicle and parking for persons with disabilities. [Ord. NS-2321, 2018; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.20.030 Temporary Parking Restriction Areas. Revised 8/19

A.    The City Manager or designee may identify areas within the City as temporary parking restriction areas and may establish durational limits or other restrictions for parking vehicles based on a reasonable determination of the safety, convenience, and necessity of the public and based on one or more of the following criteria:

1.    History of citizen complaints or citations of vehicles parking against City parking regulations, BC 6.20.005, or other parking violations.

2.    Evidence of a lack of adequate parking for businesses and other uses in the district, due to identified parking violations.

3.    Availability of a public agency partner to share in enforcement costs.

4.    Other criteria as determined by the City Manager or designee. 

B.    The City Manager must adopt an administrative policy setting forth the temporary parking area, the restrictions that will be implemented, the reasons for establishing the area, the intended means of enforcement (whether by the City’s parking enforcement contractor or other means), and the anticipated duration the restrictions will be in effect. Signage or other markings must be installed to inform the public of the parking restrictions. City Council must approve the extension of a temporary parking restriction area for longer than two years, or may adopt the temporary parking restriction area into the Code as a parking district.

C.    Temporary parking restrictions implemented under this section may not last longer than two years without City Council approval.

D.    Temporary parking restriction areas under this section may only be established on streets or other rights-of-way within or adjacent to lands with the following zoning designations, as defined in the Bend Development Code:

1.    Central Business;

2.    Convenience Commercial;

3.    Limited Commercial;

4.    General Commercial;

5.    Industrial General;

6.    Industrial Light.

E.    Temporary parking restriction areas may also be established to address items of safety, convenience, and need as described in subsection (A) of this section that occur within 500 feet of the Deschutes River, between the Bill Healy Bridge on Reed Market Road and the NW Mount Washington Drive bridge, regardless of zoning designation.

F.    Paid parking permits may be available within temporary parking restriction areas, as set forth in the City Council adopted fee resolution. [Ord. NS-2347, 2019]




Chapter 6.25 PARKING CITATION AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY

Sections:

6.25.000    Illegally Parked Vehicle.

6.25.005    Failure to Comply with Parking Citation.

6.25.010    Owner/Lessee Responsibility.

6.25.015    Registered Owner Presumption.

6.25.020    Extending Parking Time.

6.25.025    Illegal Issuance of a Parking Citation.

6.25.030    Illegal Cancellation of Parking Citation.

6.25.035    Improper Parking Citation Validation.

6.25.040    Fraudulent Use of a Parking Permit.

6.25.045    Habitual Parking Offender.


6.25.000 Illegally Parked Vehicle.

A.    Parking citations shall be placed conspicuously on the vehicle. The registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the citation unless the driver accepts responsibility.

B.    If parking is subject to a time limit, separate citations may be issued if the duration exceeds multiple increments of the posted time.

C.    Within 10 days of the issuance of the parking citation:

1.    The required penalty must be paid;

2.    A written response contesting the ticket must be filed; or

3.    A written request for an in-person hearing must be filed.

D.    The citation shall state the penalties that may be imposed for failure to comply.

E.    The City Manager may appoint one or more persons to serve as hearings officers to review written responses and/or hold in-person hearings. If the City Manager does not appoint a hearings officer, the Municipal Court Judge shall act as hearings officer. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.005 Failure to Comply with Parking Citation.

If BC 6.25.000(C) is not complied with, the City or its designee shall provide written notice to the owner or lessee of the vehicle. The notice shall provide information related to additional charges, as established in the City’s fees and charges resolution.

A.    If the City has contracted the enforcement of parking violations, that contractor or its agent may collect the penalties imposed by this chapter, and may immobilize or tow and impound the vehicle pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. The owner of the vehicle is responsible for towing and impound costs incurred by the City’s agent unless the owner can establish that the vehicle was stolen at the time it was illegally parked. The agent’s right to tow and impound in this section is in addition to and not limited by the right to remove vehicles under BC 6.30.005.

B.    A vehicle for which a citation has been issued and remains unpaid after becoming due may be immobilized or towed and impounded. A vehicle that has been immobilized or impounded shall not be released until all outstanding penalties and charges have been paid to the City or its designee.

C.    No person other than an authorized City agent shall remove or attempt to remove an immobilizer device; and no person shall move or attempt to move an immobilized vehicle until the immobilizer device is removed. A violation of this subsection is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2276, 2016; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.010 Owner/Lessee Responsibility.

The owner or lessee of a vehicle in violation of a parking restriction is responsible for the offense, but it shall be an affirmative defense that the vehicle was used without the owner’s or lessee’s consent. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.015 Registered Owner Presumption.

In a proceeding against a vehicle owner charging violation of a parking restriction, proof that the vehicle was registered to the defendant at the time of the violation shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the defendant was the owner. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.020 Extending Parking Time.

Where maximum parking time limits are designated, movement of a vehicle to another time limited parking space within a 750-foot radius shall not extend the time limits for parking. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.025 Illegal Issuance of a Parking Citation.

A.    Except as authorized by Oregon Revised Statutes, no person shall issue a parking citation unless authorized by the Chief of Police.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.030 Illegal Cancellation of Parking Citation.

A.    No person shall dismiss a parking citation in any manner, except when approved by the parking hearings officer or City validation program.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2248, 2015; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.035 Improper Parking Citation Validation.

A.    Any parking validation program shall be for over-time parking only.

B.    No person shall validate a parking citation in a manner inconsistent with the parking validation program.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.040 Fraudulent Use of a Parking Permit.

A.    No person shall use a parking permit in a fraudulent manner, such as:

1.    Alteration or duplication of any kind of a City-issued parking permit.

2.    Use of a permit belonging to another.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.25.045 Habitual Parking Offender.

A.    The penalty for repeated parking violations within any 365-consecutive-day period shall be increased as follows:

1.    Five to nine parking violations: 200 percent of the otherwise applicable penalty.

2.    Ten to 14 parking violations: 300 percent of the otherwise applicable penalty.

3.    Fifteen or more parking violations: 400 percent of the otherwise applicable penalty. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Chapter 6.30 ENFORCEMENT Revised 8/19

Sections:

6.30.000    Parking Penalties.

6.30.005    Removal (Towing) of Illegally Parked Vehicles. Revised 8/19


6.30.000 Parking Penalties.

A.    A violation of BC Chapter 6.25, unless otherwise defined in that chapter, is punishable by a penalty in the amount established by the City Fee Resolution.

B.    Disabled parking violations are punishable by the amount established by Oregon State law. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.30.005 Removal (Towing) of Illegally Parked Vehicles. Revised 8/19

A.    The City may remove any illegally parked vehicle that is unattended or that is not removed after a request is made to the owner or person in charge of the vehicle.

B.    The City shall not remove any vehicle that was originally legally parked unless:

1.    The vehicle has remained illegally parked for a period three times longer than the time originally allowed for the vehicle to be parked;

2.    Removal is needed for street cleaning, snow removal or maintenance;

3.    The vehicle is obstructing traffic;

4.    The vehicle has been parked for more than three business days;

5.    The vehicle is parked on a street that has been closed or scheduled for closure;

6.    The vehicle has outstanding parking violations that are due and remain unpaid. [Ord. NS-2343, 2019; Ord. NS-2276, 2016; Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Chapter 6.35 BICYCLES

Sections:

6.35.000    Bicycle Operating Rules.

6.35.003    Registration.

6.35.005    Impounding Bicycles.


6.35.000 Bicycle Operating Rules.

Except for bicycles operated by on duty law enforcement personnel:

A.    Bicycles shall be parked so they do not obstruct a roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance.

B.    Bicycles shall not be ridden on a sidewalk in the Downtown District described in BC 6.20.025 or in the Centennial Parking Garage.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.35.003 Registration.

The Police Department may provide a bicycle registering service for the purpose of returning lost or stolen bicycles. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


6.35.005 Impounding Bicycles.

A.    A bicycle left on public property for more than 24 hours may be impounded by the Police Department.

B.    If a bicycle impounded under this code is registered, or other means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bike.

C.    A bicycle impounded under this code and remaining unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with City procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property.

D.    Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, a fee established in the City’s Fee Resolution shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Chapter 6.40 SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER-SKATES

Sections:

6.40.000    Roller-Skates and Skateboards.


6.40.000 Roller-Skates and Skateboards.

A.    No person shall use roller-skates, skateboards, scooters or similar devices on the sidewalks in the Downtown District as defined in BC 6.20.025 or in any parking facility owned by the City.

B.    A violation of any subsection of this section is a Class C civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2140, 2010]

Exhibit A


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2140, 2010]


Title 7 BUSINESSES Revised 5/19 Revised 6/19 Revised 8/19

Chapters:

7.05    Business Registration

7.08    Alarms

7.10    Regulatory Permits and Licenses Revised 5/19

7.15    Private Security Revised 5/19

7.16    Short-Term Rental Operating License Revised 5/19

7.20    Sidewalk Vendors, Cafes and Furnishings Revised 5/19

7.25    Secondhand Dealers and Pawn Brokers Revised 5/19

7.30    Social Gaming Revised 5/19

7.35    Vehicles for Hire

7.40    Special Events Revised 5/19

7.45    Mobile Home Park Closures

7.50    Marijuana Business Operating License Revised 5/19 Revised 8/19

7.60    Shared Micromobility Businesses Revised 6/19


Chapter 7.05 BUSINESS REGISTRATION

Sections:

7.05.010    Purpose.

7.05.015    Definitions.

7.05.020    Registration Requirement.

7.05.025    Exemptions.

7.05.030    Duration of Registration – Change of Registration.

7.05.035    Submittal.

7.05.045    Additional Fee.

7.05.055    Renewal.

7.05.060    Compliance with Law.

7.05.080    Violations and Civil Penalties.


7.05.010 Purpose.

A.    The purpose of this chapter is to develop a database of businesses to allow the City to provide services efficiently and to ensure the safety of its residents. The business database also provides useful economic development information.

B.    The registration fee required by this chapter is in addition to all other taxes and fees. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.015 Definitions.

A.    Business means:

1.    An organization engaged in commercial, industrial, or professional activities.

2.    An individual engaged in commercial, industrial or professional activities other than as an employee.

B.    Commercial means providing goods, services or a combination of goods and services for payment. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.020 Registration Requirement.

A.    Except as exempted under BC 7.05.025, businesses engaging in activity in the City must register with the City.

B.    The following provisions apply to the registration requirement:

1.    Any business that conducts business activities in the City, whether or not the business operates from a physical location in the City, is subject to this chapter.

2.    Electronic businesses, including Internet businesses, with a physical location in the City, are required to register.

3.    If more than one business is conducted on the same premises, each business must register separately.

4.    A single business operation that occupies more than one building may obtain a single license. The application and license shall list all buildings and activities carried on in each building. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.025 Exemptions.

A.    The following are exempt from the registration requirement:

1.    A service business operated by a person under the age of 18, such as a lawn mowing business, a newspaper delivery business, a lemonade stand, and the like.

2.    Individuals who work only on the premises of, and as part of, a licensed business that includes the activity of the individual. Examples include barbers, beauticians, and others who perform services as part of the overall licensed business. This exemption does not apply if the overall business operation has not obtained a business license.

3.    Persons selling goods or services exclusively during a permitted special event activity where the sponsor of the event has obtained a special event permit and has a business license.

4.    Activities that qualify as hobbies or passive holding of property for investment purposes under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.

5.    Any person whose business activities, including the activities of all employees, total less than 32 hours per year or whose gross annual revenue is less than $3,000 for a full year. This exemption is intended to apply to businesses based outside the City that may do minimal work inside the City and to persons who engage only in minimal business.

6.    A person who sends goods to a customer in the City is not considered to be doing business in the City based solely on the sending or delivering of the goods into the City. However, a company in the business of delivering goods is subject to the requirements of this chapter if the company, including the activities of all employees, is engaged in business (picking up or delivering goods) within the City in excess of 32 hours per year.

B.    The following must register but are exempt from payment of the registration fee:

1.    Any business exempted from paying local business license fees or taxes by Federal or State constitution or law.

2.    Any business exempt from paying property tax.

3.    Any entity registered with the Oregon Secretary of State as a not-for-profit corporation. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.030 Duration of Registration – Change of Registration.

A.    New registrations shall be valid from the date of issuance to the end of the following twelfth month after registration and shall be renewable annually in the same month of each following year. The license fee shall not be prorated.

B.    If ownership of a business is transferred during the year, the new owner shall update contact information.

C.    Businesses that change physical location or business name shall submit a change of registration form. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.035 Submittal.

Each person wishing to engage in business shall submit a business registration form to the City accompanied by payment of the registration fee in an amount set by Council resolution. The City shall treat information other than the name, type and location of the business as confidential to the extent permitted by State public records law, but may use the information in connection with the provision of City services. The registration shall contain:

A.    A description of the nature of the business.

B.    The date that business operations commenced or will commence.

C.    The name, address and contact information of the business.

D.    All addresses in the City where the business will be located.

E.    The date of application.

F.    The North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) code number.

G.    A statement of the estimated number of full-time, part-time or seasonal employees of the business.

H.    Emergency contact information.

I.    Any other information relevant to the type and location of the business the City determines that the application should contain.

J.    The signature of an authorized representative. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.045 Additional Fee.

Any business that has operated for more than six months before registering shall pay an additional fee at the time of the initial registration in an amount to be set by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015]


7.05.055 Renewal.

Registrations shall be renewed to the expiration of the previous registration. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.060 Compliance with Law.

All businesses must comply with all City, State and Federal law, and the registration does not authorize a business to operate in violation of any other laws. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.05.080 Violations and Civil Penalties.

A knowing violation of any provision of this chapter or knowing submission of false information in a business license registration is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2238, 2015; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]




Chapter 7.08 ALARMS

Sections:

7.08.010    Definitions.

7.08.015    Alarm Registration.

7.08.020    False Alarm Response.

7.08.030    Appeal of False Alarm Fees.


7.08.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Alarm means any electronic or other signal that requests, causes or is intended to cause a response by police, fire or emergency medical personnel.

B.    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, on real property, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police, fire or medical personnel are expected to respond. An alarm in a single-family residential unit that is not electronically connected to another location is not an alarm system.

C.    False alarm means any alarm from an alarm system eliciting a response by police, fire or emergency medical personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist.

D.    Responsible party means a person that can respond to an alarm activation to allow responding personnel access to the alarm site and has the ability to deactivate or reset the alarm.

E.    Owner means a person, firm, association, or corporation owning, in possession or control of any property that an alarm originates from. [Ord. 2190, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.08.015 Alarm Registration.

The City shall develop a voluntary registration program consistent with this chapter and collect information about alarm systems through the existing business license registration program. [Ord. 2190, 2012]


7.08.020 False Alarm Response.

When a determination has been made by the City that a false alarm has happened and has caused an unnecessary response by the City, the following procedure shall be followed:

A.    First False Alarm within a 12-Month Calendar Period. The City will issue a notice of false alarm, accompanied by a request for an explanation of the reason for the false alarm.

B.    Second False Alarm within a 12-Month Calendar Period. A second false alarm fee in an amount established by Council resolution will be imposed. The City will issue a notice of false alarm, accompanied by a request for (1) payment of the fee and (2) an explanation of the reason for the false alarm.

C.    Third or Subsequent False Alarm within a 12-Month Calendar Period. The third false alarm in the amount established by Council resolution will be imposed. The City will issue a notice of false alarm, accompanied by a request for (1) payment of the fee, (2) an explanation of the reason for the false alarm, and (3) a written action plan to prevent further false alarms. If requested, the owner will also provide written proof that the alarm has been examined by an alarm installation or repair business and what steps were taken to repair the alarm. If the alarm is not a fire alarm, the City may start the procedure to revoke the permit as provided in BC 7.08.030.

D.    After a third false alarm responded to by the Police Department, the City may, in its discretion, stop providing a police response to alarms from that alarm owner. The City will notify the owner or a representative of the owner of its decision to stop providing a police response to the alarm. Upon receipt of either a written mitigation plan to eliminate false alarms or that the alarm has been examined and repaired by an alarm installation or repair company, the City may reinstate response to the alarm.

E.    The audible feature of any alarm must automatically silence within 15 minutes of continuous sound from the alarm. If the audible portion is not silent after 15 minutes, then City personnel responding to the alarm may take whatever measures are required by the situation including, but not limited to, dismantling or disconnecting the alarm. This section shall not apply to fire alarms.

F.    Upon request by City personnel responding to an alarm, a responsible person will respond to the alarm location within 30 minutes of the notification of the request. A failure to respond may, at the City’s discretion, result in no further police responses to an alarm at that location until such time as a responsible person can respond. Nothing in this code shall be interpreted to require any department of the City to respond to any alarm. [Ord. 2190, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.08.030 Appeal of False Alarm Fees.

Any alarm owner may appeal the imposition of any false alarm fee by submitting a written appeal to the Police Chief, or in the case of a fire alarm, to the Fire Chief, within 10 business days of the date the City sends the notice imposing the fee. The appeal must set out all reasons why the fee should not be imposed, and must include evidence supporting any facts relied on in the appeal. The Chief shall decide based on the written appeal notice and any written response provided by City staff. The Chief shall issue a written decision and mail the written decision to the appellant within 15 working days of the date the appeal is received. The decision of the Chief may be appealed to the Municipal Court by filing a written request for hearing within 10 working days of the mailing of the Chief’s decision. [Ord. 2190, 2012]


Chapter 7.10 REGULATORY PERMITS AND LICENSES Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.10.010    Regulatory Permit Procedure – Applicability. Revised 5/19

7.10.015    Permit and License Duration. Revised 5/19

7.10.020    Permit and License Renewal. Revised 5/19

7.10.025    Application Requirements. Revised 5/19

7.10.030    Information from Applicant. Revised 5/19

7.10.035    Criteria for Grant or Denial. Revised 5/19

7.10.040    Issuance or Denial by the City. Revised 5/19

7.10.045    Suspension of Permit or License. Revised 5/19

7.10.050    Revocation of Permit or License. Revised 5/19

7.10.055    Appeal.

7.10.060    Posting of Permit and License. Revised 5/19

7.10.065    Transfer or Assignment of Permit and License. Revised 5/19

7.10.070    Prorating of Permit and License Fee. Revised 5/19

7.10.075    Penalty.


7.10.010 Regulatory Permit Procedure – Applicability. Revised 5/19

This chapter provides general and procedural regulations for City regulatory permits and licenses. No person shall engage in an activity regulated under BC Chapters 7.15 through 7.35 without first obtaining a permit or license from the City in compliance with this chapter and with the applicable provisions specific to the type of permit. The provisions of this chapter are intended to apply in addition to the provisions of BC Chapters 7.15 through 7.35, but in the event of a conflict between provisions, provisions in BC Chapters 7.15 through 7.35 prevail over the provisions in this chapter. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.015 Permit and License Duration. Revised 5/19

Permits and licenses shall be issued for one year unless otherwise provided in the permit or license.

[Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.020 Permit and License Renewal. Revised 5/19

A.    Permit and license renewal applications shall be submitted prior to the expiration of the permit or license.

B.    If the City has received complaints about the permitted or licensed activity, the application for renewal of the permit or license may be reviewed under this chapter. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.025 Application Requirements. Revised 5/19

Permit and license applications shall be made on City forms. Application shall be made at least 30 days prior to the proposed effective date. The signed application shall constitute the applicant’s consent to conduct an investigation of the applicant’s qualifications. Applicable permit or license fees in the amount established by Council resolution shall be paid at the time of application. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.030 Information from Applicant. Revised 5/19

The City may require an applicant to provide additional information. Failure to provide the additional information or providing false or misleading information is grounds for denial or revocation of the permit or license application. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.035 Criteria for Grant or Denial. Revised 5/19

The permit or license shall be denied if:

A.    The activity does not comply with this code or other applicable law or regulation;

B.    The applicant does not meet City standards;

C.    The permitted activity would endanger property or public health or safety;

D.    The applicant’s past or present violation(s) of law or ordinance presents a reasonable doubt about the applicant’s ability to perform the permitted or licensed activity without danger to property, or public health or safety; or

E.    The application contained a knowingly false statement. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.040 Issuance or Denial by the City. Revised 5/19

The permit or license shall be issued if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all standards of this title. The permit or license shall be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate compliance with this title. The City shall provide written notice of denial listing the reasons for denial and describing the appeal process. Permits and licenses may contain terms and conditions to protect public health and safety. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.045 Suspension of Permit or License. Revised 5/19

The City may suspend a permit or license for noncompliance with this code or applicable Federal or State laws and regulations. The suspension shall take effect immediately on oral or written notice delivered to the permittee or licensee, agent, or the permittee’s or licensee’s business address. Additional notice may be mailed to the permittee or licensee stating the reason for the suspension and describing the appeal process. The City may continue the suspension so long as the reason for the suspension exists or until a determination on appeal regarding the suspension is made. For purposes of this section, a permittee is in violation of the code if the permittee or licensee no longer meets the requirements for obtaining a permit or license. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.050 Revocation of Permit or License. Revised 5/19

If the City determines that a permittee or licensee is in violation of this code, or State or Federal law, it may revoke the permit or license after 30 days’ written notice. The written notice shall state the reason for the revocation and describe the appeal process. A revocation and suspension process may be combined. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.055 Appeal.

A.    The deadline for filing an appeal is 30 days after receipt of the written notice of denial, suspension or revocation. Mailed notice is deemed received three business days after mailing. The appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder and shall state:

1.    The name and address of the appellant;

2.    The decision being appealed;

3.    The reason the decision is incorrect.

B.    The Council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the written appeal and additional evidence presented prior to the end of the hearing. The appellant shall be provided at least 14 days’ written notice of a hearing on the appeal. The appellant may waive the right to an in-person hearing and request a decision based on the written appeal.

C.    At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument, personally or by counsel, and any additional evidence. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply, and the decision of the Council after the hearing is final. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.060 Posting of Permit and License. Revised 5/19

The permit or license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the permitted activity or otherwise immediately available for inspection. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.065 Transfer or Assignment of Permit and License. Revised 5/19

Permits and licenses issued under this title are not transferable. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.070 Prorating of Permit and License Fee. Revised 5/19

Fees for permits and licenses authorized by this title are not subject to proration. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.10.075 Penalty.

A violation of any provision of this title is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 7.15 PRIVATE SECURITY Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.15.005    Definitions.

7.15.010    License Requirements. Revised 5/19

7.15.015    Applications. Revised 5/19

7.15.020    Application Review. Revised 5/19

7.15.025    Standards.

7.15.035    Temporary Suspension. Revised 5/19


7.15.005 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this section:

A.    Certification means recognition by the Oregon Department of Public Safety Standards and Training that a private security professional meets all of the qualifications listed in ORS 181.875.

B.    Private security professional means an individual who performs, as the individual’s primary responsibility, private security services for consideration, regardless of whether the individual, while performing the private security services, is armed or unarmed or wears a uniform or plain clothes, and regardless of whether the individual is employed part-time or full-time to perform private security services.

C.    Private security services means the performance of at least one of the following activities:

1.    Observing and reporting unlawful activity;

2.    Preventing or detecting theft or misappropriation of goods, money or other items of value;

3.    Protecting individuals or property, including but not limited to proprietary information, from harm or misappropriation;

4.    Controlling access to premises being protected;

5.    Securely moving prisoners;

6.    Taking enforcement action by detaining persons or placing persons under arrest under ORS 133.225;

7.    Providing canine services for guarding premises or for detecting unlawful devices or substances.

D.    Private security company means a business that provides private security services to others for compensation. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.15.010 License Requirements. Revised 5/19

A.    No private security company may provide private security services within the City without a City private security company license. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.15.015 Applications. Revised 5/19

A.    In addition to the requirements of BC Chapter 7.10, applications for a private security company license shall provide:

1.    Evidence that the private security company employs one or more certified private security professionals;

2.    Photographs of the private security company vehicles, uniforms, and badges. If the private security company has not yet acquired vehicles, uniforms or badges, drawings may substitute for photographs;

3.    Name, contact information and photograph, in uniform, if applicable, of all persons employed as licensed security professionals. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.15.020 Application Review. Revised 5/19

In addition to other application requirements, applicants for private security company licenses may be required to meet with the Chief of Police to review the vehicles, uniforms and badges utilized by the private security company. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.15.025 Standards.

A.    All private security companies shall ensure that their employees conform to the requirements regarding certification prior to allowing them to work in the capacity of a private security professional.

B.    Private security companies shall ensure that their vehicles, uniforms and badges are in compliance with BC Chapter 5.40.

C.    Private security companies shall notify the Bend Police Department in writing within 30 days of the date of separation when a private security professional is no longer employed by the company. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.15.035 Temporary Suspension. Revised 5/19

In addition to the basis for suspension authorized by BC 7.10.045, the City may suspend a license issued to a private security company when there are reasonable grounds to believe that the licensee’s employee:

A.    No longer meets the requirements for certification;

B.    Is a suspect of, or has been arrested for, any felony, persons crime or weapons offense. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 7.16 SHORT-TERM RENTAL OPERATING LICENSE Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.16.005    Applicability.

7.16.010    Purpose.

7.16.020    Definitions.

7.16.030    Annual Short-Term Rental Operating License Required.

7.16.040    Application and Fee. Revised 5/19

7.16.050    Term of Annual License and Transferability.

7.16.060    Operating License and License Renewal. Revised 5/19

7.16.070    Criteria for Approval of an Operating License and Operating License Renewal.

7.16.080    Additional Operational Requirements.

7.16.090    Revocation Procedure.

7.16.100    Violations – Penalties.

7.16.110    Appeals of Short-Term Rental Operating License Determinations.

7.16.120    Discontinuance of Short-Term Rental Occupancy.

7.16.130    Remedies Not Exclusive.


7.16.005 Applicability.

Unless expressly exempt from the permitting requirements under BDC 3.6.500(C)(3), the provisions of this chapter apply to all short-term rentals approved under BDC 3.6.500, operating a short-term rental as defined by the Development Code, or that are legal nonconforming uses under the Bend Development Code. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.010 Purpose.

A short-term rental license is a permission to operate a short-term rental in accordance with this chapter. An operating license may be suspended, terminated or revoked if the standards of this chapter are not met or the dwelling is sold or otherwise transferred as defined in this chapter. This chapter provides an administrative framework for licensing the annual operation of a short-term rental. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.020 Definitions.

A.    Authorized agent is a property management company or other entity or person who has been designated by the owner, in writing, to act on their behalf. The authorized agent may or may not be the designated representative for purposes of contact for complaints. If an authorized agent changes during the operating license period, the owner shall timely notify the City in writing of the change.

B.    City Manager means the City Manager or his or her designee.

C.    Immediate family is defined as spouse, registered domestic partner, parents, children, children of the spouse/registered domestic partner, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, parents of the spouse/registered domestic partner, and other close relatives who reside in the owner’s household.

D.    Owner means the natural person or legal entity that owns and holds legal and/or equitable title to the property. If the owner is a business entity such as a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership or similar entity, any person who owns an interest in that business entity shall be considered an owner.

E.    Sale or transfer means any change of ownership during the lifetime of the license holder, whether or not there is consideration, or after the death of the license holder, except a change in ownership where title is held in survivorship with a spouse or domestic partner, or transfers on the owner’s death to a trust which benefits only a spouse, child(ren) or registered domestic partner for the lifetime of the spouse, child(ren) or registered domestic partner. A sale or transfer also does not mean (1) the transfer of ownership of the real property to or between the members of a limited liability company or partnership when the transfer involves the same owner(s), or (2) the transfer to a trustee, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership, or other similar entity, if at least one owner is living at the time of transfer and retains at least a 25 percent interest in the entity. The permit or nonconforming right shall terminate if the original owner ceases to own at least a 25 percent interest in the entity. If the owner is a corporation, the shareholders of the corporation shall be considered the owners for purposes of this section.

F.    Short-term rental means a short-term rental (1) approved under BDC 3.6.500 or former BDC 3.6.200(L), or (2) that is a legal nonconforming use under the Bend Development Code.

G.    Short-term rental operating license means the regulatory license required by BC 7.16.030 and described in this chapter, and regulates a “short-term rental” as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2. It will be referenced as an “operating license.” [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.030 Annual Short-Term Rental Operating License Required.

No owner of property within the Bend City limits may advertise, offer, operate, rent, or otherwise make available or allow any other person to make available for occupancy or use a short-term rental without a short-term rental operating license. Advertise or offer includes through any media, whether written, electronic, web-based, digital, mobile or otherwise. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.040 Application and Fee. Revised 5/19

A.    Application Required. Applications for an operating license shall be on forms provided by the City, demonstrating the application meets the standards required by this chapter. The owner or authorized agent shall certify the following information to be true and correct:

1.    Owner Information. Owner’s name, permanent residence address, permanent residence telephone number, and the short-term rental address and telephone number. The application must also include the names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons holding an ownership interest in the property, or holding an ownership interest in the entity that owns the property.

2.    Representative Information. If the owner does not permanently reside within the Bend City limits or is not always available when the property is being rented, the owner shall provide the name, telephone number and email of a representative (which can be a person or company) who can be contacted concerning use of the property and/or complaints related to the short-term rental, as set forth in BC 7.16.070.

3.    Land Use Approval. The PZ number of the land use approval for the short-term rental use or exemption under current or former Bend Development Code, or determination by CDD of a legal nonconforming use, must be submitted with the application.

4.    Parking. Statement that required parking spaces are available, with a dated photo(s) submitted of interior and exterior parking spaces. A parking diagram of these approved parking spaces shall also be submitted.

5.    Occupancy. Occupancy limits and number of bedrooms.

6.    Use in Prior 12 Months. Documentation as set forth in BC 7.16.070(B) that the dwelling was rented at least once in the last 12 months for existing short-term rentals (if permitted in the last 12 months), and upon each annual license renewal for existing and new short-term rentals, unless the hardship exemption is met as set forth in that section.

7.    Good Neighbor Guidelines. Acknowledgment of receipt and review of a copy of the good neighbor guidelines. In addition, evidence that the good neighbor guidelines have been effectively relayed to short-term rental tenants, by incorporating them into the rental contract, including it in the rental booklet, posting it online, providing it in a conspicuous place in the dwelling unit, or a similar method.

8.    Listing Number. If they advertise, the listing numbers or website addresses where the short-term rental advertises (such as the Vrbo/Airbnb/rental website number, account number, URL, etc.)

9.    Such other information as the City Manager or designee deems reasonably necessary to administer this chapter.

B.    Incomplete Application. If a license application does not include all required materials, the application will be considered incomplete and the City will notify the applicant, by using the applicant’s email address that is on file or by first class mail if no email address is provided, explaining the information required. If the applicant provides the missing required information within 30 days of the date of the notice, the application will be reviewed. If the applicant does not provide the required information, the application will be deemed withdrawn and the City will refund the application fee.

C.    License Fee. The fee for application for a short-term rental operating license or license renewal shall be in an amount to recover the City’s actual average costs of reviewing and issuing the license application or license renewal application, including a fee for a late application, investigation and any required inspections, as established by resolution of the City Council. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS‑2239, 2015]


7.16.050 Term of Annual License and Transferability.

A.    Term. A short-term rental operating license shall be issued for a period of one year, with its effective date running from the date the application is due as set forth in BC 7.16.060, and may be renewed annually by the owner or authorized agent provided all applicable standards of this chapter are met.

B.    Transferability. The operating license shall be issued in the name of the property owner and is not transferable. The operating license shall terminate and be deemed void when the license holder sells or transfers the property approved or operating as a legal nonconforming use as a short-term rental. Although not transferable, the new owner or authorized agent shall have 60 days to apply for a new operating license. See BC 7.16.060(B)(1)(c). [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.060 Operating License and License Renewal. Revised 5/19

A.    License Must Be Obtained. An operating license shall be obtained and/or renewed as required in this section. The ability to operate a short-term rental in the City of Bend shall be discontinued for failure to obtain or renew a license to operate as provided in this chapter.

B.    Application and Renewal Application Process. A person engaging in a short-term rental who has not yet obtained an operating license, or who is required to renew an existing operating license, shall do so as follows:

1.    Time for Application.

a.    Existing Short-Term Rentals. A completed operating license renewal application and renewal fee are due for all existing short-term rentals on September 1, 2015, and annually every year thereafter.

b.    New Permits. For new land use permits issued after the effective date of this chapter, it is the responsibility of the owner or authorized agent to apply for an operating license within 60 days of receiving the final land use approval to permit the use of the property of a short-term rental.

c.    Sale of the Property. Upon change in ownership authorized by this chapter and BDC Chapter 3.6 of a property subject to a short-term rental operating license, it is the obligation and responsibility of the new owner or authorized agent to obtain a new operating license in order to operate the short-term rental. The new owner or authorized agent shall have 60 days from the date of ownership (closing of the sale) to apply for and receive a new operating license.

2.    Notice. At least 60 days prior to the due date, the City shall send notice of the need for a license or expiration of a license to the owner of any property for which an application is due as follows:

a.    For the first license required after the effective date of this chapter, for permitted nonconforming properties, notice will be sent by first class mail to the property owner as determined by the records of Deschutes County from the most recent property tax roll assessment.

b.    For properties that are legal nonconforming uses and were never permitted, it is the owner’s obligation and responsibility to apply for a PZ number and to provide the City with a new address for notification purposes.

c.    For license renewal, notice will be sent to the address of the owner/licensee by using the applicant’s email address that is on file or by first class mail if no email address is provided.

d.    For both the first license and license renewal, if an authorized agent name and address have been submitted to the City after the adoption of this chapter, the City will also send notice to such agent, although failure to do so does not violate this section.

C.    Notice – Late Applications. If the license application or renewal application is not received by the due date, the City shall send notice of expiration to the owner and authorized agent, if known, of any property for which a timely application has not been received, advising the owner that they have 30 days to respond. An application will be considered timely submitted if the City receives a completed application, accompanied by the required fees, within the 30-day late period. Notice will be sent using the applicant’s email address that is on file or by first class mail if no email is provided.

D.    License Expiration. For failure to submit an application, upon expiration of the 30-day late period, the ability to operate shall be conclusively presumed to be discontinued with no further action by the City. For renewals, upon expiration of the late period, the ability to operate shall be conclusively presumed to be discontinued and the City will commence revocation of the license pursuant to the procedures in BC 7.16.090.

    For new owners, once the 60-day grace period to apply for a license under the existing land use permit expires as referenced in subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section, the ability to operate shall be conclusively presumed to be discontinued with no further action by the City.

E.    Renewal Standards.

1.    The City will review an application for operating license renewal and issue a renewal, provided all the standards in this chapter continue to be met. If not met, the City will not renew the operating license and the property shall not be used as a short-term rental.

2.    A decision on an operating license application or renewal may be appealed as provided in BC 7.16.110. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.070 Criteria for Approval of an Operating License and Operating License Renewal.

A.    The applicant has the burden of proof to demonstrate compliance with each applicable criterion for approval or renewal of the operating license. The approval criteria also operate as continuing code compliance obligations of the owner. Staff may verify evidence submitted and the applicant shall cooperate fully in any investigation.

B.    To receive approval, an applicant must demonstrate that all approval criteria listed below have been satisfied:

1.    Proof of Use. The owner shall demonstrate that the property has been rented at least once in the prior 12 months, for the first license and every year upon renewal, as demonstrated by one or more of the following: a room tax remittance form, a rental contract with the tenant, rental receipts, or other documentation satisfactory to the City (subject to the hardship exception in subsection (B)(2) of this section). During the first year of this licensing program, the exception to this requirement is for permits issued between July 3 and September 1, 2015, uses that did not formerly require a permit, or nonconforming uses permitted after September 2, 2014, which may not have a year of potential use to demonstrate. Such owners shall demonstrate use upon the next annual renewal. Information provided by the owner under BC Chapter 12.05, Room Tax, shall be kept confidential to the extent allowed or required by law.

2.    Operating License Revocation. If an owner does not demonstrate proof of use during the prior 12 months as set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section, an operating license shall be revoked by the City under BC 7.16.090. The exception to these criteria for continuation of an operating license is a temporary hardship exception, which includes submission of proof, acceptable to the City, that: (a) a medical condition of the owner, domestic partner or immediate family member jeopardizes the ability of the owner to operate the short-term rental; or (b) the death of the spouse, domestic partner or immediate family member jeopardizes the ability of the owner to operate the short-term rental; or (c) structural integrity of the short-term rental deems it uninhabitable for tenants and is not self-imposed.

The City may attach a time limit to this hardship exception. A time limit may be set by the City Manager but shall not exceed six months. A one-time extension may be approved upon request if one of the conditions of this section still applies.

3.    Land Use Approval. The property has received land use approval under the current or former Development Code or is a legal nonconforming use. If the land use permit is modified under BDC 3.6.500 (such as to increase the number of bedrooms or parking spaces), the operating license shall be modified as well within 30 days.

4.    Contact Information. The owner or authorized agent has provided information sufficient to verify a qualified person will be available to be contacted about use of the short-term rental during and after business hours. The owner or representative shall be available to be contacted by telephone to ensure a response to the short-term rental address at all hours (24 hours a day, seven days a week) while the dwelling unit is occupied for rent. The designated representative may be changed from time to time throughout the term of the license. To do so, the license information shall be revised with the City at least 14 days prior to the date the change takes effect, except when the failure to do so is beyond the owner or authorized agent’s control. In an emergency or absence, contact forwarding information to a qualified person may be provided for the owner or representative.

5.    Notice to Neighbors. The owner or authorized agent shall either: (a) provide an annual mailing or otherwise distribute by hand, a flier to neighbors within a 250-foot radius of the short-term rental property address containing the owner and/or representative contact information, or (b) post a small placard or sign as permitted by the Bend Sign Code, BC Chapter 9.50, near the adjacent street advising neighbors and tenants of the same information where it can be seen from the public right-of-way.

The purpose of this notice is so that adjacent property owners and residents can contact a responsible person to report and request resolution of problems associated with the operation of the short-term rental. If the permanent contact information changes during the license period, the new information must be mailed or distributed again, or changed on the placard or sign.

6.    Electronic Availability. In addition, the City will make a database electronically accessible within which any person can enter in an address of a short-term rental and obtain the owner/authorized agent and/or representative’s name and telephone number.

C.    Health and Safety.

1.    Fire and Emergency Safety. A completed checklist for fire safety (fire extinguishers, smoke alarms, carbon monoxide detectors, etc.) shall be required with each annual operating license application and renewal.



2.    Owner Responsibility. It is the owner’s responsibility to assure that the short-term rental is and remains in substantial compliance with all applicable codes regarding fire, building and safety, health and safety, and other relevant laws.

D.    Mandatory Postings. The short-term rental license issued by the City shall be displayed in a prominent location within the interior of the dwelling adjacent to the front door. The license will contain the following information:

1.    A number or other identifying mark unique to the short-term rental operating license which indicates the license is issued by the City of Bend, with the date of expiration;

2.    The name of the owner or representative and a telephone number where the owner or representative may be contacted;

3.    The number of approved parking spaces;

4.    The maximum occupancy permitted for the short-term rental;

5.    Any required information and conditions specific to the operating license (such as a maximum of 29 days available for rent per 12-month period);

6.    The property address; and

7.    The City of Bend official logo.

E.    No Pending Actions or Violations. At the time of application, the owner of a short-term rental shall not have received a civil citation regarding compliance of the subject short-term rental property with any provision of the Bend Code. A voluntary assurance of compliance, negotiated compliance agreement, or deferred sentence agreement will satisfy the requirement that there be no pending actions or violations. The owner shall be in compliance with the Room Tax Code pursuant to BC Chapter 12.05, and subject to the Tax Administrator’s authority under that chapter. The owner must be in good standing with Code Enforcement including no active cases or unresolved issues.

F.    Parking Diagram. The parking diagram of the approved parking spaces shall be provided to tenants and be available in a prominent location within the short-term rental dwelling. [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.080 Additional Operational Requirements.

A.    Response to Complaints. The owner or representative shall respond to neighborhood questions, concerns, or complaints in a reasonably timely manner depending on the circumstances.

1.    Complaints. The owner or representative should maintain a record of complaints and the actions taken in response to the complaint, if relevant, in an electronic or written manner deemed reasonable to document the interaction. If kept, this record can then be made available for City inspection upon request to investigate under subsection (A)(3) of this section.

2.    City Authority. Certain types of complaints are subject to the City’s regulatory authority under other sections of the Bend Code (noise complaints, disorderly conduct, chronic nuisance, etc., under BC Title 5, Public Protection, which are enforced by the Bend Police Department). Other complaints related to occupancy and on-site parking are subject to the City’s code enforcement authority under BDC 3.6.500. It is not intended that the owner, agent or representative act as a peace officer or code enforcement officer or put themselves in an at-risk situation.

However, reasonable initial inquiries or complaints related to noise, disturbances, occupancy or parking may first be made to the owner or representative. In addition, complaints specifically related to the good neighbor guidelines, or the condition, operation or conduct of occupants of the short-term rental, should first be made to the owner or representative. If there is a failure to respond or a clearly inadequate response by the owner or representative, a complaint may be submitted to the City on a form provided by the City and the City will respond or investigate as needed. The City will first seek voluntary compliance or resolution, but if the City finds substantial evidence supports further action given the complaint(s), the City will follow the warning procedures set forth in BC 7.16.090(A)(6). Alternatively, and in its discretion, the City may refer the complaint to the City program for dispute resolution and/or mediation.

3.    Records. On request and in compliance with the public records law, the City shall provide the owner, authorized agent and/or representative with the information in the complaint.

4.    Grounds for Warning. Repeated failure of the owner or representative to timely and reasonably respond to a complaint(s) relayed by City staff is considered grounds for a warning and potential revocation under BC 7.16.090. Issuance of a noise (as sustained on appeal if applicable) citation to a tenant may be grounds for a warning to the owner, only if under the circumstances in the reasonable judgment of the City Manager the owner should be held responsible. Issuance of a public nuisance citation may be grounds for a warning in the appropriate circumstances.

5.    Administrative Rules. The City Manager shall have the authority to establish administrative rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out, furthering, and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the City Recorder and be posted on the City website. [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.090 Revocation Procedure.

A.    In addition to the penalties described in BC 7.16.100, the following provisions apply to violations of this chapter:

1.    Failure to renew an operating license as set forth in BC 7.16.060 is grounds for immediate revocation of the operating license.

2.    Failure to meet the criteria required by BC 7.16.070(B)(1), (2) and (3) is grounds for immediate revocation of the operating license.

3.    The discovery of material misstatements or providing of false information in the application or renewal process is grounds for immediate revocation of the operating license.

4.    Expiration or revocation of the land use permit through Development Code proceedings is grounds for immediate revocation of the operating license.

5.    Such other violations of this chapter of sufficient severity in the reasonable judgment of the City Manager, so as to provide reasonable grounds for immediate revocation of the operating license.

6.    Other violations of this chapter, including but not limited to City initiated investigation/sustaining of complaints, shall be processed as follows:

a.    For the first violation within a 12-month period, the sanction shall be a warning notice.

b.    If the same offense continues to occur or a second similar offense occurs at any time during a 12-month period, the City may either send a second warning notice or suspend the operating license for 90 days, depending on the severity of the offense.

c.    If a third similar offense occurs at any time during a 12-month period, the penalty shall be revocation.

B.    Notice of Decision/Appeal/Stay. If the operating license is suspended or revoked as provided in this section, the City Manager shall send written notice of suspension and revocation to the owner stating the basis for the decision. The notice shall include information about the right to appeal the decision and the procedure for filing an appeal. The owner may appeal the City Manager’s decision to revoke the operating license under the procedures set forth in BC 7.16.110. 

Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Manager shall stay the suspension or revocation decision until the appeal has been finally determined by the City Council. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.100 Violations – Penalties.

A.    In addition to the revocation procedure of BC 7.16.090, any person or owner who uses, or allows the use of, property in violation of this chapter is subject to the enforcement authority of BC Chapter 1.40, Civil Infractions, and the civil infraction authority of BC 7.10.075, Regulatory Permits. Violation is a Class A civil infraction subject to penalties, which include monetary fines. Each day in which a dwelling is used in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation.

B.    The following conduct also constitutes a violation of this chapter and is a civil infraction:

1.    Representing a dwelling as available for occupancy or rent as a short-term rental where the owner does not hold a valid operating license issued under this chapter, or making a short-term rental available for use, occupancy or rent without first obtaining a valid operating license;

2.    Advertising or renting a short-term rental in a manner that does not comply with the standards of this chapter; and

3.    Failure to comply with the substantive standards of BC 7.16.070 and 7.16.080. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.110 Appeals of Short-Term Rental Operating License Determinations.

A.    Filing Requirements – Notice. The owner or authorized agent may appeal a short-term rental operating license decision to revoke an operating license under BC 7.16.090.

B.    Authority to Decide Appeal. The City Council shall be responsible for determining an appeal of a decision approving or denying an application or renewal application for an operating license, or revoking or suspending an operating license, in any zone.

C.    Time for Filing. An appellant is required to file a written notice of appeal including the basis for the appeal within 12 calendar days of the license determination being appealed. This requirement is jurisdictional and late filings shall not be allowed.

D.    Fee for Appeal. The City Council may establish by resolution a fee for filing an appeal, which shall be jurisdictional. The fee shall be sufficient to recover the average or actual costs of mailing notice of hearing and conducting the hearing.

E.    Procedures. The City Manager may establish administrative procedures to implement the appeal procedures provided in this section, including any required forms. The Council may adopt procedures for hearings not in conflict with this section, including but not limited to time limits on oral testimony and limitations on written argument.

F.    Hearing. Within 21 days of receiving the notice of appeal, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal before the City Council. At the hearing, the appellant shall have the opportunity to present evidence and arguments as may be relevant. The Council may direct the City Attorney to draft findings of fact and interpretations of code or law to be considered at a later Council meeting.

G.    Standard of Review and Decision. The Council shall determine whether the City’s decision was based on a preponderance of the evidence. A decision of the Council shall be based on the evidence received, in writing and signed by the chair, no later than 30 days after the close of the hearing. The Council may determine not to suspend or revoke the license, or to revoke or suspend the license. If the Council upholds the decision to revoke the operating license, the Council shall order the owner to discontinue use as a short-term rental. If the Council reverses the decision to revoke the operating license, the operating license shall be granted.

H.    Finality. The Council’s decision shall be final on the date of mailing the decision to the appellant. The Council’s decision is the final decision of the City and is appealable only by writ of review to Circuit Court. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.120 Discontinuance of Short-Term Rental Occupancy.

A.    After Revocation. After a short-term rental operating license has been revoked, the dwelling unit may not be used or occupied as a short-term rental unless a new land use approval and license are granted, and the owner of the property to which the license applied and whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to reapply for a short-term rental license for short-term rental occupancy of the same property for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation.

B.    After Expiration. If a short-term rental operating license expires, the dwelling unit may not be used or occupied as a short-term rental, except for the 60-day grace period for new owner(s) of property during which time they may apply for a new operating license. The owner of the property to which the license applied and whose license has expired shall be required to apply for and obtain both a land use permit and a short-term rental license before the property may be lawfully used or occupied as a short-term rental. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


7.16.130 Remedies Not Exclusive.

The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, all other legal remedies, criminal and civil, which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of this code, the Development Code, or other public nuisance. [Ord. NS-2239, 2015]


Chapter 7.20 SIDEWALK VENDORS, CAFES AND FURNISHINGS Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.20.005    Sidewalk License. Revised 5/19

7.20.010    Exceptions to License Requirements. Revised 5/19

7.20.015    Sidewalk Cafes. Revised 5/19

7.20.020    Sidewalk Vendors. Revised 5/19

7.20.025    Standards for Sidewalk Vendors and Cafes. Revised 5/19


7.20.005 Sidewalk License. Revised 5/19

A.    In addition to the requirements of BC Chapter 7.10, an application for a sidewalk vendor or cafe license must:

1.    Contain a provision that the applicant holds the City harmless;

2.    Be accompanied by evidence of liability insurance at least equal to the City’s tort liability limits;

3.    Be accompanied by a damage deposit in an amount established by Council resolution.

B.    City approval is required prior to any changes in operations inconsistent with the license. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.20.010 Exceptions to License Requirements. Revised 5/19

The actions authorized by this section do not require a sidewalk vendor or cafe license.

A.    In the Downtown District, businesses may place planters and merchandise displays on sidewalks adjacent to their businesses; provided, that an accessible sidewalk passageway of six feet is provided.

B.    Businesses in the Downtown District that do not sell food or beverages may place chairs and tables adjacent to their businesses; provided, that an accessible passageway of six feet is provided. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.20.015 Sidewalk Cafes. Revised 5/19

A.    Sidewalks cannot be used for the sale of food or beverages to be consumed at tables on the public property or right-of-way unless the seller has obtained a sidewalk cafe license.

B.    Sidewalk cafe licenses may be issued if:

1.    The applicant lawfully operates a restaurant adjacent to the right-of-way for which the applicant seeks a license;

2.    The owner of the restaurant property consents to issuance of the license; and

3.    Seating will be limited to no more than 20 persons. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.20.020 Sidewalk Vendors. Revised 5/19

A.    A sidewalk vendor license is required to sell food, beverages, wares or goods from a public sidewalk or other public property.

B.    In addition to the generally applicable application requirements, an application for a sidewalk vendor license shall:

1.    Include a drawing or photo of the proposed unit.

2.    Provide a complete list of all items the vendor proposes to offer for sale.

C.    A sidewalk vendor license may be issued if the following criteria are met in addition to the criteria in BC Chapter 7.10:

1.    The use of the right-of-way or public property will not interfere with existing utilities or pedestrian use, or pose a hazard to vehicular traffic. There will be an accessible pedestrian passageway of at least five feet. The use will be in compliance with applicable vision clearance requirements.

2.    The proposed use of City-owned property is not inconsistent with the use for which the property was dedicated.

3.    Sales shall be from a self-contained unit no larger than 25 square feet unless specified on the license. Only the self-contained unit and a single chair for the use of the vendor may be placed in the public property or right-of-way unless specifically authorized by the license. Licensee may only operate at the location specified on the license.

D.    The City will create a list or map of locations where sidewalk vendors may operate. The City may change the locations. Licensees may operate at only one of the locations designated by the City Manager. The City shall annually conduct a lottery to assign locations among applicants. Any licensee who has not applied for a sidewalk vendor license by the time of the lottery shall be allowed to operate at any remaining location on a first-come, first-served basis. Locations assigned to a sidewalk vendor are nontransferable.

E.    A sidewalk vendor may not sell merchandise within one-half block of a permanent retailer that sells the same type of item. A license will not be revoked during a calendar year if a permanent retailer moves into the permanent building after a license has been issued for that calendar year.

F.    A sidewalk vendor may not provide customer seating without written City approval.

G.    No cooking systems may be used unless approved by the Bend Fire Department.

H.    No sidewalk vendor may operate within the area of any permitted special event without permission of the event organizer. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.20.025 Standards for Sidewalk Vendors and Cafes. Revised 5/19

A.    Licensee shall maintain the area within 10 feet of the activity free from litter and debris at all times. All litter and debris shall be disposed of in the licensee’s trash receptacles.

B.    Licensee is required to clean all surfaces soiled by licensee’s use of the public property.

C.    Any portion of a damage deposit not needed for cleanup or repair will be returned by the City after expiration of the license. If it is necessary for the City to use all or part of the damage deposit before the license expires, the City Manager may either revoke the license or require the deposit of additional money as a condition of continued operation. If the deposit is insufficient to cover cost of damage or cleanup, the licensee will be responsible for all additional costs.

D.    Licensees may not use the City’s storm drainage system to dispose of anything.

E.    Licensees may not drive motorized vehicles onto City’s sidewalks.

F.    No electrical cords or electrical generators are allowed.

G.    No licensee may block any public facilities, such as kiosks, disabled access, bike racks, entrances to buildings, or sidewalks.

H.    Licensees may not place anything, including barricade or signs, on public property or rights-of-way without written City approval. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 7.25 SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWN BROKERS Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.25.005    Definitions.

7.25.010    License Required. Revised 5/19

7.25.015    Exemptions. Revised 5/19

7.25.020    License Application, Review and Issuance. Revised 5/19

7.25.025    Records Required. Revised 5/19

7.25.030    Regulation of Premises.

7.25.035    Purchases from Minors.

7.25.040    Retention and Return of Articles.


7.25.005 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Electronic report is a report of information required to be entered by this chapter on a City-approved website.

B.    Dealers mean persons who are engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, trading, bartering or exchanging secondhand goods. “Dealers” includes pawn brokers.

C.    Secondhand goods means all personal property which has been used or possessed previously by another and includes previously owned precious metals such as gold, silver and platinum, jewelry, coins, firearms, hand and power tools, and any article with a manufacturer’s serial number. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.010 License Required. Revised 5/19

Dealers must obtain a City secondhand goods dealer license. Agents and employees of a dealer who engage in the purchase of secondhand goods must also obtain a license. No person may act as a dealer without a secondhand goods dealer license. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.015 Exemptions. Revised 5/19

This chapter does not apply to:

A.    Used, wrecked or salvaged vehicle dealers;

B.    Recycling centers;

C.    The resale of goods acquired as a trade-in;

D.    Sales at flea markets, trade shows or similar organized sales events that operate three or fewer times annually and not to exceed five days per event;

E.    Used book stores;

F.    Used clothing stores;

G.    Scrap metal businesses;

H.    Not-for-profit businesses that deal in donated items.

A person claiming an exemption has the burden of proof to establish the exemption. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.020 License Application, Review and Issuance. Revised 5/19

A.    Applicants shall be fingerprinted by the City and the City may conduct a background check as part of its review of the application.

B.    The City will issue a photo identification card to approved applicants.

C.    Grounds for denial or revocation of a dealer’s license include, in addition to the grounds in BC Chapter 7.10:

1.    Conviction of a felony;

2.    Failure of the dealer to obtain all necessary zoning, planning, building and sanitation permits for the dealer’s place of business;

3.    Allowing people who are required to obtain a license under this section to work as the dealer’s employee without a license. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.025 Records Required. Revised 5/19

A.    Every dealer conducting business in the City of Bend shall file an electronic report of all purchases of any pawned or secondhand goods as follows: precious metals, jewelry, coins, firearms, hand and power tools, or any article with a manufacturer’s serial number. The electronic report must be completely filled out, including an accurate and sufficiently detailed description of the secondhand goods purchased; the name, date of birth, sex, and address of the person from whom the item was purchased or acquired; the day and hour of the purchase and price paid; serial numbers of secondhand goods purchased, if applicable. If the item purchased is jewelry, a digital image of the item shall be uploaded with the electronic report.

B.    If the goods are acquired from an entity rather than an individual, the report must provide relevant information on both the entity and its individual agent from whom the goods were acquired.

C.    Dealers shall keep a copy of all electronic reports for at least two years after entry of the report.

D.    Repealed by Ord. NS-2323.

E.    For all purchases of secondhand and pawned goods, the dealer will inspect and record one of the following:

1.    A valid driver’s license;

2.    A valid State identification card;

3.    A valid military identification card;

4.    A valid passport, visa or alien registration card with photo;

5.    A valid Federal firearms license, if the dealer is purchasing secondhand firearms.

F.    This chapter does not apply to the following purchases:

1.    Purchases made at an auction;

2.    Purchases from a dealer licensed or permitted by another local governmental entity;

3.    Purchases which are shipped to the dealer from a dealer whose primary business location is outside of Deschutes County.

G.    No electronic report may be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced once entered, other than to correct a mistake. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.030 Regulation of Premises.

Police officers may enter and inspect the premises of a dealer at all reasonable times. If any stolen property is found, the police may remove the property and return it to the rightful owner. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.035 Purchases from Minors.

No dealer may purchase or acquire from a person under 18 years of age any pawned or secondhand merchandise without written consent of the parents or guardian of the minor. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.25.040 Retention and Return of Articles.

A.    All secondhand goods that must be electronically reported shall be retained for a period of seven business days from the date that the goods are electronically reported. This subsection does not apply to items that a dealer purchases from other licensed dealers who have complied with this subsection.

B.    A dealer shall retain any secondhand goods for 15 days when directed in writing to do so by a police officer to allow an investigation as to whether the item is stolen goods.

C.    A dealer shall promptly turn over to a police officer any item identified as stolen property by any police agency. If requested by the dealer, the police officer shall give a receipt for all items received from the dealer. The receipt shall include the police agency’s name, address and case number. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 7.30 SOCIAL GAMING Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.30.005    Social Gaming. Revised 5/19


7.30.005 Social Gaming. Revised 5/19

A.    Social gaming, as authorized by State law, is permitted on premises that have obtained a social gaming license, subject to the following restrictions:

1.    No person may participate in social gaming other than a player as defined by ORS 167.117(16).

2.    No person may act as “house player” or “house bank.”

3.    All games shall be conducted without house odds.

4.    No house income may be generated from the operation of the social game.

5.    The person responsible for the premises where social gaming occurs shall not permit any individual who is visibly intoxicated to participate in social gaming.

B.    The fee for a social gaming license shall be established by Council resolution and may be based on the number of tables or on any other basis the Council deems appropriate.

C.    The City may inspect each location where social gaming has been licensed to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The inspections may include an annual inspection, and inspections of the public portions of the premises during hours that the premises are open for business. The annual inspection may include a meeting to discuss the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 7.35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE

Sections:

7.35.005    Purpose.

7.35.010    Definitions.

7.35.020    License, Application and Fees.

7.35.030    Driver Requirements.

7.35.040    Insurance Requirements.

7.35.050    Operational Requirements.

7.35.060    Audit.

7.35.070    Revocation, Suspension and Penalties.

7.35.080    Enforcement.

7.35.090    Effective Date.


7.35.005 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and promote the safety and welfare of the general public by regulating vehicles for hire within the City of Bend, as authorized by ORS 221.485 and 221.495. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended or shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the City or its employees for any injury or damage related to any provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the City or its employees. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A.    City means the City of Bend, Oregon.

B.    License means the license issued by the City to a taxi company or TNC authorizing the company to engage in vehicle for hire services within the City.

C.    Driver means any individual natural person who operates a vehicle for hire within the City.

D.    Person means and includes any individual natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, or other entity.

E.    Vehicle for hire means any vehicle used for the ground transportation of passengers for compensation within the City, including taxis and transportation network company (TNC) vehicles, as well as animal-drawn vehicles and vehicles powered by humans, including but not limited to vehicles such as pedi-cabs. The following motor vehicles are excluded from the definition of vehicle for hire and are exempt from this chapter:

1.    School buses operated to transport students;

2.    Vehicles used by nonprofit transportation providers solely for elderly or handicapped persons;

3.    Vehicles used to provide courtesy transportation at no charge to and from parking lots, hotels, rental offices, retirement homes, and the like;

4.    Vehicles used to provide ambulance service.

F.    Taxi company means any person or entity operating one or more vehicles for hire, other than as a driver, regardless of the legal form of the entity and regardless of whether the taxis so operated are owned by the company, or leased, or owned by individual members of an entity. Taxi companies do not include TNCs.

G.    Transportation network company or TNC means a company or other entity that exclusively uses an Internet-enabled platform or application to connect passengers with vehicles for hire and/or TNC drivers. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.020 License, Application and Fees.

A.    The City may issue a license to a taxi company or TNC if the company certifies on a form acceptable to the City that it is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to driver and insurance requirements, operating standards, and any other requirements of the code or the City, and actually meets all applicable standards and requirements.

B.    The City may include conditions, restrictions, or special provisions in the license related to routes, times of operation, or lighting if necessitated by the vehicles or operations of the taxi company or TNC. The City may waive or lessen the requirements of this chapter if the type of vehicles or operations of a taxi company or TNC render the requirements unreasonable or unnecessary, in the sole discretion of the City.

C.    The license issued under this chapter is valid for one year. Any renewal must be approved by the City prior to the expiration date in order for the taxi company or TNC to continue providing vehicle for hire services within the City.

D.    The application fee shall be based on the number of drivers operating for the taxi company or TNC at the time of the application, and shall be intended to account for the City’s costs in administering the requirements of this chapter. The fee amounts shall be set by City Council resolution as part of the City’s fee schedule.

E.    The application fee shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting both initial and renewal license applications.

F.    All taxi companies and TNCs must comply with the City’s business registration requirements. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.030 Driver Requirements.

A.    All drivers shall be at least 21 years of age and shall possess a valid driver’s license, proof of motor vehicle registration, and proof of current automobile liability insurance that meets the requirements of this chapter and state law.

B.    Every taxi company or TNC shall maintain accurate, current records for all drivers employed by, contracting with, or affiliated with the company, including all drivers accessing a company’s digital network to operate in the City. The records shall include the driver’s name, date of birth, address, social security number, criminal background check results, driver’s license information, motor vehicle registration, and automobile insurance. These records will be made available to the City promptly on request.

C.    Prior to permitting a person to operate as a driver, and annually thereafter, the taxi company or TNC shall conduct, or have a qualified third party conduct, a criminal background check. The criminal background check shall include a search of no less than seven years of database history, unless prohibited by law, in which case the duration of the search shall be the maximum number of years permitted by law. The criminal background check shall include local, state, and national criminal history databases and all accessible sex offender registries. Any person who is on a sex offender registry or has a record of a felony conviction within the previous seven years may not act as a driver. A record of a conviction of any of the following within the previous seven years will also disqualify a person from acting as a driver: crimes involving driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, sexual offenses, or crimes involving physical harm or attempted physical harm to a person. The company or its agent shall maintain records of a criminal background checks for a period of at least two years. For purposes of this section, the term “conviction” includes convictions, bail forfeitures, and other final adverse findings.

D.    A taxi company or TNC must revoke a driver’s authority to operate as a driver for their company and inform the City if it finds at any time that the standards set forth in this section are no longer being met by the driver. The company shall only reinstate a driver upon a finding by the company that all standards are again being met by the driver.

E.    Notwithstanding the standards of this section, upon application by a taxi company or TNC, the Bend Chief of Police has authority to allow a person to act as a driver if the Chief determines public safety would not be compromised. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.040 Insurance Requirements.

A.    For all required insurance, taxi companies and TNCs shall provide certificates of insurance naming the City, its officers, agents, and employees as additional insured parties and give at least 30 calendar days’ notice to the City before a policy is canceled, expires, or has any reduction in coverage.

B.    Insurance requirements of this section shall be satisfied by insurance issued by a licensed insurer or an eligible surplus lines insurer in the State of Oregon.

C.    The insurance limits for both TNCs and taxi companies are subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon during the permit’s term, other statutory changes, or other changes deemed necessary by the City.

D.    The adequacy of insurance coverage is subject to the review and approval of the City.

E.    Every taxi company and TNC shall maintain continuous, uninterrupted coverage for the duration of the license and any operations in the City. Any lapse in insurance coverage, even if it is later backdated by the insurance company, is a violation of this chapter.

F.    Both taxi companies and TNCs shall secure and maintain commercial general liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate for claims arising out of, but not limited to, bodily injury and property damage incurred in the course of operating in the City.

G.    Taxi companies operating any motor vehicles shall secure and maintain commercial automobile liability insurance covering those vehicles, with a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for claims arising out of, but not limited to, bodily injury and property damage incurred in the course of operating in the City.

H.    TNC Service Periods Defined.

1.    Period 1: The TNC driver has logged into the app or is otherwise connected to the TNC’s digital network, but has not yet accepted a request for a ride from a passenger. For example, the app is open and the driver is waiting for a match.

2.    Period 2: A passenger match has been accepted, but the passenger is not yet picked up (for example, the driver is on the way to pick up the passenger).

3.    Period 3: The passenger is in the vehicle.

I.    Upon City request or as part of an application, TNCs shall provide proof of current, valid insurance for City approval covering all affiliated TNC drivers and vehicles for hire operating for such company and satisfying the minimum requirements of Periods 1, 2, and 3.

J.    All TNCs shall maintain and provide the City with proof of the following automobile liability coverages:

1.    Primary insurance coverage during Period 1 with minimum liability limits of $50,000 per person for death and injury, $100,000 per incident for death and injury, and $25,000 for property damage, plus any other state compulsory coverage.

2.    Primary insurance coverage during Periods 2 and 3 with minimum liability limits of $1,000,000 in combined single limit coverage for death, personal injury and property damage per incident; and $1,000,000 in combined single limit under/uninsured motorist coverage for death, personal injury and property damage per incident.

3.    The required automobile liability insurance shall specifically recognize the driver’s provision of TNC and vehicle for hire services and shall comply with the laws of the State of Oregon and/or other applicable governing bodies.

K.    TNC drivers shall be responsible for maintaining all personal automobile liability insurance required by State law. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.050 Operational Requirements.

A.    TNCs shall maintain records of all trips made by all drivers for at least one year from the date of the trip. The data may be aggregated and/or anonymized, and shall include, at minimum, the locations by ZIP code of trip origination and destination, vehicle miles traveled, trip origination and completion times, trip duration, and passenger wait times from a driver’s acceptance of a request to passenger pick-up. The City may require a TNC to enter a data sharing agreement in order to receive a license.

B.    All vehicles operating for taxi companies shall be clearly marked as such and shall include the taxi company name, phone number, and a vehicle identification number in plain sight. Vehicles operated for TNC services shall be marked with a customary “trade dress” type of identification, such as a sticker or placard. The TNC’s software application or website shall display for the passenger the make, model, and license plate number of the TNC vehicle.

C.    TNCs may not accept street hails, and may only accept rides arranged through a TNC’s digital network.

D.    Taxi companies and TNCs shall implement and maintain at all times a zero tolerance policy on the use of drugs or alcohol applicable to all drivers employed by or affiliated with the company while providing vehicle for hire services. Companies shall provide notice of the zero tolerance policy on their website and/or have it clearly displayed in each vehicle. The notice must include contact information to report a complaint about a driver for possible violation of policy. A company shall immediately suspend a driver upon receipt of a passenger complaint alleging a violation of the zero tolerance policy, for at least the duration of the investigation of the complaint.

E.    Taxi companies and TNCs must provide reasonable accommodations to passengers with disabilities, including passengers accompanied by a service animal, passengers with hearing and visual impairments, and passengers with mobility devices, and must comply with all applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.060 Audit.

The City may audit taxi company and TNC records up to twice per calendar year to review compliance with this chapter. An audit shall occur at a time and location designated by the City. In addition to an audit, the City may require a company to produce records related to an investigation of a specific allegation of a violation of this Code or other applicable law, or to evaluate a complaint. Production of records for an investigation or to evaluate a complaint does not count toward the twice-per-year auditing limit. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.070 Revocation, Suspension and Penalties.

A.    In addition to any other enforcement options provided by the code, the City may suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue a license if the taxi company or TNC has violated or not met any of the provisions of this Code. A violation includes any failure to meet or maintain any of the requirements or qualifications set forth in this Code, including the procedures and requirements for obtaining and maintaining a license, as well as the making of any materially false statement or representation. The decision to suspend, revoke or refuse to issue a license may be appealed to the City Council, which will conduct a hearing where the company and the City may present evidence and argument. The company shall have the burden of proving it has complied with all requirements of this Code necessary to obtain or maintain the license. The decision of the City Council on the appeal shall be the final decision of the City.

B.    A violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.080 Enforcement.

The City has the administrative authority to implement and enforce this chapter, including adoption of rules, regulations, or policies. This provision shall not be construed to abrogate or limit the jurisdiction or authority of the Bend Police Department or any law enforcement agency. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


7.35.090 Effective Date.

Anyone with a taxicab operator permit under previous BC Chapter 7.35, Taxicabs, valid as of the effective date of the ordinance repealing the previous chapter and creating this chapter is exempt from this chapter, Vehicles for Hire, until January 1, 2018, unless the permit holder wishes to apply under the new chapter at an earlier date. All existing taxicab operator permits issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance creating this chapter will expire automatically on December 31, 2017. [Ord. NS-2287, 2017]


Chapter 7.40 SPECIAL EVENTS Revised 5/19

Sections:

7.40.005    Definitions.

7.40.010    Special Event Permit Required.

7.40.015    Exceptions to Special Event Permit Requirement.

7.40.020    Special Event Permit Application, Fees and Costs.

7.40.025    Sanitary Facilities at Special Events.

7.40.030    Fire Protection Standards.

7.40.035    Accessibility.

7.40.040    Public Safety.

7.40.045    Parking Facilities.

7.40.055    Facility Inspection at Special Events.

7.40.060    Animals at Special Events.

7.40.065    Beer Gardens.

7.40.070    Street Closure.

7.40.075    Special Event Permit Approval, Suspension and Revocation.

7.40.080    Permit Denial.

7.40.085    Appeal and Complaint. Revised 5/19

7.40.090    Permit Information.

7.40.095    Inspection of Special Events.

7.40.100    Special Event Crowd Limitation.

7.40.105    Interference with a Special Event.

7.40.110    Special Event Banners, Displays and Information.

7.40.120    Events on District Property.

Prior legislation: Ord. NS-2143.


7.40.005 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Accessibility plan means a written plan, including a detailed site map, addressing accessibility needs for the event. The plan should include accessible parking, seating, sanitary facilities, communications, route(s) of travel, signage, loading zone, transportation, facilities, sales/display venues, assisted listening devices, and other amenities to the extent that these elements are provided to the public. The plan will also address how people with disabilities will be evacuated, if an emergency occurs.

B.    Beer garden means a temporary outdoor facility located on the site of a special event that dispenses beer or wine in accordance with a special beer or wine license issued by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

C.    District means the area encompassed by the perimeter of Newport, Greenwood, Hill, Franklin, Bond, Louisiana, Riverside, Tumalo, and Harmon streets.

D.    Parade means a procession of persons using the public right-of-way and consisting of 10 or more persons or three or more vehicles, with the exception of funeral processions.

E.    Special event includes all gatherings of more than 150 persons open to the public on City property or right-of-way. “Special event” includes parades. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.010 Special Event Permit Required.

A.    Special events are prohibited without a City special event permit.

B.    No more than three special events per month requiring a street closure are allowed in the district during July and August. No more than two events per month requiring a street closure are allowed at any other time. The Council may by motion allow events in the district requiring street closure in excess of the maximum otherwise allowed if the Council determines that:

1.    The street closure will be limited in location and/or duration or will occur at a time that will have minimal impact on downtown businesses; and

2.    The public benefit from the event is expected to outweigh any negative effect on downtown businesses.

C.    The City will maintain a calendar listing the date and location of each special event, date and location. Existing events have precedence over new events.

D.    Applications for special event permits must be submitted as far in advance as possible and no less than 90 days if for a new event and no less than 60 days if a repeat event in advance of the event in order to allow time for review by all affected City departments. A pre-application conference is required for special events that have not previously been approved by the City. The City Manager may waive the deadline if the applicant provides good cause why the applicant was unable to meet the deadline. [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2164, 2011; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.015 Exceptions to Special Event Permit Requirement.

The City may waive the special event permit requirement when no significant public health, safety or welfare issues are involved and when no police service or other City service is determined to be necessary. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.020 Special Event Permit Application, Fees and Costs.

A.    The applicant for a special event permit shall pay a permit fee in the amount set by Council resolution. The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursement of costs incurred by the City as a result of the special event. These costs may include any expenses or lost revenue incurred by the City. The City may require a deposit to cover anticipated costs. After the event, the City shall determine its actual costs, including staff time, and require payment if the deposit was insufficient for costs incurred, and shall refund any excess.

B.    Each application for a special event permit shall include:

1.    A complete application form that includes a description of the event, the number of people reasonably expected to attend, and a description of any amplified sound to be used;

2.    An accessibility plan;

3.    A security and/or crowd management plan;

4.    A parking plan;

5.    A communication plan;

6.    A traffic control plan;

7.    A sanitation plan;

8.    A fire protection plan;

9.    A map showing the location to be used for the event, and the number of persons reasonably anticipated to attend;

10.    Proof that the applicant has provided notice of the proposed event to any affected neighborhood association, and for events in the district, to the Downtown Bend Business Association. A neighborhood association is affected by an event if the event is held within or adjacent to the boundaries of the neighborhood;

11.    Evidence of insurance or that insurance will be issued; and

12.    The application fee.

Samples of accessibility plans, parking plans, communication plans, traffic control plans, sanitation plans and fire protection plans are available from the City.

C.    For parades, the application shall also include the route of the parade and assembly points, the proposed starting and ending time and the estimated number of participants (persons, vehicles and animals). The City may deny parade permits to avoid impact on transportation, businesses and public infrastructure projects. [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.025 Sanitary Facilities at Special Events.

The special event permittee shall provide sanitary facilities that are in accordance with applicable regulations. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.030 Fire Protection Standards.

Special events shall comply with the Oregon Fire Code and provisions in the Bend Code related to fire protection. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.035 Accessibility.

Special events shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.040 Public Safety.

A.    Adequate traffic control, fire control personnel and equipment, and crowd control and security shall be contracted for or otherwise provided by the applicant, and shall conform to the standards required by the City.

B.    If security is required at the special event, all security personnel must have appropriate identification identifying them as event crowd control or security. Additionally, security personnel may be required to wear a uniform or other item of identification.

All security personnel are required to present their state-issued certification card or PS-20 (temporary work permit) upon request to City officials when working.

C.    It shall be the duty of the security personnel to report any violations of law to the appropriate law enforcement agency.

D.    Access to public infrastructure must be maintained through the entire event as required by the City. The City may require event facilities to be located away from items such as hydrants, water valves, manholes and storm drains to ensure proper access.

E.    No objects may be thrown to onlookers by parade participants during a parade. [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.045 Parking Facilities.

Adequate parking facilities will be available for special events. Accessible parking facilities and transportation shall be shown in the parking plan. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.055 Facility Inspection at Special Events.

All facilities other than traffic control devices shall be in place at least two hours before the start of a special event so that the City may inspect them. Traffic control devices shall be placed in accordance with the approved traffic control plan prior to or contemporaneously with blockage of any vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian way. The special event permit may be suspended or revoked if the facilities or traffic control fails the inspection. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.060 Animals at Special Events.

A.    Event managers may prohibit individuals from bringing animals into an area where a special event is being held.

B.    This prohibition does not apply to service animals. [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.065 Beer Gardens.

Alcohol may be served in conjunction with a special event only in an approved beer garden, under the following conditions:

A.    The applicant has obtained a special retail beer or wine license from the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and City approval.

B.    The applicant must pay the fee set by Council resolution.

C.    The event organizer is responsible for security in the beer garden during the event. Security at a minimum shall include checking identification to assure alcohol consumption only by persons 21 and older, monitoring participants for indications of intoxication and/or disruptive behavior.

D.    All beer gardens will provide monitoring of the City-approved perimeter. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.070 Street Closure.

A.    No City street will be closed for a special event unless the City has approved the closure. Applications for a right-of-way permit for any sidewalk, lane or street closures shall be submitted no less than 90 days in advance and shall include a circulation and a traffic control plan (BC Chapter 3.40). If the street to be closed is a State highway, the applicant shall obtain approval from the Oregon Department of Transportation.

B.    Requests for street closures in the district will be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that the event cannot be held without a street closure or there is a specified safety reason to close the street(s). [Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.075 Special Event Permit Approval, Suspension and Revocation.

A.    Special event permits may be issued if:

1.    The application is consistent with this title;

2.    The proposed event will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the public health, welfare, and safety;

3.    The location is available for use and the event will not conflict with another permitted event;

4.    The event will not unreasonably interfere with traffic or businesses;

5.    The applicant has provided proof of liability insurance.

B.    The City may deny the permit if it does not meet the standards for approval in subsection (A) of this section.

C.    The City may impose conditions of approval on special event permits to assure compliance with this chapter, to protect public health and safety, and to limit the impact on parking, transportation, City-owned property and City-administered rights-of-way. The City may impose conditions governing the noise generated at the event, including decibel levels and time restrictions. Failure to comply with the conditions relating to noise shall constitute a violation of BC Chapter 5.50.

D.    The City may suspend or revoke a special event permit for violation of any provision of this chapter, failure to comply with a permit condition, or to protect public health and safety. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.080 Permit Denial.

The City shall deny a special event permit application if it does not meet the standards for approval in BC 7.40.075. If the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified of the reason for the denial. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.085 Appeal and Complaint. Revised 5/19

A.    Appeal by Applicant. If the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial to the City Council within five business days.

B.    Complaint. Any person may file a written or electronic complaint regarding a permitted special event within three months after the event takes place. The City will take such written or electronic comments into account prior to issuing any subsequent permits for the event. The City will attempt to notify the applicant of all complaints. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.090 Permit Information.

A special event permit shall contain the following information:

A.    Date, time, location of the event;



B.    Special conditions imposed on the activity;

C.    Signed acknowledgement by the applicant;

D.    Emergency contact information;

E.    A statement that the event permit may be suspended or revoked by the City. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.095 Inspection of Special Events.

The City and its authorized representatives shall have the right to enter all areas used for a special event to inspect and enforce this code and State law. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.100 Special Event Crowd Limitation.

If at any time during the special event the size of the crowd creates a health or safety hazard, the City may require the permittee to limit further admissions. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.105 Interference with a Special Event.

No person shall knowingly interfere with the conduct of a permitted special event or authorized activities of a special event participant. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.110 Special Event Banners, Displays and Information.

A.    Any signs placed in conjunction with a special event before, during or after the approved event date shall not deface or obstruct City property, including street signs.

B.    Signs for parades, races, tours or other mobile events must be temporary and easily removed. Removal of directional or informational signs will be the responsibility of the permittee. Signs must be placed so that they do not impair intersection and crosswalk vision clearances for pedestrians and motor vehicle operators and do not affect or impair emergency access routes.

C.    If road markings are used, only biodegradable, water-soluble material may be used. Such materials as chalk, flour and tape are acceptable but must be removed within 24 hours after the event. Sidewalks shall not be stenciled, painted, or marked in any fashion without express permission from the City.

D.    Temporary signs within the special event area are not subject to the City’s sign code during the special event. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.40.120 Events on District Property.

The Bend Park and Recreation District and the Bend-LaPine School District shall inform the City of any event held on their property by a third party when they receive the application for the event, and shall coordinate with the City regarding impacts on public safety, rights-of-way, or City property. [Ord. NS-2178, 2012]


Chapter 7.45 MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURES

Sections:

7.45.005    Purpose and Intent.

7.45.010    Definitions.

7.45.015    Manufactured Home Park Closure Permit.

7.45.020    Closure Impact Report.

7.45.025    Payment Plan.

7.45.030    Required Notifications.

7.45.035    Required Findings.

7.45.040    Conditions of Approval.

7.45.045    Enforcement.

7.45.050    Affordable Housing Density Bonus.


7.45.005 Purpose and Intent.

The purpose of these provisions is to protect public health and safety. The provisions are intended to mitigate the adverse impacts of mobile home park closures on park residents by ensuring that the closure is preceded by adequate notice, that the social and economic impacts of the involuntary relocation of tenants associated with the closure are adequately defined, and that relocation and other assistance is provided park residents. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter.

A.    Appraisal means a written statement independently and impartially prepared by a qualified and licensed appraiser setting forth an opinion of defined value of real property as of a specific date and meeting professional standards for an appraisal.

B.    Closure of a manufactured home park means the termination of manufactured home space rental agreements for all or a portion of the park spaces for the purpose of ceasing to use all or a portion of the park as a manufactured home park. Termination of tenancy for violation of rental agreements or park rules, actions required by the exercise of eminent domain or by order of State or local agencies shall not constitute closure of a manufactured home park.

C.    Comparable manufactured home park space means any space, lot, or parcel of land in Deschutes, Jefferson, Crook and northern Klamath Counties that is (1) decent, safe, and sanitary; (2) adequate in size to accommodate the manufactured dwelling; (3) within the financial means of the displaced tenant (the higher of rent not greater than current rent of tenant or a rent, with mortgage on home if applicable, that is not greater than 30 percent of tenant’s income).

D.    Manufactured home means a manufactured home, mobile home or residential trailer as these terms are defined in ORS 446.003(26).

E.    Manufactured home park means a place where four or more manufactured homes are located in a residential zone, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a fee as defined in ORS 449.003(27). Manufactured home parks not defined under this section must still complete the closure impact report prior to closing.

F.    Owner means a mortgagee in possession and means one or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to a manufactured home park or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the manufactured home park. “Owner” includes an authorized representative of the owner.

G.    Owner-tenant means a person who owns and occupies a manufactured dwelling in a manufactured home park. For the purpose of this chapter, a tenant does not include a tenant who has accepted an earlier termination date or contracted with the landlord as provided in ORS 90.630(6)(a) or (b). [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.015 Manufactured Home Park Closure Permit.

A.    Permit Required. No person may close a manufactured home park unless a manufactured home park closure permit has been obtained; provided, however, that nothing in this section is intended to limit or regulate in any manner a person’s ability to: (1) to apply for and obtain a plan amendment, zone change, or other land use decision pursuant to the City’s Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Ordinance; (2) sell, convey or transfer a manufactured home park; or (3) provide notification pursuant to Oregon State law.

B.    Scope of Permit Requirement – Construction. These provisions shall be construed as not to conflict with State law and shall be applied in a manner such that the provisions and State law operate concurrently.

C.    Application Filing. Applications for closure permits shall include the following information as may be required by this chapter and the City Manager or City Manager’s designee:

1.    A detailed narrative description of and timetable for the proposed closure;

2.    A report on the impact of the closure of the manufactured home park on its residents pursuant to BC 7.45.020;

3.    The payment plan pursuant to BC 7.45.025;

4.    Notice pursuant to BC 7.45.030;

5.    The application filing fee in an amount established by the City Council.

D.    Application Processing. Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Manager or designee shall review the application and, within 45 days of the receipt of the complete application, issue a decision either denying the application, approving the application, or approving the application with conditions. A decision of the City Manager or designee may be appealed to the Council by the owner of the park. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.020 Closure Impact Report.

A.    Any person filing an application for a closure permit shall file a closure impact report on the impact of the closure, change of use, or cessation of use upon the residents of the manufactured home park. The closure impact report shall include the following, as well as any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the City Manager or designee.

1.    A detailed description of the manufactured home spaces within the manufactured home park, including but not limited to:

a.    The total number of manufactured home spaces in the park and the number of spaces occupied;

b.    The length of time each space has been occupied by the present resident(s) thereof;

c.    The age, size, and type of manufactured home occupying each space;

d.    The monthly rent currently charged for each space, including any utilities or other costs paid by the present resident(s) thereof;

e.    Name and mailing address of the primary resident(s) and owner if different than occupant of each manufactured home within the manufactured home park. Tenant shall provide this information at request of park owner. Any refusal of cooperation by tenant for this information will negate any benefits for tenant under this chapter.

2.    The City of Bend will assist the park owner and tenants by providing a list of all comparable manufactured home parks spaces within Deschutes, Crook, and Jefferson Counties and northern Klamath County. This list shall include the age of the manufactured home park and the manufactured homes therein, a schedule of rents for each park listed, a listing of the vacancies in the parks and the criteria of the management of each park for acceptance of new tenants and used manufactured homes.

3.    A detailed analysis of the economic impact of the relocation on the tenants, including comparisons of current rents paid and rents to be paid at comparable manufactured home parks in Deschutes County, the estimated costs of moving a manufactured home and personal property and any direct or indirect costs associated with relocation to another manufactured home park.

4.    A list of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of one or more housing specialists with an explanation of the services the specialists will perform. These services shall include, but not be limited to, assistance in locating a suitable replacement manufactured home park, coordination of moving the manufactured home and personal property, and any other tasks necessary to facilitate the relocation to another comparable manufactured home park. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.025 Payment Plan.

A.    A payment plan for owner-tenants of the manufactured home park shall be submitted for review and approval as part of the application for a closure permit. The payment plan shall provide, at a minimum, for the following:

1.    Units That Can Be Relocated. The owner shall provide a list of each single-wide, double-wide and triple-wide unit that can be relocated and the name and contact information for each unit. The payment plan for units that can be relocated shall provide for the owner to pay the tenants the amount stipulated by Oregon State law (ORS 90.505 to 90.840) and, if the owner utilizes the increased density bonuses provided for in BC 7.45.050, to pay the owner-tenants the following amounts:

a.    For each single-wide unit an additional $1,000.

b.    For each double-wide unit an additional $3,000.

c.    For each triple-wide unit an additional $3,500.

These additional amounts shall be adjusted annually by the increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) based on the index published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, using the index U.S. City Average, All Items, All Urban Consumers, Not Seasonally Adjusted (1982-1984 = 100).

The park owner is not required to provide the additional amount(s) stated above to the tenant until such time as the manufactured home unit has been removed from the park.

In the event that the owner does not utilize the density bonus program contained in BC 7.45.050, the City may pay owner-tenants these amounts, subject to budgetary authority approved by the City Council prior to the subject fiscal year and subject to Council’s right to limit the total amount of payments on an annual basis.

2.    Units That Cannot Be Relocated. The payment plan shall identify those manufactured homes that cannot be relocated to a comparable manufactured home park space in Deschutes, Crook, Jefferson Counties and northern Klamath County. This list shall include the name and contact information for each owner-tenant. In the event that the owner utilizes the density bonus program contained in BC 7.45.050, the owner shall be required to offer to purchase any manufactured home that cannot be relocated in conformance with this chapter. The offer to purchase the manufactured home will be made at the greater of the:

a.    The real market value, per Deschutes County Property Records, of the home as reported on the most recent property tax assessment roll; or

b.    The amount required by Oregon State law (HB 2735 ORS 90.505 to 90.840).

B.    The owner shall be responsible for the cost of disposal of the mobile home park unit for those units that cannot be relocated. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.030 Required Notifications.

A.    Any written notice by the landlord of termination of a rental agreement because of facility closure and the land or leasehold being converted to a different use shall conform with the requirements of ORS 90.630 and provide at least the following information:

1.    The landlord’s or representative agent’s address for contact and communications;

2.    The firm date set for the closure of the facility or of the relevant portion of the facility;

3.    The actions and activities the landlord plans to take in the facility closure that may affect the facility tenants;

4.    The landlord’s obligations under ORS 90.630(5), (6), (7) and (8);

5.    The tenant’s rights under ORS 90.630(4) for a 365-day closure notice or 180-day closure notice, as applicable, including the right, if any, for payment of moving expenses under OAR 813-008-0030 and the eligible moving expenses defined under OAR 813-008-0025;

6.    The voluntary benefits, if any, to be provided to the tenant by the landlord or contracted between the parties, together with any shortened period between notice and termination of the rental agreement arising therefrom;

7.    A copy of ORS 90.630 and of OAR Chapter 813, Division 008;

8.    Any definitions referenced within these rules applicable to the tenant’s rights under these rules;

9.    A description of any City or County regulations, laws, or ordinances that apply to tenant interests in facility closures; and

10.    A list of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of one or more housing specialists with an explanation of the services the specialists will perform. These services shall include, but not be limited to, assistance in locating a suitable replacement manufactured home park, coordination of moving the manufactured home and personal property, and any other tasks necessary to facilitate the relocation to another comparable manufactured home park.

B.    Notices required by ORS 90.630 or by these rules shall be delivered personally or by first class mail to each affected tenant or tenant organization. If served by mail, the minimum period before facility closure shall be extended by three days, and the notice shall recite the fact and extent of the extension. The notice shall be delivered to the tenant at the address specified in the lease or rental agreement between the tenant and the landlord. In any sublet unit, the notice shall be delivered to the tenant at his or her current address and to the subtenant in possession. If the tenant’s address is unknown and not reasonably discoverable, his or her copy shall be delivered to the subtenant with written instructions to forward it to the tenant. Failure of the subtenant to deliver such copy to the tenant shall not limit the landlord’s right to terminate the rental agreement because of facility closure.

C.    For 365-day closure notices as provided in ORS 90.630(5)(a), the provisions of OAR 813-008-0020 through 813-008-0030 do not apply.

D.    For 180-day closure notices as provided in ORS 90.630(5)(b), the landlord shall comply with the provisions of OAR 813-008-0020 through 813-008-0030. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.035 Required Findings.

A.    The City Manager may approve a permit for a manufactured home park closure, only if the City Manager finds that the proposed closure meets the following requirements in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.

1.    That the tenants or tenants’ association of the manufactured home park have been adequately notified of the proposed closure, including information pertaining to the anticipated timing of the proposed closure;

2.    That the payment plan meets the requirements of BC 7.45.025;

3.    That, if the owner files a tentative plat or plan for a land division to be created from the closure of a rental manufactured home park, the owner provides all tenants offers and other information required by law. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.040 Conditions of Approval.

The City Manager or designee shall not deny, but must approve or conditionally approve, the permit involving the closure of the park or cessation of the use of the land as a manufactured home park, provided the applicant has properly complied with the requirements of this chapter and there is no evidence that the applicant or prior owners have attempted to evict or otherwise cause the removal of residents for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.045 Enforcement.

A.    Violations. Any person who closes a manufactured home park without a permit, who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or the conditions of the permit, or who willfully makes an untrue or misleading statement of material fact or willfully omits required information in the process of application, or whose actions, through the raising of rent or otherwise, objectively manifests an intent or effort to avoid the requirements to this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the penalty for any such violation shall be not greater than $1,000. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


7.45.050 Affordable Housing Density Bonus.

The City’s Zoning Ordinance authorizes increased density in Manufactured Home Park Overlay Zones through a density bonus program. To qualify for the density bonus program, the park owner must enter into a development agreement that commits to compliance with this section.

A.    A minimum of 10 percent of new units must meet the following affordability requirements:

1.    The owner must offer to qualified tenants who are being displaced and whose units cannot be moved the opportunity to either rent or purchase one of the affordable units.

2.    The mortgage/rent for these tenants shall not be greater than the higher of:

a.    Amount of current space rent and mortgage on home;

b.    Thirty percent of the family’s adjusted income per Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) standards; or

c.    Thirty percent of the income for a family at 50 percent of median income, based upon most recent HUD Income Limits for the Bend Metropolitan Statistical Area (Bend MSA), with family size corresponding to unit size as follows: For one-bedroom units the income shall be based upon a family of two. For two-bedroom units the income shall be based upon a family of three; for three-bedroom units the income shall be based upon a family of four; and for four-bedroom units the income shall be based upon a family of six.

3.    For rental developments, up to 10 percent of the newly created affordable units shall have a rent or mortgage that is affordable for a family at or below 30 percent of median income. The number of units that will be required to meet this threshold shall be based upon the income surveys of existing tenants. Income surveys of all existing tenants shall be initiated by the owner and tenants shall be required to provide verification information to the owner as condition of receiving benefits/housing under this section. Units created as part of this section must be offered to existing tenants whose incomes are at or below 30 percent of median income.

B.    Any displaced tenant-owner shall be assured of affordable transitional housing and the payment of any necessary and reasonable moving expenses for personal property to relocate from their existing unit to a transitional unit and from the transitional unit to the permanent housing in the new unit. Tenant shall be required to solicit a minimum of two bids from licensed moving companies and shall be required to take the lower of these bids. The allowable transitional relocation expenses shall not exceed:

1.    Actual reasonable expenses in moving family or other personal property.

2.    Actual direct losses of tangible personal property as a result of moving but not to exceed an amount equal to the reasonable expenses that would have been required to relocate such property, as determined by the City Manager or designee.

3.    An amount not to exceed $4,000 (adjusted annually by the increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) based on the index published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, using the index U.S. City Average, All Items, All Urban Consumers, Not Seasonally Adjusted (1982-1984 = 100)), in total for relocation to transitional housing and from transitional housing to permanent housing. However, during the period of transition, tenant will still be required to pay, for rent, the amount stated above in this section and comply with lease agreement and applicable Landlord Tenant Law. Any significant violations of lease will negate tenant rights under this chapter.

4.    Park owners may elect to contract for moving of tenant or may move tenants utilizing other resources; provided, that all bonding and insurance is satisfied for the moving of the belongings.

5.    Park owners may provide transitional housing, either on site or off site to meet the requirements of this section.

6.    Tenant-owners who cannot qualify for the new permanent unit due to rental history issues, credit worthiness or other factors shall not be eligible for relocation benefits under this section but shall receive compensation for their units as stated in BC 7.45.025. Income alone cannot be a factor in excluding someone from receiving benefits under this section.

C.    All tenant property in a park under closure notice shall remain secure and all services in rental agreements shall be provided to tenants remaining in park until closure.

D.    New rental units developed under the density bonus program shall meet the affordability requirements for not less than 20 years, beginning after project completion, and must be offered first to existing tenants in the park. The affordability requirements for the rental units apply without regard to the term of any loan or mortgage or the transfer of ownership. The requirements must be imposed by deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, or other mechanisms approved by the City of Bend, except that the affordability restrictions may terminate upon foreclosure or transfer in lieu of foreclosure. The City of Bend, the owner, or other entity having property rights in project may use purchase options, rights of first refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure to preserve affordability. The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner of record before the foreclosure, or deed in lieu of foreclosure, or any entity that includes the former owner or those with whom the former owner has or had family or business ties, obtains an ownership interest in the project or property. Rent for new units to be occupied by tenant-owners shall be as stated in this section. All other rental units required to meet the 10 percent of total unit requirement will have a rent that shall not exceed 30 percent of income for a family at 50 percent of median income per HUD Income Limits for Bend MSA and family size will be based upon unit size.

E.    Subsequent Rents for Units Vacated During Affordability Period. Units that are vacated by original tenants during the period of affordability shall remain available and rented to low-income tenants. Rents for these units shall not exceed 30 percent of income for tenants at 50 percent of median per HUD Income Limits for Bend MSA and family size will be based upon unit size as stated in this section. Owners of rental properties shall be required to submit an annual rent schedule for all units to the City of Bend.

1.    Rent Increases. Any increase in rents for assisted units is subject to the provisions of outstanding leases and, in any event, the owner must provide tenants of those units not less than 30 days’ prior written notice before implementing any increase in rents.

2.    Over-Income Tenants. Units continue to qualify as affordable housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by increases in the incomes of existing tenants, if actions satisfactory to City of Bend are being taken to ensure that all vacancies are filled in accordance with this section until the noncompliance is corrected.

F.    New affordable ownership units developed under the MHP Overlay Zone shall be acquired by an existing tenant or homebuyer whose family qualifies as a low-income family, and the housing must be the principal residence of the family throughout the period of affordability. Units shall be first offered to tenants being displaced.

1.    Mortgage Amounts. Mortgage for new units shall be as stated in this section for units that are to be sold to existing owner tenants. All other ownership units required to meet the 10 percent of total unit requirement will have a sales price whose mortgage shall not exceed 30 percent of income for a family at 80 percent of median income per HUD Income Limits for Bend MSA and family size will be based upon unit size.

2.    Periods of Affordability. The newly created/assisted ownership unit must remain affordable for a period of eight years. However, a portion of the gained equity shall be recaptured for a period of 20 years.

3.    Resale and Recapture. To ensure affordability, the property owner/developer must impose either resale or recapture requirements, at its option and upon agreement with the City of Bend. The resale or recapture requirements shall comply with the following standards:

a.    Resale. Resale requirements must ensure, if the housing does not continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of affordability, that the housing is made available for subsequent purchase only to a buyer whose family qualifies as a low-income family (80 percent of median income per HUD Income Limits for the Bend MSA) and will use the property as its principal residence. The resale requirement must also ensure that the price at resale provides the original assisted owner a fair return on investment (including the homeowner’s initial investment (down payment) and any capital improvement) and ensure that the housing will remain affordable to a reasonable range of low-income homebuyers.

b.    Transaction Documents. Deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, or other similar mechanisms must be used as the mechanism to impose the resale requirements. The affordability restrictions may terminate upon occurrence of any of the following termination events: foreclosure, transfer in lieu of foreclosure or assignment of an FHA insured mortgage to HUD. The owner/developer of the property, with approval of the City of Bend, may use purchase options, rights of first refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before foreclosure to preserve affordability. The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner of record before the termination event obtains an ownership interest in the housing.

c.    Recapture. Recapture provisions must ensure that the market value of the assistance to the homebuyers (real market value of property minus total cost to purchaser at time of initial sale/occupancy), if the housing does not continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of affordability, is recouped. Deed requirements shall ensure that this recaptured amount of funding is deposited with Neighbor Impact (or designated successor) and shall be utilized, minus administrative costs, to assist a future purchaser of the property. Neighbor Impact will market the property to eligible purchasers. Trust deeds, mortgages or other instruments of property transfer executed at time of sale shall ensure compliance with this section.

d.    Reduction During Affordability Period. The market value amount to be recaptured shall be reduced on a pro rata basis for the time the owner-tenant homeowner has owned and occupied the housing measured against the required affordability period. This shall be at a rate of 50 percent per year beginning in year six and accelerating to 100 percent per year beginning in year eight.

e.    Shared Net Proceeds. Upon recapture of market value of assistance, 10 percent of the amount of seller’s net proceeds shall be deposited in the City of Bend Affordable Housing Fee Fund to be utilized for affordable housing projects. This requirement shall expire 20 years after project completion.

f.    Uses of Recaptured Proceeds. All funding recaptured upon sale of any unit during period of affordability shall be utilized to assist a qualifying low-income homebuyer to purchase the unit. Portion of seller’s net proceeds recaptured shall be utilized as stated in this section. [Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 7.50 MARIJUANA BUSINESS OPERATING LICENSE Revised 5/19 Revised 8/19

Sections:

7.50.005    Applicability.

7.50.010    Purpose.

7.50.015    Definitions.

7.50.020    Administration. Revised 5/19

7.50.025    License required.

7.50.030    Term, transferability, change or modification. 

7.50.035    License fees.

7.50.040    Marijuana business operating license application. Revised 8/19

7.50.045    Standards of operation. Revised 5/19

7.50.050    Operating license approval or denial.

7.50.055    Operating license surrender. Revised 5/19

7.50.060    Operating license suspension/revocation.

7.50.065    Appeal.


7.50.005 Applicability.

This chapter applies to all marijuana businesses in the City of Bend, including businesses related to medical marijuana dispensaries, recreational marijuana facilities or the processing, producing, wholesaling or testing of marijuana, and licensed or registered by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or Oregon Health Authority. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to create an operating licensing and regulatory program for marijuana businesses to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to allow legitimate businesses to operate within the City of Bend while ensuring compatible and responsible business practices. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.015 Definitions.

The definitions in this chapter mean the terms as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.020 Administration. Revised 5/19

The City Manager shall (A) administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, (B) have the authority to issue written, electronic and oral interpretations consistent with its intent, and (C) be authorized to adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary to its proper administration and enforcement. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.025 License required. 

A.    A marijuana business operating license is a permission to operate any marijuana business operation in accordance with this chapter. A marijuana business operating license may be suspended, terminated, or revoked if the standards are not met, or if the business is sold or otherwise transferred as defined in this chapter. No person may engage in marijuana business without first obtaining an operating license, and renewal license(s) as required by this chapter.

B.    All marijuana businesses must obtain a marijuana operating license. Existing medical marijuana businesses must obtain the license by December 31, 2016, and annually thereafter. New businesses must file an operating license application with the City within 30 days of obtaining the land use permit to operate, and must renew the operating license annually thereafter. An operating license is required for each marijuana business type operating at a particular location.

C.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit a law enforcement agency’s ability to investigate unlawful activity in relation to a license issued pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.030 Term, transferability, change or modification. 

A.    Licenses under this chapter are valid for one year, and may not be transferred or assigned to any other person or entity. Licenses expire one year after the date of issuance unless validly renewed.

B.    Whenever the ownership structure of the marijuana business changes, or the marijuana business proposes changes which require Minimum Development Standards Review or Site Plan Review, the marijuana business must file an application for change or modification to the operating license. This application must be filed within 30 days after the effective date of any change to the ownership structure, or within 30 days after completion of Minimum Development Standards Review or Site Plan Review. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.035 License fees. 

Upon submission of the original application, the applicant shall submit a nonrefundable license fee as set by City Council resolution based on the cost of administering the program. The fee for license renewal or any change or modification will be one-half of the amount for an initial license, or the actual cost of service, whichever is higher. An application for renewal or change or modification that is untimely will be assessed the same fee as for an initial license. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.040 Marijuana business operating license application. Revised 8/19

An application for a marijuana business operating license, including a renewal or change or modification, must be on a City form and include the following information:

A.    The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant(s), including every person or entity with any ownership interest in the marijuana business.

B.    A statement that the applicant is fully aware and knowledgeable of the applicable rules and regulations established by the Oregon Health Authority, the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and this chapter.

C.    For medical marijuana businesses, proof that the Oregon Health Authority has registered the medical dispensary at the location on the application.

D.    For recreational marijuana businesses, proof that the Oregon Liquor Control Commission has registered the facility at the location on the application.

E.    An authorization signed by the property owner approving the use of the property by the applicant for the particular marijuana business type(s) specified on the application.

F.    A valid City of Bend business registration number for the business.

G.    A site plan and floor plan along with designation of the square footage for each use. A certificate of occupancy, when available. [Ord. NS-2342, 2019; Ord. NS-2281, 2016; Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.045 Standards of operation. Revised 5/19

A.    Hours of Operation. Marijuana recreational retail facilities and medical marijuana dispensaries must not open before 7:00 a.m. or remain open after 10:00 p.m.

B.    Building Requirement. Except for producing (grow) operations, all aspects of a recreational or medical marijuana business must be located inside a permanent building. Outdoor storage of marijuana and marijuana products for commercial sale is not allowed, except for production (grow) facilities as allowed by State regulation in the City’s industrial zones.

C.    On-Site Consumption. The on-site consumption of marijuana at marijuana businesses is prohibited unless:

1.    The consumption is conducted for testing in compliance with OAR 333-008-1190; or

2.    The consumption is allowed under the medical exception granted in OAR 333-008-1200.

D.    Display. All marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia must be completely screened from view from any point outside the marijuana business. There must be no visible marijuana, marijuana product, or marijuana paraphernalia from the exterior of the building or structure.

E.    Security. All marijuana businesses must include the following safety measures:

1.    Security lighting in parking lots, primary entrances, and exterior walkways to provide adequate visibility to employees and patrons.

2.    Installation of a fully operational security system, including a video surveillance system and alarm system.

3.    Any other security required by State law. Marijuana businesses may not have a walk-up and/or drive-through window.

F.    Disposal. Marijuana businesses must provide for secure disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products as required by State law and regulation. Marijuana remnants or by-products may not be placed for collection with regular solid waste or recyclables by the City’s solid waste collection franchisees.

G.    Admittance of Law Enforcement and Other Authorized Personnel. Marijuana businesses may not refuse or limit entry of law enforcement or other authorized personnel to the business or premises for legitimate law enforcement, inspection, or other regulatory purposes.

H.    Other City Regulations. The marijuana business must meet applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to building and fire codes and the Bend Development Code. The marijuana business must comply with the regulations of all other city departments, including but not limited to the Fire Department, Public Works and Utilities, the Building Division and Community Development, and must pay all required inspection and permitting fees. A license under this chapter will not be issued by the City of Bend until all required City approvals have been obtained. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.050 Operating license approval or denial.

A.    After receiving an application, the City may issue or renew an operating license to operate a marijuana business at the location identified in the application, or approve a change or modification to the operating license, if the City finds:

1.    The application is complete and accurate;

2.    The Oregon Health Authority and/or Oregon Liquor Control Board has registered the facility at the location indicated on the application; 

3.    The applicant has paid the required fee; and

4.    The applicant meets all requirements of this chapter, the Bend Development Code, applicable building and fire code standards, and any other applicable standards. 

B.    If the City denies any application under this chapter, the City shall notify the applicant promptly and state the reasons for the denial. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.055 Operating license surrender. Revised 5/19

A licensee may surrender a marijuana business operating license by delivering written or electronic notice to the City that the licensee voluntarily surrenders the license. A licensee’s surrender of a license under this section does not affect the licensee’s civil or criminal liability for acts the licensee may have committed before surrendering the license. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.060 Operating license suspension/revocation.

A.    The City may suspend or revoke a marijuana business operating license if:

1.    The licensee knowingly makes a material false statement or omission in connection with the application for or renewal of the license;

2.    The Oregon Health Authority and/or Oregon Liquor Control Commission revokes or suspends the registration of or the authority of the person responsible for the business to which the license pertains;

3.    The license is exercised in violation of any State or local law, rule or regulation; and/or 

4.    Noncompliance with any standard of operation contained in this chapter. 

B.    The factors to consider in determining whether to suspend or revoke a license include:

1.    The nature of the conduct constituting the grounds for suspension or revocation;

2.    The frequency of the conduct;

3.    The effect the conduct has upon the enjoyment of life, health and property of members of the community;

4.    The efforts of the person responsible for the business to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the conduct and the actual results of any action taken; and

5.    The costs to the City of investigating the conduct, including bringing the proceeding. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


7.50.065 Appeal. 

A.    Appeal to City Council. An applicant or owner may appeal a denial of an operating license or the decision to suspend or revoke a license to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal, including the basis for the appeal, and paying the appeal fee within 12 calendar days of the license suspension or revocation. The requirement to file a written notice of appeal and pay the fee is jurisdictional and late filings and/or payments are not allowed. The appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder.

B.    Appeal Fee. The appeal fee will be established by City Council resolution. The fee shall be sufficient to recover the average or actual costs of mailing notice of hearing and conducting the hearing. 

C.    Procedures. The City Manager may establish administrative procedures to implement the appeal procedures. The City Council may adopt procedures for hearings, including but not limited to time limits on oral testimony and limitations on written argument. 

D.    Hearing. Within 21 days of receiving the notice of appeal, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal before the City Council. At the hearing, the appellant shall have the opportunity to present evidence and arguments. The City Council may direct the City Attorney to draft findings of fact and interpretations of code or law to be considered at a later Council meeting.

E.    Standard of Review and Decision. After the hearing, the City Council shall decide whether to uphold the staff decision. 

F.    Finality. The City Council’s decision shall be final on the date of mailing the decision to the appellant. The City Council’s decision is the final decision of the City and is appealable only by writ of review to Deschutes County Circuit Court. [Ord. NS-2268, 2016; Ord. NS-2257, 2015]


Chapter 7.60 SHARED MICROMOBILITY BUSINESSES Revised 6/19

Sections:

7.60.005    Shared Micromobility Businesses. Revised 6/19


7.60.005 Shared Micromobility Businesses. Revised 6/19

A.    Shared micromobility business are businesses or other organizations that provide any transportation solution such as bikes, e-bikes, scooters, e-scooters, or any other small, lightweight vehicle used as a shared resource among multiple users that can be used for point-to-point trips. Shared micromobility businesses do not include businesses or other organizations that provide this kind of transportation solution from a fixed location that is not on City property or right-of-way, where the user returns the device to that location at the end of the for-hire period.

B.    No shared micromobility business may provide services or operate within the City without a valid license or permit, or upon receiving approval under a pilot-permitting or pilot-licensing program.

C.    Any violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2333, 2019]

 


Title 8 FIRE PREVENTION CODE Revised 2/20

Chapters:

8.10    Adoption of Fire Code Revised 2/20


Chapter 8.10 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE Revised 2/20

Sections:

8.10.010    Adoption of and Amendment to the 2019 Oregon Fire Code. Revised 2/20

8.10.015    Regulations.

8.10.020    Fire Prevention Division.

8.10.030    Limits and Exceptions on Storage of Regulated Materials.

8.10.040    Appeals.

8.10.050    Enforcement.


8.10.010 Adoption of and Amendment to the 2019 Oregon Fire Code. Revised 2/20

A.    The 2019 Oregon Fire Code, including Appendices B, C, D, K, N, Q, R, S and T (the “Fire Code”), is adopted as fire protection regulations within the City.

B.    The fire code official for the City is the Fire Chief or designee. [Ord. NS-2359, 2019; Ord. NS-2274, 2016; Ord. NS-2153, 2010]


8.10.015 Regulations.

The City Fire Code Official may adopt regulations and policies implementing and providing additional procedures for administration of the Fire Code. Any adopted regulations shall be available on the City’s website. [Ord. NS-2274, 2016; Ord. NS-2153, 2010]


8.10.020 Fire Prevention Division.

The fire prevention division is established within the Fire Department under the direction of jurisdiction of the fire code official to implement, administer and enforce the Fire Code and this chapter. The fire code official may appoint a deputy fire code official and other officers, inspectors and employees. [Ord. NS-2153, 2010]


8.10.030 Limits and Exceptions on Storage of Regulated Materials.

A.    All limits on storage of hazardous and combustible materials, including, but not limited to, liquefied petroleum gases, compressed natural gases, explosives, and flammable cryogen liquids, established in the Fire Code shall apply within the City, except as provided in subsections (B) through (G) of this section. All references to tables and sections are references to provisions in the Fire Code.

B.    Materials in excess of the limits imposed by Tables 5003.1.1(1) through (4) and Sections 5003, 5303, 6104.2, and 5504 may only be stored in General Industrial Zones in areas that are not heavily populated or congested. Any material stored in tanks must be in tanks approved by the Fire Code Official.

C.    Materials may be stored in excess of the limits imposed by Table 5003.1.1(1) through (4) in Light Industrial Zones in an approved tank or tanks with written approval of the Fire Code Official.

D.    Flammable and combustible liquids used solely for emergency equipment may be stored in approved tanks in excess of the limits imposed by Tables 5003.1.1(1) through (4) but not exceeding the limits imposed in Chapter 6.

E.    Flammable and combustible liquids in excess of the limits imposed by Tables 5003.1.1(1) through (4) may be stored in approved tanks with written approval of the Fire Code Official.

F.    Limited amounts of non-mass-detonating explosives as defined in Sections 5601.8.1.2 and 5601.8.1.3 are allowed in areas that are not heavily populated or congested if approved in writing by the Fire Code Official and stored and used within the scope of nationally recognized standards.

G.    Amounts of hazardous material in excess of the limits in Section 5003 may be stored in Light Industrial Zones not heavily populated or congested. Limited amounts of hazardous materials in excess of the limits imposed by Section 5003 may be stored in commercial areas not heavily populated or congested if approved in writing by the Fire Code Official and stored and used within the scope of nationally recognized standards. [Ord. NS-2274, 2016; Ord. NS-2153, 2010]


8.10.040 Appeals.

Appeals of any decision of the Fire Code Official may be appealed by filing a written appeal with the City Recorder within 10 days of the decision. The City Manager will decide the appeal based on the written appeal document and any written response from the Fire Code Official. The City Manager’s decision may be appealed to the Regional Appeal Advisory Board under ORS 479.180 within 10 days from the date of the City Manager’s decision. [Ord. NS-2153, 2010]


8.10.050 Enforcement.

Violation of any provision of the Fire Code or this chapter, or any order or permit issued under the Fire Code or this chapter, is a Class A civil infraction. Each day that a violation remains is a separate infraction. The civil infraction remedy is in addition to any other legal or equitable remedy. [Ord. NS-2153, 2010]


Title 9 BUILDINGS Revised 6/19 Revised 7/19 Revised 2/20

Chapters:

9.10    Building Codes Revised 2/20

9.20    Moving Buildings

9.30    Wildfire Hazard Zone

9.40    Affordable Housing Fee Revised 7/19

9.50    Signs Revised 6/19


Chapter 9.10 BUILDING CODES Revised 2/20

Sections:

9.10.010    Authority of Building Official. Revised 2/20

9.10.015    Additional Local Authority. Revised 2/20

9.10.020    Stop Work Orders. Revised 2/20

9.10.025    Occupancy Violations. Revised 2/20

9.10.030    Validity of Permit. Revised 2/20

9.10.040    Suspension/Revocation. Revised 2/20

9.10.050    Permit Expiration, Extension and Reinstatement. Revised 2/20

9.10.060    Fees. Revised 2/20

9.10.070    Violation and Penalty. Revised 2/20


9.10.010 Authority of Building Official. Revised 2/20

The City of Bend Building Official is authorized to administer and enforce this chapter and the following State of Oregon Codes for the City of Bend, and shall have all authority granted by these codes:

A.    The Oregon Structural Specialty Code;

B.    The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code;

C.    The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code;

D.    The Oregon Electrical Specialty Code;

E.    The Oregon Residential Specialty Code;

F.    The manufactured dwelling park and mobile home park rules;

G.    The manufactured dwelling rules;

H.    The recreational park and organization camp rules; and

I.    All referenced material within the above codes. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.10.015 Additional Local Authority. Revised 2/20

The City of Bend Building Official has the additional authority to regulate the following:

A.    1.    Pursuant to the regulation of dangerous buildings, the Building Official may adopt seismic rehabilitation plans that provide for phased completion of repairs that are designed to provide improved life safety but that may be less than the standards for new buildings.

2.    Abatement of nuisances and dangerous buildings.

3.    Fire safety during construction.

4.    Demolition.

5.    Protection of adjoining property.

6.    Encroachments into the public way.

7.    Retaining walls.

8.    Fences.

9.    Tanks.

10.    Cellular phone, radio, television and other telecommunication and broadcast towers, in compliance with Federal law.

11.    Flagpoles.

12.    Building Code aspects of signs.

13.    Floating structures.

14.    Docks.

15.    Fixed piers or wharves.

16.    Equipment shelters.

17.    Administration and implementation of a National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

18.    Transitional housing accommodations.

19.    Matters related to structures that are not otherwise encompassed by this code.

B.    Right of Entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code or to exercise the authority of the Building Official, or where the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry required. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

C.    Certificate of Occupancy. Issuance of certificate of occupancy is contingent upon the requirements of the State of Oregon building codes as well as other applicable City requirements.

D.    Service Utilities.

1.    Connection of Service Utilities. A person shall not make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until released by the Building Official.

2.    Temporary Connection. The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power.

3.    Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities. The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the building code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or where such utility connection has been made without the approval required by subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2) of this section. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.

E.    Unsafe Structures and Equipment.

1.    Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the Building Official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.

2.    Record. The Building Official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.

3.    Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the Building Official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

4.    Method of Service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is: delivered to the owner personally; sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested; or delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner on the owner’s agent or on the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice on the owner.

5.    Restoration. Where the structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the Building Official is restored to a safe condition, to the extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions and change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of the Building Code. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019]


9.10.020 Stop Work Orders. Revised 2/20

A.    Authority. Whenever the Building Official finds any work regulated by any code of this jurisdiction being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or any other code of this jurisdiction or dangerous or unsafe, the Building Official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

B.    Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.10.025 Occupancy Violations. Revised 2/20

When any structure regulated under this chapter is used contrary to the provisions of the codes adopted by this chapter, the Building Official may order the use discontinued and the structure (or a portion of the structure) vacated. The use of the structure (or portion of the structure) must be discontinued within the time prescribed by the Building Official in the notice and may not be resumed until the use and structure are brought into compliance as determined in writing by the Building Official. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2205, 2013]


9.10.030 Validity of Permit. Revised 2/20

The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other laws or ordinances of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other laws or ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The Building Official is also authorized to prevent or vacate occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.10.040 Suspension/Revocation. Revised 2/20

The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.10.050 Permit Expiration, Extension and Reinstatement. Revised 2/20

A.    Every permit issued by the Building Official shall expire and become null and void if the building or work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the permit, or if the building or work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. The building or work authorized is considered suspended or abandoned if no approved inspections are acquired for 180 days.

B.    Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work is to be completed. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented work from being completed. Extensions may be granted only if the following conditions exist:

1.    The applicable building codes have not changed since the permit was issued.

2.    The applicable land use standards have not changed since the land use approval or, for outright permitted uses, the date of the building permit application.

Extensions may only be granted if the Building Official determines that the building project is likely to be completed in a reasonable time.

C.    Where a permit has expired, the permit may be reinstated and the work authorized by the original permit can be recommenced, provided the following are met:

1.    The conditions listed above for extensions exist;

2.    No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and

3.    The original permit expired less than one year from the request to reinstate.

The Building Official can review and approve exceptions at the Building Official’s discretion if the preceding criteria cannot be met. The fee for a reinstated permit will be proportional to the amount of review and inspection required as compared to the amount required for a new application and permit. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.10.060 Fees. Revised 2/20

Fees charged under this code shall be as provided by Council resolution. The Building Official may authorize the refunding of fees paid in accordance with the refund policy in effect in the jurisdiction. The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.10.070 Violation and Penalty. Revised 2/20

A violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction, unless some other penalty is specified in the applicable specialty code or State law. In the case of a continuing violation, every day’s continuance of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. A person cited for a violation of this chapter has the right to a hearing before a hearings officer appointed by the City Manager. The hearings officer may be a City employee other than an employee of the Building Division. [Ord. NS-2358, 2019; Ord. NS-2179, 2012]




Chapter 9.20 MOVING BUILDINGS

Sections:

9.20.010    Permit Required to Move Buildings.

9.20.020    Application.

9.20.030    Requirements.

9.20.040    Permit Issuance.

9.20.050    Moving to a Location in the City.

9.20.060    Appeal of Permit Denial.

9.20.070    Tires.

9.20.080    Limitation of Permits.

9.20.090    Violation.


9.20.010 Permit Required to Move Buildings.

No person may move a building on or through rights-of-way located within the City without a building moving permit issued by the Building Official. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.020 Application.

The application for a building moving permit must include the following:

A.    A completed City application form showing the route to be taken in moving the building, the date and time the building will be moved (including the approximate length of time which may be consumed in the moving process), and the dimensions of the vehicle used to transport the house when loaded with the house which is being moved.

B.    Written approvals of the move from all utility companies with overhead lines along the route.

C.    A deposit for damages of $5,000.

D.    A certificate of insurance demonstrating liability insurance with minimum policy limits at least equal to the City’s tort liability limits. The policy shall include the City of Bend, its officers and employees as additional insured for all actions relating to the issuance of the permit and movement of the building.

E.    The permit fee in the amount established by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.030 Requirements.

A.    The building may be moved on the route authorized in the permit.

B.    Applicant shall provide, at applicant’s expense, an escort for the building at all times while the building is in the right-of-way. The escort shall be either a regular or reserve City of Bend police officer or other responsible person approved by the Police Chief. Arrangements for escort shall be made at least 24 hours in advance with the Police Chief.

C.    The applicant must notify all utility companies controlling or maintaining power, telephone, cable, or other overhead lines along the route of the move at least one week before the moving date of the intended move, with details on the date, time and route.

D.    The permittee shall promptly repair, to the satisfaction of the City of Bend, any damage to any public or private property resulting from the moving of the building.

E.    If the applicant fails to repair damage promptly, the City may repair the damage and deduct the cost of repairs from the funds deposited with the application and may take appropriate legal action to collect damages in excess of those posted with the City. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.040 Permit Issuance.

The Building Official may deny the permit if the application materials are incomplete or insufficient, if the building cannot be safely moved along the described route, or if the move will create an unacceptable impact on rights-of-way, utility facilities, or adjoining properties. The Building Official may impose conditions of approval, including conditions relating to the time of the move, the route followed, equipment to be used, traffic control measures to be taken, or other conditions to protect public safety and public and private property. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.050 Moving to a Location in the City.

If the building is being moved to a location within the City, the permit may not be issued until the Building Official has conducted an inspection of the building to be moved and has generally advised the permittee what will be necessary to bring the building into compliance with all applicable laws, codes and regulations after it has been moved. The permit will not be issued until a building permit has been obtained to site the building in its new location. The building must be installed on a permanent foundation in conformance with all applicable laws, codes and regulations within 60 days of the date of the move, and the moved building must comply with all applicable laws, codes and regulations within 120 days of the move. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.060 Appeal of Permit Denial.

The applicant may appeal the denial of a permit by submitting a written appeal to the City Council, which shall hear the appeal at the next Council meeting that is at least five days after the date the appeal is filed. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.070 Tires.

Buildings moved under this chapter must be moved on equipment with inflated pneumatic tires of sufficient size to reasonably carry the load being moved without damage to the surface on which the load is moved. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.080 Limitation of Permits.

The issuance of a permit does not authorize the permittee to break, injure, damage, or move public utility facilities, trees, or other public or private property without written permission from the owner of the property. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.20.090 Violation.

A violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. Every day’s continuance of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


Chapter 9.30 WILDFIRE HAZARD ZONE

Sections:

9.30.010    Wildfire Hazard Zone Established.


9.30.010 Wildfire Hazard Zone Established.

A Wildfire Hazard Zone is adopted for all areas in the City of Bend. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


Chapter 9.40 AFFORDABLE HOUSING FEE Revised 7/19

Sections:

9.40.010    Affordable Housing Fee Imposed.

9.40.020    Special Revenue Fund.

9.40.030    Permitted Expenditures.

9.40.040    Median Income Requirement.

9.40.050    Repealed. Revised 7/19


9.40.010 Affordable Housing Fee Imposed.

A fee of one-third of one percent of permit valuation, for all building permits, shall be assessed at time of building permit application. [Ord. NS-2255, 2015; Ord. NS-2179, 2012; Ord. NS-2167, 2011]


9.40.020 Special Revenue Fund.

Funding received from this source shall be deposited in special revenue fund and only be spent for affordable housing programs and projects evaluated pursuant to the priorities established through the City of Bend Consolidated Plan and administration of the affordable housing programs and projects. Any loan proceeds from this source shall be returned to the fund. In years where fee collections are sufficient so that less than 10 percent of the total fee covers permitted administrative expenses as defined in BC 9.40.030, that excess amount, not to exceed 10 percent of total collected, shall be placed in a reserve account to cover future permitted administrative costs with the long-term goal of annual administrative costs not to exceed 10 percent of total annual collected fees. Repaid loan amounts shall not be included assessing administrative cap expenses. Applications for and awarding of this funding shall be done on an annual basis by the City Council and will utilize the City of Bend’s Affordable Housing Advisory Committee’s recommendations. The fund shall not be used to pay for General Fund programs or other programs not related to the provision of affordable housing and the administration of the City’s affordable housing program. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012]


9.40.030 Permitted Expenditures.

Permitted expenditures shall include:

A.    One full-time equivalent (FTE) employee shall be authorized for purposes of administration of this program and the Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG). This employee shall be primarily funded by the administrative allowance of the CDBG program. If the Federal allocation is not sufficient to meet the entire FTE cost, the remainder shall be provided for by the City of Bend affordable housing fee funds.

B.    In addition to the employee specified in subsection (A) of this section, the following administrative purposes may be paid for from the Affordable Housing Fund:

1.    General Management, Oversight and Coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. Such costs include, but are not necessarily limited to, necessary expenditures for the following:

a.    Salaries, wages, and related costs of staff for program administration. This may include the entire salary, wages, and related costs allocable to the program of each person whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program involve program administration assignments, or the pro rata share of the salary, wages, and related costs of each person whose job includes any program administration assignments. Program administration includes the following types of assignments:

i.    Providing local officials and citizens with information about the program;

ii.    Preparing program budgets and schedules, and amendments thereto;

iii.    Developing systems for assuring compliance with program requirements;

iv.    Developing interagency agreements and agreements with subrecipients and contractors to carry out program activities;

v.    Monitoring program activities for progress and compliance with program requirements;

vi.    Preparing issue summaries, reports and other documents related to the program;

vii.    Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings;

viii.    Evaluating program results against stated objectives;

ix.    Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program include such assignments as those described above; and

x.    Payment of reasonable administrative costs and carrying charges related to the planning and execution of activities assisted in whole or in part with affordable housing fee funding.

b.    Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program;

c.    Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such services as general legal services related to projects funded through this program, accounting services, and audit services; and

d.    Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and rental and maintenance of office space.

2.    Public Information. The provisions of information and other resources to residents and citizen organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of activities being assisted with affordable housing fee funds.

3.    Indirect Costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the affordable housing fee program under the City of Bend Cost Allocation program. Indirect costs may not exceed three percent of the balance of unobligated funds on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year.

C.    Project Costs. Costs related to completion of specific projects shall be allocated to the specific project. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012; Ord. NS-2167, 2011]


9.40.040 Median Income Requirement.

Affordable housing fee proceeds may be targeted for housing opportunities for residents at or below 100 percent of area median income. [Ord. NS-2179, 2012; Ord. NS-2167, 2011]


9.40.050 Expiration. Revised 7/19

Repealed by Ord. NS-2345. [Ord. NS-2220, 2014; Ord. NS-2179, 2012; Ord. NS-2167, 2011]


Chapter 9.50 SIGNS Revised 6/19

Sections:

9.50.010    Purpose and Applicability.

9.50.020    Pre-Application Conference.

9.50.030    Definitions. Revised 6/19

9.50.040    Permit Requirements and Sign Districts. Revised 6/19

9.50.050    Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements.

9.50.060    Temporary Signs.

9.50.070    Prohibited Signs.

9.50.080    Sign District Regulations. Revised 6/19

9.50.090    Standards for Permanent Signs. Revised 6/19

9.50.095    Mural Sign Regulations. Revised 6/19

9.50.100    General Requirements.

9.50.110    Procedures.

9.50.120    Amendments.

9.50.130    Formal Interpretation.

9.50.140    Variance.

9.50.150    Adjustment to Standards.

9.50.160    Appeals.

9.50.170    Sign Plan.

9.50.180    Historic Landmarks. Revised 6/19

9.50.190    Nonconforming Sign.

9.50.200    Enforcement.

9.50.210    Severability.

Exhibit


9.50.010 Purpose and Applicability.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate signs that are visible from streets or which are visible from one site to another to provide reasonable regulations for the design, construction, placement and maintenance of signs in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. The intent is not to regulate content, only the number, type, location, height and size of signs. This chapter has the following objectives:

A.    To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained to assure public and traffic safety;

B.    To reflect and support the desired character and development patterns of the community;

C.    To allow adequate and effective signs without dominating the visual landscape;

D.    To balance the needs of business with the desire to preserve and enhance the visual character of the City.

The sign standards are intended to allow for signs with adequate visibility to streets that abut the site but not necessarily to streets farther away.

All new signs must comply with the provisions of this chapter in effect when the sign is installed or a permit is applied for. [Ord. NS-2292, 2017]


9.50.020 Pre-Application Conference.

A pre-application conference with the City of Bend is recommended for applicants who are unfamiliar with the sign permit process. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the procedural requirements and to identify issues likely to arise in processing an application.


9.50.030 Definitions. Revised 6/19

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

Alteration means the modification of the size, shape, or height of a sign; also includes changes to the sign location, illumination, and the replacement of sign materials with other comparable materials, such as the replacement of wood parts with metal parts. “Alteration” does not include normal maintenance and repair of an existing sign or changing the sign colors or sign copy on a removable sign face or sign panel insert in a cabinet style sign.

Animated sign means any sign that incorporates movement by electric, mechanical or kinetic means including, but not limited to, rotation, revolving or wind activation of all or a portion of sign; or incorporating flashing or intermittent light for sign illumination, including rotating or intermittent lighting in windows and on buildings.

Awning means a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable.

Awning sign means a sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an awning. The entire awning shall be included in the sign area calculation when the awning is backlit and the awning material exhibits the characteristics of luminosity obtained by means of a source of illumination.

Banner means a flexible material on which a sign or graphic may be displayed. Banners are temporary signs and do not include flags as defined in this section. Banners include tear drop flags and similar signs.

Billboards are only those freestanding sign structures which are identified in Table 3.

Building signs are those that are attached, painted, etched or otherwise installed on a structure. Building signs include wall signs, window signs, projecting signs, awning and canopy signs.

Canopy, attached means a multi-sided overhead structure supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at additional points.

Canopy, freestanding means a multi-sided overhead structure supported by columns, but not enclosed by walls, which is installed as a permanent building structure under which vehicles can be driven.

Clear vision area means the area in which no sign structure or device is permitted to dangerously limit the visibility of persons in motor vehicles on streets or alleys.

Copy means the text, graphics or message of a sign.

Directory sign means a sign with multiple sign panels designed to be read on site, located at a multi-tenant development or group of buildings.

Discernible means the physical attributes of a sign that allow for an observer’s differentiation of its letters, words, numbers, or graphics.

Flag means a piece of fabric attached to a flag pole or other support on one side, excluding banners. The length at right angles to the support must be at least as long as the length of the attached side.

Freestanding sign means a sign principally supported by one or more columns, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground. Ground-mounted, monument and pole signs are subtypes of freestanding signs.

1.    Ground-mounted sign means a freestanding sign with a solid base directly and continuously connected to at least 50 percent of the sign face width or with two bases of at least 12 inches in width, measured at the narrowest dimension, each. The lowest portion of the sign face in a ground-mounted sign is at least 12 inches, but less than eight feet, above grade.


[IMAGE]


2.    Monument sign means a freestanding sign that has a solid supporting base equal to or greater than the width of the sign face and at least 12 inches high with no separations between the sign and base. The sign and base may be one integrated unit. If not an integrated unit, the supporting base shall be a minimum 12-inch vertical height.


[IMAGE]


3.    Pole sign means a freestanding sign with the lower edge of the sign face located from one to eight feet above grade and that is not a monument or a ground-mounted sign.


[IMAGE]


Grade means the existing landscape before construction or newly established landscape after construction, exclusive of any berming, filling, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of elevating a freestanding sign.

Illuminated sign means a sign that contains or consists of lights or a light source or that is illuminated by another light source intended primarily to illuminate the sign. The following definitions apply to illuminated signs:

1.    Exposed illumination means a light source that is seen such as neon, fiber optics and bare bulbs that are not external illumination.

2.    External illumination means an external light source directed to illuminate the exterior surface of the sign. External illumination includes downlit (lit from above), uplit (lit from below) and backlit; provided, that the light does not transmit through translucent material.

3.    Internal illumination means a source of illumination entirely within the sign which makes the sign face visible at night by means of light being transmitted through a translucent material and where the source of illumination is not visible.

4.    Opaque means any material which does not allow light to pass through it.

5.    Translucent means any material which allows light to pass through it.

Light pole means any luminaire set on a pole which raises the source of light off of the ground. The pole must be permanent and supported by a footing. New luminaires must comply with the Outdoor Lighting Ordinance.

Lot means a legally created parcel of land.

Mansard roof means a four-sided roof having a double slope on all sides, with the lower slope much steeper than the upper.

Model means any three-dimensional object displayed for advertising purposes including, but not limited to, graphics, logos, models of people, bottles, animals, buildings, ships, and aircraft; sculpture; vehicles; hot air balloons.

Multiple-faced primary freestanding sign means a primary freestanding sign with three or more separate sign cabinets, or one or more sign cabinets with three or more separate sign panels, designed to allow replaceable copy without altering the sign. “Alteration” is as defined in this section.


[IMAGE]


Mural signs are a subcategory of a wall sign and consist of paint applied directly to the exterior wall of a building, or the mural sign consists of paint applied directly on a structure and is not a sign type included in Table 1. Mural signs may not include any additional materials including, but not limited to, electrical components or lighting, dimensional structural elements, or automated methods that cause changes in the appearance of the mural.

Nonconforming sign means a sign that was lawful when erected, but that does not comply with this chapter.

Nonstructural trim means the molding, battens, caps, latticing, cutouts or letters attached to the sign structure.

Parapet wall means the extension of a false building wall that extends above the edge of the roof.

Permanent sign means any sign that is affixed to a building, window, or structure, or to the ground in a manner that enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or movement of the sign.

Portable sign means a movable sign that is not attached to a structure or the ground. Portable signs include A-frame signs, T-frame signs, and similar signs.

Primary facade means that portion of a building facade providing the primary public entrance into the primary use building and which may or may not face the public street, also known as a storefront. Multiple-tenant buildings may have individual primary facades or share a common primary facade. The primary is located on the first story and provides pedestrian access into the building from sidewalks, parking lots, and/or other areas from the first floor. The primary shall be the basis for determining the permissible sign area for building signs.

Primary freestanding sign means a freestanding sign installed adjacent to and oriented towards a right-of-way.

Principal use building means the building in which the principal use of the site is conducted. Sites with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings; however, storage buildings, garages and other accessory structures or uses shall not be considered as the principal use building.

Projecting sign means a sign that projects from and is supported by a wall of a building with the display surface of the sign in a plane perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the wall.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes and as further defined, by rule, by the Director of the Department of Consumer and Business Services.

Right-of-way means land that is owned by the public for transportation and utility facilities.

Roof sign means a sign which is affixed on the slope of the roof or roof-mounted equipment structure or projects higher than the roofline or roof eave. Signs on parapet walls or mansards are considered wall signs.


[IMAGE]


Roofline means the top edge of a roof or building parapet; excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other projections.

Sign means the physical components of materials placed or constructed primarily to convey a message or other display.

Sign band means the prominent flat horizontal area located on the first story of a building directly above storefronts or primary entrances and architecturally designed for wall-mounted signs.

Sign District means a specified boundary within the City, as designated by City Council and incorporated into the Sign District Map, which is attached to and made a part of this chapter. See Exhibit B.

Sign face means the surface upon, against or through which the sign copy or message is displayed or illustrated.

Site means a lot or contiguous lots under common ownership developed under a development approval.

Street frontage means the width of a legal tax lot measured along the line separating the lot from a street.

Suspended sign means a sign attached to the underside of a canopy or awning and supported by the canopy or awning.

Temporary sign means a sign that is intended to be placed for a brief time, and is not a permanent sign.

Urgent care center means a medical facility that delivers unscheduled ambulatory treatment for issues that require immediate care but are not serious enough to require treatment at a hospital 24-hour emergency department.

Wall sign means a single-sided sign that is attached to or painted on an exterior wall of a building, parapet or mansard so that the sign face is parallel or approximately parallel to and within 18 inches of a building wall, parapet or mansard. A mural sign is a subcategory of a wall sign.

Window area means an individual pane of glass or a contiguous area of glass separated by nonstructural elements of dissimilar (non-glass) material or by structural materials.

Window sign means any sign applied, painted, or affixed to a window, or displayed inside the building within two feet of a window or building opening so that it is oriented to the window. Customary displays of merchandise behind a store window are not considered window signs. [Ord. NS-2340, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2292, 2017; Ord. NS-2279, 2016]


9.50.040 Permit Requirements and Sign Districts. Revised 6/19

A.    Sign Permit Required. Unless exempted under this chapter or as authorized by BC 9.50.190, Nonconforming Signs, sign permits are required for:

1.    New signs.

2.    Alterations to an existing sign.

3.    Relocation of a sign.

4.    Mural signs.

B.    Sign District Boundaries. Sign districts are shown on the map attached as Exhibit B. Sign district boundary lines are at the centers of public rights-of-way or the center of a river. [Ord. NS-2340, 2019; Ord. NS-2292, 2017]


9.50.050 Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements.

The following signs are allowed in all sign districts without a sign permit and are not included in the determination of the type, number, or area of permanent signs allowed. All signs, even those exempt from permitting, must comply with sign placement and maintenance requirements.

A.    Flags mounted on a pole in the ground or on a building are exempt but are subject to Development Code height regulations and must be located and constructed so that, if the pole should collapse, its reclining length would be contained on the property on which it is installed, subject to the following limitations:

1.    Three flags per site under six acres.

2.    Six flags per site over six acres.

B.    Required or Authorized Signs.

1.    Official and legal notices required or authorized by a court or governmental agency;

2.    Signs placed in the public right-of-way by the entity responsible for administering the right-of-way, or by a governmental authority providing transit services within the right-of-way to the extent that the signs are part of a transit stop.

C.    Signs which are placed inside a building or structure and which are either not visible through window or building openings or are not intended to be visible from outside the building or structure.

D.    One nonilluminated wall or window sign located on or below the second story window opening for nonresidential uses with a maximum sign area of three square feet or one nonilluminated sign located on site in a residential zone with a maximum sign area of three square feet.

E.    One wall or window sign limited to two square feet in area per primary facade or below, except in Sign District 5 the sign must be nonilluminated.

F.    Signs not greater than four feet in height with a sign area not exceeding six square feet per side and not discernible from a public right-of-way or private street with a public access easement.

G.    One permanent freestanding sign not greater than four feet in height with a sign area not exceeding four square feet located at a driveway entrance to a nonresidential property.

H.    Signs located within a sports stadium or athletic field and oriented to the playing field or spectator areas.

I.    Signs that are carried or worn by humans or animals are allowed at all times while they are being carried or worn.

J.    Light Pole Banner. Banners attached to light poles must comply with the following minimum standards:

1.    Banners attached to light poles are allowed for nonresidential uses. Banners must not be located in or project over a street or right-of-way or be attached to a City-owned pole except as authorized by the City of Bend.

2.    Not more than two banners are permitted on a single light pole.

3.    Banners must be vertically installed and must not project more than 36 inches from the light pole. Banners’ sizes must not exceed 30 inches in width and 60 inches in length. Supporting brackets must be attached to the top and bottom of the banner. The banner must be a minimum of eight feet above the finished grade below the sign, 16 feet when located above areas accessed by vehicles.

4.    Stringing attachments or supporting devices between any two or more light poles or between light poles and other objects is prohibited.

5.    Light pole banners must be maintained in accordance with BC 9.50.100(E)(2).

6.    Light pole banners must be attached only on light poles that were legally installed.

K.    Nonilluminated signs on an operable motorized vehicle that has a current registration or nonilluminated signs on an operable motorized vehicle or recreational vehicle on a property with an active vehicle dealer certificate. [Ord. NS-2292, 2017]


9.50.060 Temporary Signs.

A.    Temporary signs that meet the standards of this section are not included in the determination of the type, number, or area of permanent signs allowed. Temporary signs must be nonilluminated. Temporary signs must be located on site except when allowed to be located in the right-of-way by this section. Signs that do not meet the standards of this section are subject to the standards for permanent signs in BC 9.50.090, Standards for Permanent Signs. 

B.    The following temporary signs are allowed without a sign permit:

1.    One window sign located on or below the first story with a maximum sign area of six square feet may be displayed for a period of up to 14 consecutive days with a maximum of four display periods per calendar year.

2.    Temporary signs with a maximum sign area of six square feet in residential zones and 16 square feet in other zones and a maximum height of six feet in residential zones and eight feet in other zones may be displayed for the period starting 60 days before and ending seven days after any election date established by State statute.

3.    Where a site is under construction, one on-site sign with a maximum sign area of six square feet in residential zones and 32 square feet in other zones and a maximum height of six feet in residential zones and eight feet in other zones may be displayed for two weeks prior to construction, through construction and for one week after completion of construction. 

4.    Where a site is offered for sale, rent or lease, one on-site sign with a maximum sign area of six square feet in residential zones and 32 square feet in other zones and a maximum height of six feet in residential zones and eight feet in other zones may be displayed while the property is for sale or rent and for one week after the transaction is finally completed and possession transferred. In addition, portable signs are allowed subject to the following:

a.    Portable signs must be erected during daylight hours and must be removed the same day they are erected;

b.    Portable signs may be up to four square feet in area with a maximum height of four feet and a maximum width of two feet;

c.    Portable signs may be located on site or may be located in the right-of-way not including sidewalks, medians, roundabouts, and streets; and

d.    Portable signs must be placed to avoid conflict with parked vehicles.

5.    Portable signs in the Downtown Economic Improvement District may be allowed subject to the following:

a.    One portable sign is allowed per public entrance in lieu of a merchandise display. If there are multiple tenants in a building, which share the same public entrance, only one portable sign may be displayed.

b.    Portable signs may be up to six square feet in area with a maximum height of four feet and a maximum width of two feet.

c.    Portable signs must be displayed only during the hours the business is open to conduct business.

d.    Portable signs must be located in front of the public entrance’s storefront.

e.    Portable signs must be spaced a minimum of six feet apart from any other portable sign.

f.    Portable signs must be placed to avoid conflict with parked vehicles.

g.    Portable signs are prohibited at building exits or fire escapes.

h.    Portable signs may be located on private property or may be located in the public right-of-way on the sidewalk when authorized by the entity responsible for administering the right-of-way. Portable signs must not adversely affect easements, nor restrict or impede pedestrians. Portable signs must be placed to conform to all relevant standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and maintain an accessible passageway no less than six feet wide.

i.    All portable signs must be registered.

Placement of Portable signs
[IMAGE]


Downtown Economic Improvement District
[IMAGE]


C.    The following temporary signs are allowed if a sign permit is obtained:

1.    The following temporary sign(s) may be located on a site where a development project has received land use approvals or, if no land use approval is required, a building permit.

a.    Lot or parcels less than four acres may display one sign up to 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

b.    Lots or parcels over four acres may display a maximum of two signs. Each sign may be up to 64 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

c.    The signs may be installed up to two weeks prior to the start of construction project for which a permit has been issued and must be removed within seven days after the completion of the development project or within one year of issuance of the sign permit, whichever occurs first.

2.    Banners.

a.    One banner up to 60 square feet in area.

b.    Banners that are freestanding are limited to a maximum height of eight feet and banners that are placed on a building must be located on or below the first story at a maximum height of 14 feet.

c.    One banner may be displayed on a site for a maximum of 60 days per calendar year.

3.    Portable Signs. 

a.    One nonilluminated portable sign may be up to six square feet in area with a maximum height of four feet and a maximum width of two feet.

b.    The portable sign may be displayed on a site for a maximum of 90 days per calendar year.

c.    Not more than two temporary portable sign registrations can be issued per site per year. [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2292, 2017]


9.50.070 Prohibited Signs.

The following signs or devices are prohibited and may neither be erected nor maintained:

A.    Fluttering, spinning, windblown or inflatable devices including three-dimensional models, pennants, propeller discs and banners as permanent signs.

B.    Signs on benches.

C.    Roof signs.

D.    Signs or devices, including searchlights, spot lights and holograms, that contain or are illuminated by flashing, chasing, or intermittent effects and/or signs that have any movement or are animated signs.

E.    Signs affixed to utility poles except signs not exceeding one square foot in area placed by the owner of the pole.

F.    Sign Emissions. No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor shall be permitted. Open flames used to attract public attention to a place of business or to an advertising sign shall not be permitted.

G.    Mirrors. No mirror device shall be used as part of a sign.

H.    All other nonexempt signs that are not expressly permitted under this chapter.

I.    Signs attached to trees. [Ord. NS-2292, 2017]


9.50.080 Sign District Regulations. Revised 6/19

Table 1 in this section establishes the types of signs allowed in the City’s Sign Districts. BC 9.50.090 provides standards for each type of sign and BC 9.50.100 provides general requirements including illumination standards.

Table 1  

	SIGN TYPE	SIGN DISTRICT

	1	2	3	4	5	6

	Awning/Canopy Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Projecting Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Wall Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Window Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Suspended Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Roof Sign	N	N	N	N	N	N

	Primary Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Billboard Sign	P	P	N	N	N	N

	Directory Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Drive-through Sign	P	P	P	P	P	P

P:    Permitted as allowed in BC 9.50.090 and 9.50.100

N:    Not permitted

[Ord. NS-2340, 2019; Ord. NS-2279, 2016]




9.50.090 Standards for Permanent Signs. Revised 6/19

A.    Determining Building Sign Area Allowance.

1.    Building signs include awning or canopy signs, directory signs, drive-through signs, projecting signs, suspended signs, wall signs and window signs.

2.    The combined permitted sign area of all building signs, excluding suspended signs, directory signs and drive-through signs, must be limited to one and one-half square feet of sign area for each one lineal foot of width of the primary facade up to the maximum sign area allowed in each sign district identified in Table 2, unless a different amount allocated to the building occupant is identified in an approved sign plan pursuant to BC 9.50.170. Sign area allowances for suspended signs, directory signs, and drive-through signs, where permitted, are allowed in addition to the building sign area allowance. For window signs, see subsection (B)(4) of this section.

 

Table 2  

	Sign District	Maximum Sign Area	Minimum Sign Area

	1	200 square feet	30 square feet

	2	150 square feet	30 square feet

	3	100 square feet	30 square feet

	4	100 square feet	20 square feet

	5	12 square feet	12 square feet

	6	Special standards apply

3.    Sign area is computed based on the width of the principal building’s primary facade in elevation view. The width is measured using a straight line beginning at the corner at one end of the side of the building and continuing to the other corner on the same side of the building. If multiple entities occupy a single building, each entity may apply for a sign based on that entity’s primary facade, and the total sign area may not exceed the total sign area for the entire building. Screening walls, fences or other extensions are not included when calculating the building width. Accessory buildings are not used to calculate sign area allowance. Sign area allowances shall not be transferred to other separate tenants or separate uses on the site.

4.    Building signs may be installed on the primary facade or subordinate facades, except in Sign District 6 where special standards for sign number, size and placement apply.

a.    Exception: Buildings located in Sign District 6 are limited to one sign on a subordinate facade visible to the Bend Parkway. The sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the maximum sign area allowance. The sign area is deducted from the total sign area allowance, and the sign shall not be internally illuminated. All other building signs shall comply with the underlying Sign District regulations.

B.    Standards for Specific Signs. Where allowed by BC 9.50.080, the following standards apply to specific types of signs:

1.    Awning and Canopy Sign.

a.    Awning and canopy signs are allowed for nonresidential uses. Awnings and canopies shall be installed in compliance with current editions of adopted building codes and subject to permitting and inspection by the Building Safety Division.

b.    Awning and canopy signs may be permitted only as an integral part of the awning or canopy to which they are attached or applied. Signs shall not be attached on top of or project beyond the fascia of a freestanding canopy. Signs may be installed on top of a canopy that is attached to and supported by the building, provided the sign does not extend above the roofline or eaves of the building. The sign area shall be deducted from the building sign area allowance.

 

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	Allowed	Not Allowed

c.    Awnings and canopies shall not interfere with trees or traffic signs.

d.    Awning and canopies attached to the building are allowed on the first story only. Attached awning or canopy structures shall maintain a clearance of eight feet above a public right-of-way or finished grade. The valance shall maintain a seven-foot clearance. An awning or canopy shall not extend within two feet from the street curb. Posts or columns beyond the property line are not permitted. Awning and canopies shall not project above the roofline.


[IMAGE]


2.    Projecting Sign.

a.    Projecting signs are allowed for nonresidential uses.

b.    Projecting signs shall be installed on the primary use building. Multiple-tenant buildings may have one sign on each tenant’s storefront that provides customer access.

c.    Projecting signs shall be located on the first story except that a projecting sign may be installed on the wall of the second story, provided the sign and sign supports are installed no higher than the second floor window opening or 24 feet above grade, whichever is lower. Projecting signs shall not extend above the roofline or roof eave or above the parapet of the building.

 

	
[IMAGE]


	Allowed	Not Allowed

d.    Projecting signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and shall be no more than 36 inches wide and have a maximum thickness of 18 inches. Projecting signs shall extend no more than 42 inches from the building or within two feet of the curb, whichever is less. The sign area shall be deducted from the building sign area allowance.

e.    A minimum clearance of eight feet between the bottom of the sign and the finished grade below the sign is required. At alleys, when no curb exists, a minimum height of 14 feet between the bottom of the sign and the finished grade below the sign is required.

3.    Wall Signs.

a.    Wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses.

b.    A wall sign may be painted, attached or pinned away from the wall. A wall sign shall not project from the surface upon which it is attached more than required for construction purposes and, in no event, more than 18 inches. A wall sign located over an alley shall have a minimum 14-foot clearance unless it projects less than 12 inches from the building.

c.    One or more wall signs may be allowed. The total area shall be deducted from the building sign area allowance.

d.    Wall signs shall be located on the designated sign band. When a sign band does not exist, the sign shall be located between the first and second story of a multiple story building. The sign shall not be installed higher than the top of the second story window opening to which it is adjacent and shall not be more than 24 feet above grade.

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	Designated Sign Band	Signs located below second story window opening

e.    Wall signs installed on mansard roofs may be installed vertically when installed on the lowest portion of the sloped roof.

f.    Wall signs shall not extend above the roofline, eaves, wall or building facade or more than 24 feet above the finished grade below the sign.

4.    Window Signs.

a.    Window signs, in combination with temporary window signs, for nonresidential uses located on or below the first story are permitted as follows:

i.    Window signs 25 percent or smaller of the total window area are permitted without a sign permit.

ii.    Window signs larger than 25 percent of the total window area require a sign permit and must deduct the total square footage of the window sign area from the building sign area allowance in Table 2 in this section, Standards for Permanent Signs.

iii.    Illuminated window signs must not exceed 15 percent of the total window area in which they are displayed.

b.    Second story nonresidential uses are allowed only one nonilluminated window sign up to three square feet without a permit.
[IMAGE]


5.    Suspended Signs.

a.    Suspended signs shall be placed only under an attached awning or canopy on the first story facade for nonresidential uses with direct exterior pedestrian access.

b.    The sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and is in addition to the building sign area allowance.

c.    A minimum seven-foot clearance above finished grade below the sign is required.

d.    Only one sign shall be allowed at each public entrance. Tenant spaces with two separate elevations may install one sign on each elevation.

e.    Suspended signs shall not be internally illuminated except when the clearance is greater than eight feet.
[IMAGE]


6.    Primary Freestanding Sign.

a.    No portion of a freestanding sign shall be in, or project over, a public right-of-way.

b.    The numerical address of the property must be included on the primary sign and must be clearly visible and legible from the street on which the property fronts. Numbers should be no less than six inches tall and shall not be considered signage nor shall they be included in the calculation of sign area.

c.    Primary freestanding signs shall be either a monument or ground-mounted type sign except in Sign Districts 1 and 2 where pole signs are permitted if freestanding monument or ground-mounted signs would be inconsistent with clear-vision standards at intersections or driveway access points.

d.    One primary freestanding sign is permitted per site. A second freestanding sign is allowed in either of the following situations:

i.    In Sign Districts 1 and 2 on sites with street frontage on two or more arterial streets. The two signs shall be separated by a minimum of 300 feet measured along the street frontages.

ii.    When included in a sign plan approved under BC 9.50.170.

iii.    Multiple-family dwellings of 10 units or more and subdivisions are allowed two monuments or ground-mounted signs located at the principal entrances to the site.

e.    The primary freestanding sign shall be located and oriented to the street.

i.    Exception: Freestanding signs on sites that abut the Bend Parkway shall be located and oriented to the street frontage farthest from the Bend Parkway and shall not be oriented to the Bend Parkway Overlay. Where an intervening access street separates a site from the Bend Parkway Overlay, and that street serves as the primary access to the lot, the freestanding sign may be installed and oriented towards the street consistent with the requirements of the underlying Sign District.

f.    Freestanding signs are not allowed within 10 feet of a lot line that abuts another site.

g.    The maximum size allowed in each Sign District is as follows:

i.    Sign Districts 1 and 2.

(A)    Eighty square feet in area and a maximum of 11 feet in height on sites with a principal building 30,000 gross square feet in area or less or on a site less than six acres in size.

(B)    One hundred twenty square feet in area and a maximum of 15 feet in height on sites with a principal building over 30,000 gross square feet in area or on a site over six acres in size.

ii.    Sign Districts 3 and 5: 32 square feet in area and a maximum of five feet in height.

iii.    Sign District 4: 40 square feet in area and a maximum of eight feet in height.

7.    Billboard.

a.    The maximum number of billboards allowed within the City limits is 43. The inventory of billboards existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is included in Table 3. No new billboard may be erected unless it replaces an existing billboard. Billboards must have existed within the Bend Urban Growth Boundary as of December 18, 1985, in order to be included in the maximum number allowed.

b.    Before erecting any new billboard, a permit must be secured from the Building Official. Where applicable, evidence must be provided of a State-issued permit in accordance with the Oregon Motorists Information Act of 1971.

c.    All billboards moved after the effective date of this chapter shall be located in Sign District 1 or 2 on commercial or industrial zoned properties only. Billboards are not permitted west of the Deschutes River.

d.    Billboards shall be freestanding and shall not be installed on any building.

e.    All billboards shall be spaced a minimum of 500 lineal feet apart.

f.    The sign face shall not exceed the maximum size permitted by the State-issued permit or 10.5 feet in vertical height and 24 feet in horizontal length, whichever is less. Extensions beyond the sign face shall not be permitted.

g.    The billboard shall not exceed 24 feet in height, as measured from finished grade; however, if a variance is granted, the maximum height shall not exceed 35 feet.

h.    Internally illuminated and/or animated billboards are prohibited. External illumination shall comply with the Lighting Ordinance. Electrical wiring to the billboard shall be located underground.



i.    All billboards erected or moved shall be installed behind the legal setback line of each parcel of property as determined by the Development Code.

j.    All structural supports for billboards shall be constructed of steel.

k.    Only flat, single-faced or double-faced billboards shall be permitted. As used in this section, double-faced means a billboard with two display surfaces visible to traffic from two directions of travel. A single-faced billboard means a sign with one display surface visible from one direction of travel.

Table 3 

Billboard Inventory as of May 17, 2011  

	ID	TAX LOT	ADDRESS

	1	171209CD00200	63655 N HWY 97

	2	171209D000302	20625 GRANDVIEW DR

	3	171216B000706	20505 ROBAL LN

	4	171216B000101	63594 N HWY 97

	5	171216B000201	63595 N HWY 97

	6	171216B000704	63450 N HWY 97

	7	171220A000801	3520 N HWY 97

	8	171220A001004	 

	9	171220D001900	3197 N HWY 97

	10	171220DA02400	3305 N HWY 97

	11	171221B001300	63148 NELS ANDERSON

	12	171228B001899	15 NE BUTLER MARKET

	13	171228BC00401	 

	14	171228BC01300	 

	15	171228CB03800	 

	16	171233BC03700	913 NE 3RD ST

	17	171232AA02900	 

	18	171232AA03700	 

	19	171232AD03600	20 NW GREENWOOD

	20	171233BC05400	1052 NE 3RD ST

	21	171233CC06402	197 NE 3RD ST

	22	171234CB00503	 

	23	171234CB00100	1791 NE HWY 20

	24	181204A000500	273 SE 9TH ST

	25	181204CB02502	880 SE 3RD ST

	26	181204CB02900	919 SE 3RD ST

	27	181204D001002	625 SE 9TH ST

	28	181205A005400	389 SW SCALEHOUSE

	29	171221B000709	63075 CORPORATE PL

	30	181204DC01900	905 SE REED MARKET

	31	181205DD00700	1098 SE DIVISION ST

	32	181208AC00100	61445 HWY 97

	33	181208C001510	20130 BADGER RD

	34	181208C001305	61210 HWY 97

	35	181208D000600	61360 S HWY 97

	36	171234DD00600	2405 NE HWY 20

	37	171234DC00100	2035 NE HWY 20

	38	Right-of-Way	GREENWOOD RR

	39	Right-of-Way	BUTLER MARKET RR

	40	171229DD07000	REVERE RAILROAD

	41	181208AA00500	1325 S HWY 97 (CANAL)

	42	171234CA00700	1835 NE HWY 20

	43	171234DC00500	2215 NE HWY 20

8.    Directory Signs.

a.    Directory signs shall be allowed in addition to other freestanding or building signs; provided, that there is a minimum of three separate tenants.

b.    Directory signs shall be located on the first story facade adjacent to a public entrance or adjacent to the parking lot. The sign shall not be oriented or intended to be legible from a public street or right-of-way.

c.    Not more than one freestanding directory sign may be displayed per site. One or more wall-mounted directory signs may be displayed.

d.    The maximum sign area is 20 square feet when installed on a building or 32 square feet and eight feet in height if freestanding.

e.    Illuminated directory signs are not permitted in residential zones.


[IMAGE]


9.    Drive-Through Signs.

a.    Drive-Through Signs. Drive-through signs are allowed only for businesses with drive-through services.

b.    Type, Location and Orientation. Drive-through signs may be wall-mounted or freestanding. Freestanding signs shall be on the left side of and oriented to the drive-through lanes. Drive-through signs shall not be intended to be legible from the public rights-of-way.

c.    Maximum Number, Area and Height. One sign of up to 45 square feet in area and eight feet in height is allowed per drive-through lane for up to two drive-through lanes.

d.    One additional sign per site of up to 15 square feet in area and eight feet in height is permitted at the entry to the drive-through area. The signs allowed by this section shall be located on the left side and oriented to the drive-through lanes. [Ord. NS-2340, 2019; Ord. NS-2292, 2017; Ord. NS-2279, 2016; NS-2148, 2010]


9.50.095 Mural Sign Regulations. Revised 6/19

A.    Standards for Mural Signs. The following standards apply to mural signs in addition to the general requirements provided in BC 9.50.100:

1.    Mural signs are allowed on properties designated as commercial, mixed-use, public facilities, or industrial on the Comprehensive Plan map, in addition to any other sign allowed on a property. 

2.    Except for sites zoned Urbanizable Area (UA) District, mural signs are allowed in the residential Comprehensive Plan map designations in addition to any other sign allowed on a property when they comply with the following:

a.    The mural sign is located on a developed site that abuts an arterial or collector street and the site does not include a residential use.

3.    Mural signs are not subject to size and height limitations.

4.    Mural signs must be kept in good condition until they are removed.

5.    A permit is required for mural signs. All artists and owners of the property must sign the mural sign permit application. When a mural sign is part of a school or similar group project, the signature of a responsible official of the school or other group will be deemed signature by all artists. All artists and owners of the property must agree to the following:

a.    The mural sign must remain in place, without alterations, for at least 12 months from the date of permit issuance, unless the property is transferred during that period. 

b.    After 12 months the mural sign may be painted over, or at any time the mural sign becomes noncompliant with this code. 

6.    Murals may be allowed on structures within the public ROW if authorized by City Council motion, following an establishment of a program for murals in the right-of-way. [Ord. NS-2340, 2019]


9.50.100 General Requirements.

A.    Placement.

1.    All signs and sign structures shall be installed and attached on or within the site or property behind any applicable setback or right-of-way.

2.    Any sign or portion of a sign that obstructs any window, doorway, transom, architectural details, fire escape, stairway or standpipe; interferes with exits through any window; obstructs any door or required exit from any building; or obstructs any required light or ventilation is prohibited.

3.    Signs or structures that may pose a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including but not limited to signs that obstruct the clear view of pedestrians and drivers, and signs interfering with the effectiveness of traffic signs or signals are prohibited.

4.    Signs in the public right-of-way except those exempt or permitted under this chapter, not including signs on vehicles lawfully using the right-of-way or legally parked, are prohibited.

B.    Clearances.

1.    Vision Clearance Areas. No sign shall be placed in a clear vision area as identified in BDC Chapter 3.1.

2.    Vehicle Area Clearances. In areas outside of rights-of-way, when a sign, sign structure or awning extends over an area in which vehicles travel or are parked, the bottom of the sign or awning must be at least 14 feet above the finished grade below the sign except when reasonably protected with a permanent structure as approved by the Building Official. Vehicle areas include driveways, alleys, parking areas, and loading and maneuvering areas.

3.    Pedestrian Area Clearances. When a sign, sign structure or awning extends more than 12 inches over a sidewalk, walkway, or other space used by pedestrians, the bottom of the structure must be a minimum of eight feet above grade.

4.    Clearances from Fire Escapes, Means of Egress or Standpipes. Signs, sign structures and awnings are prohibited from being erected in any manner that interferes in any way with the free use of any fire escape, means of egress or standpipe. Attaching signs, sign structures or awnings to a fire escape is prohibited.

5.    Clearance from High Voltage Power Lines. No sign or part of a sign support may interfere with any utility wires or supports. All signs must be sufficiently clear of high voltage power lines so those signs can be safely erected and maintained. Signs shall be located not less than six feet horizontally or 12 feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors that are energized in excess of 750 volts.

6.    Clearance for building signs shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance measured between the finished grade directly below the sign and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.

C.    Signs Extending Over the Public Right-of-Way.

1.    Signs shall not be located in or project over the right-of-way except in the Central Business District where signs, awnings and canopies are allowed.

2.    If rights-of-way are widened so that an existing sign is in, or projects into, the expanded right-of-way, the City may allow the sign to remain in place if the City determines that it will have no impact on safety. The City may require the sign to be moved.

D.    Sign Illumination. The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or external source, shall be designed to eliminate negative impacts on surrounding right-of-way and properties. The following standards shall apply to all illuminated signs:

1.    No sign or light source shall create an unduly distracting or hazardous condition to a motorist, pedestrian or the general public. Colored lights or colored sign faces shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.

2.    External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign.

3.    Internally illuminated signs and signs with exposed light sources are prohibited in all residential zoned properties and Sign Districts 4 and 5, except internally illuminated signs on the site of 24-hour emergency medical facilities and urgent care centers, during business hours.

4.    Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness or color.

5.    Internally illuminated sign faces shall be constructed to have an opaque background and translucent copy or a sign that has a translucent dark colored background and light colored copy. White, off-white, light gray, creams or yellow colors are not permitted as background colors.

E.    Design, Construction, Inspection, and Maintenance.

1.    Design. All signs and related structures must be designed, constructed, inspected and maintained in compliance with this chapter and current State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code including any applicable City, State and Federal code, rule, law or regulation.

2.    Maintenance. All signs including structures and components including supports, braces, anchors, and other components shall be maintained in a state of good repair.

3.    Materials. All signs except exempt and temporary signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and permanently affixed to a structural support in the ground or on the building.

4.    Supports. All sign permit applications shall include the specific support details. The design of the support will be reviewed by the Building Official for compliance with the applicable building code standards. The Building Official may require a design prepared by a State-licensed engineer.

F.    Determining Sign Area and Dimensions. Sign area shall be measured by drawing the smallest geometric shape created with a maximum of eight straight lines drawn at right angles (squares or rectangle) which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, nonstructural trim, background material, colored or illuminated areas and attention-attracting devices forming an integral part of an individual message except that:
[IMAGE]


1.    Wall signs having no visible boundary or clearly defined background area shall have the areas between letters, words or logos intended to be read together and any device intended to draw attention to the sign message included in the computation of sign area.

2.    Spherical Signs and Signs with Three-Dimensional Objects. Signs that are spherical or have three-dimensional objects that project less than eight inches from the sign support structure shall be measured as a flat sign. Signs that project more than eight inches from the sign support structure shall be measured using the smallest two-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes which will best approximate the greatest actual sign area visible from any one direction.

3.    Double-Sided or V-Shaped Sign. Only one side of a double-sided sign or V-shaped sign is calculated provided the distance between the two sign faces is less than two feet apart. Where two sides are not of equal size, the larger of the two sides is measured. Where the sign faces are more than two feet apart all sides are calculated.


[IMAGE]


4.    Awning and Canopy Sign. The sign area on awnings and canopies attached to the building shall include the sign and all areas that are translucent when illuminated. When the ends of awnings are parallel and contain a sign or are translucent, only one side is counted in addition to the front. Signs on all sides of a freestanding canopy structure are calculated.


[IMAGE]


5.    Freestanding Sign. Sign area does not include the sign support posts or poles that are clearly incidental and are used only to support the sign cabinets, panels or nonstructural trim or serve another permitted purpose separate from the sign, such as a retaining wall, fence or other structure. The first 12 inches in vertical height above grade is not included when calculating the sign area of a freestanding sign provided it does not contain sign copy; the first 12 inches is considered necessary to elevate the sign above grade or to provide a sign base for a monument type sign.

G.    Determining Sign Height.

1.    The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from average grade of the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign, unless the average grade at the base of the sign is lower than the grade of the street frontage nearest to the sign. If the grade at the base of the sign is lower than the grade of the street frontage where the sign is located, the height is measured from the top of the curb, if there is one, or from the average street grade of the street nearest the sign.

2.    The height of a sign attached to a building shall be the vertical distance as measured from the highest point of a sign attached to a building, including supporting frames and material to the ground below the sign. [Ord. NS-2292, 2017]


9.50.110 Procedures.

A.    Applications. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted on City forms. The application form shall include the name and address of the property owner, sign owner, sign manufacturer and sign installer and must be accompanied by a fee in the amount set by Council resolution. The minimum submittal requirements include drawings showing the design, location, content, and dimensions of the sign and the design and dimensions of any measures used to support the sign or used to affix the sign to the building or structure.

B.    Approval and Inspection. The City shall issue the sign permit if the application is properly submitted and the proposed sign meets the standards of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. The approved sign shall be constructed and installed within six months of the approval date. The City shall use a Type I development review process for sign permits except as otherwise specified in this chapter. The Community Development Director may elevate any application to a Type II or Type III process at his or her discretion.

C.    Revocation of Permits. The City may revoke sign permits if a sign is found to be in violation of this chapter, if the violation cannot be cured, or if the permittee fails to take steps to cure the violation. The City may revoke sign permits if it determines the permits were mistakenly issued in violation of this chapter. Sign permits shall become void if sign installation is not completed within six months of permit issuance.


9.50.120 Amendments.

Amendment to this chapter shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and criteria contained in the Bend Development Code for map and text amendments.


9.50.130 Formal Interpretation.

Formal interpretation of the text or application of this chapter may be made by the Community Development Director following the Type II process. The Director shall base his or her interpretation on the following criteria:

A.    The interpretation is consistent with the purpose of this chapter;

B.    The interpretation is consistent with any dictionary of common usage if subsection (A) of this section cannot be applied.


9.50.140 Variance.

Variances to the standards in this chapter will be reviewed in accordance with the procedures and criteria contained in Bend Development Code for Class B Variances.


9.50.150 Adjustment to Standards.

A.    Purpose. This section is intended to provide for flexibility to specific criteria of the Sign Code in order to allow for creativity in sign location and design relative to the particular topography and/or building architecture where a sign otherwise complies with the provisions of this code in all respects except size, height, location or other numeric standards. This chapter provides uniform procedures for the granting or denial of applications for an adjustment to standards.

B.    Applicability. Adjustment of up to 25 percent may be approved by the Community Development Director to each of the specific numeric standards in this code that regulate the following:

1.    Wall Sign Location. Increase the maximum height on which a sign may be installed on a building wall.

2.    Sign Dimension and Area. Increase the maximum allowed size of individual signs or of the total allowed building sign area.

3.    Sign Height. Increase the maximum allowed height of on-site ground, monument or pole signs, or of building or wall signs.

4.    Other numeric standards in this code except where an exception is expressly prohibited.

5.    Legal Nonconforming Signs. Allowing legal nonconforming on-site pole, ground or monument signs to be structurally altered at their existing base or pole structure location; provided, that the extent of nonconforming sign height or sign size is reduced.

C.    Application Requirements. Applicants for a sign permit may seek an adjustment to the standards of this chapter by filing an application for an adjustment to standards. The application shall contain information as specified on the application form and shall be accompanied by the required fee.

D.    Approval Process. An adjustment to standards is reviewed under the Type II procedure contained in the Bend Development Code. If the adjustment to standards is denied, a party may appeal the decision to the Bend Planning Commission in accordance with the appeals section of the Bend Development Code. A request to exceed a numeric standard by more than 25 percent may only be approved through the variance process.

E.    Criteria of Approval. The Community Development Director or designee shall review the application and approve, approve with conditions or deny the request. A decision and any conditions placed on the decision shall be in writing. The decision shall include findings demonstrating that all of the following criteria have been met:

1.    a.    Unusual conditions associated with the sign location have been identified that interfere with the reasonable visibility of the sign;

b.    There are proposed sign design elements that are in scale with and compatible with the landscape, topography, building design and surrounding district but are not otherwise permitted by this code;

2.    The request does not create a vision clearance hazard for pedestrians, motor vehicles or bicyclists;

3.    The request does not impede public safety or adequate emergency access to the site;

4.    The request does not impact public or private easements;

5.    The request does not limit solar access standards for abutting properties. In order to meet this criterion, the Director may require that the sign structure be placed as close to the south property line as possible; and

6.    The request otherwise complies with the provisions of the Sign Code.

F.    Additional Requirements.

1.    If the adjustment to standards involves a setback, the plot plan shall be prepared by an Oregon registered surveyor.

2.    Adjustment will not be granted for prohibited signs or to construction and maintenance standards.

3.    Approval of an adjustment to standards shall become void if the approved work is not completed within six months of the approval date. (Ord. NS-2154, 2010)


9.50.160 Appeals.

Appeals shall be processed in accordance with the procedures contained within the Bend Development Code for appeals.


9.50.170 Sign Plan.

A Sign Plan is intended to integrate the signs proposed for a nonresidential development project with the overall site design.

A.    Applicability. The submittal of a Sign Plan shall be optional.

B.    Approval Process and Limitation. Sign Plans shall be reviewed through the Type II adjustment to standards process. An increase in sign height or sign area of more than 25 percent or an increase in the number of signs is not allowed.

C.    Application Requirements. An application for a Sign Plan shall include filing fees and all plan views, building elevations, square foot sign area allowances, sign location areas and examples of appropriate building signs and freestanding signs.


9.50.180 Historic Landmarks. Revised 6/19

The City will not consider a sign permit for a sign on a historic resource until the sign request is determined by the City to be in conformance with BC Chapter 10.20, Historic Preservation Code. [Ord. NS-2340, 2019]


9.50.190 Nonconforming Sign.

A.    Any sign lawfully existing or lawfully permitted and constructed within the time allowed by the sign permit but which is made nonconforming by adoption or amendment of this chapter is a nonconforming sign.

B.    Nonconforming signs must be removed or brought into compliance if any of the following occurs:

1.    The sign or sign structure is moved, removed, replaced or structurally altered unless the moving is required by the City or other public entity to accommodate a public project. Changes in removable faces or panels are not structural alterations.

a.    Exception: When a nonconforming sign is damaged by causes beyond the control of the owner, the sign may be rebuilt to the same size and height, using the same types of original material.

2.    The use of the property where the sign is located changes to a different use. For purposes of this section, a change in use includes situations in which services or goods offered or provided on the property are changed.

a.    Exception: When a nonconforming multiple-faced primary freestanding sign is located on a developed site where there are three or more separate uses the copy may be changed without losing the nonconforming right unless and until the sign is moved, removed, replaced or altered. [Ord. NS-2303, 2018]


9.50.200 Enforcement.

A.    Violations. A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class A infraction. Each day shall be a separate violation. Violations will be enforced through the Bend civil infraction procedure.

B.    Confiscation. The City may remove any sign installed or placed on public rights-of-way or on City property in violation of this chapter. The City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign all costs of removal and disposal of a sign removed under this section, in addition to other remedies within this chapter.

C.    Violation Declared a Nuisance. The location, erection, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use of a sign in violation of this chapter is declared a nuisance and may be abated in either the manner provided for in this chapter or in the same manner as all other nuisances.


9.50.210 Severability.

If any part, section, subsections, sentence or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.


Exhibit


[IMAGE]



Title 10 DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:

10.10    Bend Development Code

10.20    Historic Preservation Code


Chapter 10.10 BEND DEVELOPMENT CODE

Sections:

10.10.010    Development Code as Separate Document.

10.10.020    References to “This Code.”

To view the online Bend Development Code, click here.


10.10.010 Development Code as Separate Document.

The Bend Development Code shall be maintained as a separate document, with its own organization and numbering system. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


10.10.020 References to “This Code.”

The term this code as used in the Bend Code includes both the Bend Code and the Bend Development Code. [Ord. NS-2180, 2012]


Chapter 10.20 HISTORIC PRESERVATION CODE

Sections:

10.20.010    Purpose.

10.20.020    Applicability.

10.20.030    Procedures.

10.20.040    Definitions.

10.20.050    Criteria of Approval.

10.20.060    Designation of Historic Resources.

10.20.070    Removal of Historic Resource Designation.

10.20.080    Demolition or Moving of Historic Structures.

10.20.090    Signs/Plaques.

10.20.100    Capital Improvement Projects.

10.20.110    Appeals.

10.20.120    Penalties.

10.20.130    Design Review Criteria.

10.20.140    Supplemental Information.


10.20.010 Purpose.

The standards and criteria of this chapter were created to implement the Secretary of the Interior’s standards for the treatment of historic properties. The standards are contained in BC 10.20.140. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Bend Area General Plan’s policies regarding the preservation and designation of historic resources that have special historic and prehistoric association or significance as a part of the heritage of the citizens of the City and for the education, enjoyment and pride of the citizens, as well as the beautification of the City and enhancement of the value of such property. The Bend Area General Plan includes the City’s official list of historic and cultural resources and sets policy for the protection and designation of these locally recognized historic resources, which are protected by the standards contained within this chapter. This chapter also protects properties registered with the National Register of Historic Places. The Landmarks Commission appointed by the Mayor consistent with the provisions of the Bend Code is responsible for carrying out the provisions of this code and is an advisory body to the City Council on decisions that could affect historic resources. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005]


10.20.020 Applicability.

This chapter applies to historic resources as defined in this chapter that are within the City of Bend. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005]


10.20.030 Procedures.

A.    Chapter 4.1 of the Bend Development Code (BDC) provides uniform procedures for reviewing applications. All applications required by this code are subject to the procedural requirements of BDC Chapter 4.1.

B.    All applications for alterations, additions, new construction, demolition, removal, signs, restoration, rehabilitation and other actions involving a historic resource and addressed by this chapter shall be submitted to the City Community Development Department on the appropriate application form and with the review fee as set by the City Council.

C.    No person may alter a designated historic building or building within a historic district to change its exterior appearance, nor may any new structure be built within a historic district unless approved in accordance with this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of exterior architectural features which does not involve a change in design or type of materials.

D.    A pre-application meeting is encouraged for complex applications or for applicants who are unfamiliar with the City’s historic preservation program or the development review process. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is:

1.    To acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements;

2.    To provide for an exchange of information regarding applicable requirements; and

3.    To identify issues likely to arise in processing an application.

E.    Applications shall be reviewed according to the processes described below:

1.    The following applications are reviewed by the Director via the Type I process:

a.    Fences.

b.    Solar panels visible from a public street.

c.    AC unit/mechanical equipment either rooftop or window mounted, visible from a public street.

d.    Replacement-in-kind such as a front door, residing or reroofing.

e.    Side venting for a fireplace unit or insert, provided venting does not impact masonry.

f.    Demolition of nonhistoric features or building.

g.    Signs.

h.    At the discretion of the Director, a Type I application may be elevated to a Type II application.

2.    The following applications are reviewed by the Director via the Type II process:

a.    Minor additions and alterations;

b.    At the discretion of the Director, a Type II application may be elevated to a Type III application.

3.    The following applications are reviewed by the Landmarks Commission via the Type III process:

a.    Major alterations;

b.    New construction;

c.    Moving or partial/complete demolition of a historic structure.

4.    The following applications are reviewed through the Type IV process with the Landmarks Commission serving as the advisory body to the City Council:

a.    Designation or removal of a historic district.

b.    Designation or removal of a historic resource.

F.    Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, all other development regulations contained in the Bend Development Code apply to historic resources and historic districts.

G.    All improvements in the public right-of-way shall meet the requirements of the City’s standards and specifications. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.040]


10.20.040 Definitions.

The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings described below. These definitions are used in conjunction with the definitions contained in BDC Chapter 1.2. Where there is a conflicting definition relating to a historic resource, this section shall prevail.

Adaptive reuse means putting a historic structure to a new use and altering its interior and/or exterior and making other modifications to allow for its new use, while retaining the qualities for which the resource has been recognized.

Alteration means the addition to, removal of or from, or physical modification of any exterior part or portion of a structure.

Alteration, major means an addition, removal or reconfiguration which significantly changes the historical or architectural significance of a historic resource including new construction in historic districts.

Alteration, minor means an alteration which does not affect the historical or architectural significance of a structure.

Architectural significance means that the structure, building or district (1) portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style, or (2) embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type, or (3) is the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City, or (4) contains elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship which represent an architectural innovation.

Character-defining means the qualities for which the resource has been recognized.

Demolish means to raze, destroy, dismantle, deface or, in any other manner, cause partial or total ruin of a designated structure.

Exterior means any portion of the outside of a designated historic structure and/or building or a structure and/or building in a designated historic district or any addition thereto.

Historic resource means a building, historic or cultural site, structure, object, or historic district that meets the significance and integrity criteria for designation as a landmark designated by the City Council, State of Oregon or National Park Service. Resource types are further described as:

1.    Building: Shall have the same meaning as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2.

2.    Structure: Shall have the same meaning as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2.

3.    Historic Object: A construction which is primarily artistic or commemorative in nature and not normally movable or part of a building or structure, e.g., statue, fountain, milepost, monument, sign, etc.

4.    Historic Site: The location of a significant event, use or occupation which may include associated standing, ruined, or underground features, e.g., battlefield, shipwreck, campsite, cemetery, natural feature, garden, food-gathering areas, etc.

5.    Historic District: A geographically defined area designated by the National Register of Historic Places possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects unified by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. Historic districts consist of contributing and noncontributing properties.

Historic resources of statewide significance are buildings, structures, objects, cultural sites, or districts listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and those located within approved National Register Historic Districts pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (PL 89-665; 16 U.S.C. 470).

Historical significance means that the structure or historical district (1) has character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics for the City, County, State, or nation; (2) is the site of a historic event with an effect upon society; (3) is identified with a person or group of persons who had some influence on society; or (4) exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, or historic heritage of the community.

Inventory is a survey, map, or description of one or more resource sites that is prepared by a local government, State or Federal agency, private citizen, or other organization and that includes information about the resource values and features associated with such sites. As a verb, “inventory” means to collect, prepare, compile, or refine information about one or more resource sites.

Landmarks Commission or Commission means the Bend Landmarks Commission.

Maintenance means the process of mitigating the wear and deterioration of a property without altering the historic character of the property, including action taken to protect and repair the condition of the property with the least possible impact on the historic character of the property.

Preservation means the process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of a historic property, including but not limited to the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic materials, but not including the extensive replacement of historic materials or new construction.

Property owner means the owner of record or the contract purchaser and does not include a person or organization that holds a security interest.

Protect means to require Landmarks Commission review of applications for demolition, removal, or exterior alteration of a historic resource, new construction or signs on the designated property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter so that the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment are retained.

Real market value has the meaning given in ORS 308.205.

Reconstruction means the process of depicting, by means of new construction, the form, features, and detailing of a nonsurviving site, landscape, building, structure, or object for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location.

Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.

Replacement means the process of replacing historic materials and features with new materials when the deterioration of a character-defining material or feature is so extensive that protection, maintenance, or repair is not possible. Replacing severely deteriorated or damaged historic materials with new materials of the same kind as the historic materials and in the same design as the historic element is “replacement.”

Resource, contributing means a building, structure, or object which has been identified by the State or the General Plan as adding to the historical integrity or architectural qualities that make the historic district or resource significant.

Resource, noncontributing means buildings within a historic district identified by the State or General Plan as a contributing resource that does not contribute to the historical integrity or architectural qualities that make the historic district or resource significant.

Restoration means the process of accurately depicting the forms, features and character of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time, by means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from the restoration period.

Site means the location of a significant event, prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historical, cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.

Structure means anything constructed or built, any edifice or building or any kind, or any pieces of work architecturally built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.050]


10.20.050 Criteria of Approval.

A.    Applications for Type I applications shall meet the following criterion:

1.    The proposal is consistent with this chapter, including the design review criteria of BC 10.20.130.

B.    Applications for Type II and III additions to and alterations of existing structures shall meet all of the following criteria of approval:

1.    The proposed alteration will not change the qualities for which the structure has been recognized.

2.    The alteration will be compatible with the appearance and character of the historic structure or district.

3.    The proposal is consistent with the design review criteria of BC 10.20.130.

C.    Type II and III applications for the construction of new structures in a historic district shall meet all of the following criteria of approval:

1.    The new structure will be compatible with the appearance and character of the historic district.

2.    The new structure is consistent with the design review criteria of BC 10.20.130. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.060]


10.20.060 Designation of Historic Resources.

A.    Any individual or organization may apply to designate a building or site as a historic resource with the consent of the property owner. The application shall be processed as a quasi-judicial General Plan amendment with a recommendation from the Landmarks Commission and final decision by the City Council. The criteria for evaluating the request are as follows:

1.    The request is consistent with relevant State administrative rules and statutes and with Federal regulations; and

2.    The request is consistent with relevant General Plan policies; and

3.    The building or site has architectural or historical significance based upon past use; or the site had a prior use involving the establishment, growth, or particular incidents relating to the history of the City.

B.    A request to establish a local Historic District or resource shall be processed as a legislative General Plan amendment with a recommendation from the Landmarks Commission and final decision by the City Council. The criteria for evaluating the historic district designation request are as follows:

1.    The designation is consistent with relevant State administrative rules and statutes and with Federal regulations; and

2.    The designation is consistent with the historic preservation General Plan policies; and

3.    The area has architectural or historical significance based upon past use. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.070]


10.20.070 Removal of Historic Resource Designation.

A.    If any historic resource has been demolished or destroyed, no longer possesses the charter-defining features related to its architectural significance for which it was recognized or an error in documentation occurred, the City Council, upon recommendation of the Landmarks Commission, may remove the historic resource designation from the site.

B.    If the designation is proposed to be removed from any historic resource, the same process and criteria shall be used as upon the designation as a historic resource.

C.    In accordance with ORS 197.772, a property owner shall be allowed to remove a historic designation imposed on the property by the City. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005]


10.20.080 Demolition or Moving of Historic Structures.

The following regulations apply to the demolition and moving of contributing and noncontributing historic resources:

A.    The owner shall apply for approval to demolish or move a historic resource to the City of Bend. A pre-application meeting with the City is required.

B.    At least 30 days prior to submitting an application to move or demolish a designated historic resource, the applicant shall provide mailed notice of the intended demolition or removal to the Deschutes County Historical Society and State Historical Preservation Office. The letters shall include the historic name of the resource, the date of construction or significant event associated with the property, a statement of its cultural or historic significance, and the reason for the proposed removal or demolition. Copies of the two mailed notices shall be submitted by the applicant with the demolition or removal application.

C.    As part of the pre-application meeting, staff will provide the applicant information regarding financial incentives for historic preservation and adaptive reuse projects including but not limited to the Oregon Special Assessment Program, donations of facade easements, the Federal Investment Tax Credit, the “Preserving Oregon” grants, the “Preserving America’s Treasures” grants and special provisions in the International Building Code and International Existing Building Code available for designated historic resources. The applicant shall acknowledge in writing that he/she is aware of the above incentives.

D.    At least 30 days before submitting an application for demolition or removal of a historic structure, the applicant shall post a notice on the property notifying the public that the applicant is considering applying to move or demolish a historic structure. The notice shall also invite purchasers and tenants to make written offers to purchase and/or rent the structure. The notice posted on the property shall be placed at a conspicuous location easily visible from the adjacent street. A copy of the notices shall be submitted with the removal or demolition application.

E.    An application to move or demolish a historic resource shall contain the following information, if available:

1.    The first list of submittal requirements applies to all historic resources, both contributing and noncontributing resources.

a.    Proof of ownership of the property.

b.    Whether or not the structure could be adaptively reused.

c.    Records of how the structure has been used over time.

d.    Date property was acquired and status of the property under this chapter at the time of acquisition, e.g., whether the property had been designated as a historic resource.

e.    Statement of the necessity of the action requested.

f.    Whether or not there is a viable economic or public use for the structure as it exists.

g.    Alternatives to the requested action that have been studied.

h.    Records of the current owner’s efforts to maintain and rehabilitate the structure in the past five years or since purchasing the structure, if ownership has been for a period of less than five years.

i.    The information used in the original designation of the property or structure as a historic resource as filed in the Deschutes County Historical Landmarks Commission Historic Sites file or applicable National Register of Historic Places nomination.

j.    Evidence of structural maintenance including maintenance records for the past five years or since the current owner purchased the building, and whether the current owner has neglected the structure thereby deliberately leading to demolition by neglect.

k.    Records of applications for any available historic preservation or energy efficiency grants or tax incentives.

l.    Whether or not the structure poses a threat to the public health or is a safety or fire hazard and whether or not there is a technically feasible means of alleviating the public health, safety, or fire hazard.

m.    Current photographs of the structure and its setting showing all exterior sides of the structure.

2.    The following applies to contributing resources only:

a.    Records of efforts to sell the property during the past 18 months to a party interested in preserving or adaptively reusing the structure.

b.    Records of advertisements for tenants for the structure.

c.    Evidence prepared by parties of comparable lease or rental rates for the structure.

d.    Architectural plans and construction drawings of the historic structure.

e.    Copies of all attempts to market the property, such as advertisements, notices, and news articles in magazines, newspapers, and the local historical society newsletter.

f.    Evidence that the owner(s) are willing to consider in good faith, in the interest of preserving the structure, all reasonable offers to purchase, rent or lease the property and whether the owners have made a good faith effort to locate a tenant or a buyer for the property.

g.    Reports of registered structural engineers, registered architects or historic preservation contractors with historic preservation experience about the feasibility of rehabilitation, restoration or an adaptive reuse project.

h.    The importance of the historic structure to the identity of the neighborhood and the importance to the appearance of the built environment and architectural diversity and texture of Bend.

F.    The Landmarks Commission shall make a decision on whether a resource may be demolished or moved based on the following criteria:

1.    The request is consistent with relevant State Administrative Rules and statutes; and

2.    The request is consistent with relevant General Plan policies; and

3.    There is no viable economic alternative to demolition.

G.    The Commission may attach conditions to the decision regarding historic artifacts and/or regarding the future development of the location if other historic resources will be affected by the proposed development.

H.    If the City approves the application for demolition, a building permit may not be issued until all appeals have been exhausted or waived.

I.    The Building Division shall notify the Landmark Commission staff of abatement of dangerous buildings involving historic structures. Landmark Commission staff may work with property owners to remedy the cause for the abatement notice. The Building Division shall entertain requests for extensions of time in processing such abatements to enable the property owner to remedy such dangerous conditions; provided, that the public safety is maintained.

J.    The same procedures as stated in this section for demolition shall apply to moving a building or structure. The setting is an important component of the historical context. The site to which the building or structure is moved shall be as similar as is possible to the original setting.

K.    When the Landmarks Commission approves the demolition of a historic resource inventoried in the Bend Area General Plan it shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding whether or not the landmark or historical status should be removed from the General Plan. In making this recommendation the Commission shall consider the following factors among others: the historic resource was part of an ensemble designated as a historic landmark; or the site of the historic resource itself was designated as a significant feature of a historic landmark; or other buildings, structures, or objects on the property are historic resources.

L.    Notice of the demolition of a historic resource shall be given to the State after the resource is removed.

M.    If a designated historic resource is to be demolished, if it is practical and if funds are available, the Landmarks Commission shall keep a pictorial and graphic history of the historic building or site and obtain artifacts from the building or site which it deems worthy of preservation. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.110 – 10.20.130]


10.20.090 Signs/Plaques.

A.    No sign or plaque may be displayed on a historic resource except for signs or plaques approved in conformance with this chapter and the Sign Code.

B.    All signs and plaques to be displayed on a historic property must be approved by the City.

C.    Signs that are freestanding, painted on the windows or glass doors or that are similar to signs shown in historic photographs of the structure are permitted.

D.    Signs must be attached to the structure in such a way as to not cause irreversible damage to the building. New signs shall be attached by reusing existing hardware whenever possible. New brackets and bolts on masonry buildings shall be put only in wood or mortar, and not in bricks or rock.

E.    The size of the sign must be in proportion to the size of the historic building. The placement of the sign shall not obscure significant architectural elements of the building.

F.    The type of the sign, font, design and shape of the sign should be compatible with the historic building and the historic character of the historic district.

G.    The materials of which the sign is made must be compatible with the historic building and the historic character of the historic district.

H.    Backlighted or internally illuminated signs are prohibited. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.140]


10.20.100 Capital Improvement Projects.

Any capital improvement project administered by the City in or adjacent to a designated historical district, building, or site shall be submitted to the Landmarks Commission during the design phase of the project so that any issues raised by the Commission may be addressed. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.150]


10.20.110 Appeals.

A.    An appellant must file a completed notice of appeal in conformance with BDC 4.1.1100.

B.    Appeals of Type II decisions shall be heard by the Landmarks Commission as via the Type III process. Appeals of Landmarks Commission decisions shall be to the City Council and shall comply with the appeal procedures contained in BDC Chapter 4.1. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.160]


10.20.120 Penalties.

A.    A violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction.

B.    Illegal Demolition or Removal of a Historic Resource.

1.    The demolition or removal of a historic resource without the appropriate permit shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable accordingly.

2.    The City is authorized to institute a civil action against any person or group of persons who demolishes a designated historic resource without a demolition permit to recover up to 20 percent of the current real market value of the subject property as determined by the Deschutes County Assessor or in the event that the property is sold or conveyed for profit to recover the difference between the sales price and the purchase price by the property owner. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly 10.20.170]


10.20.130 Design Review Criteria.

The following design review criteria shall apply to alterations, additions and new construction:

A.    Siting.

1.    In addition to the zoning requirements, the relationship of new additions and new construction to the street and to the open space between buildings shall be compatible with adjacent historic buildings and with the historic character of the surrounding area.

2.    New additions and new construction shall be sited so that the impact to the primary facade(s) is kept to a minimum. Additions shall generally be located at the rear portions of the property or in such locations where they have the least visual impact from public ways.

B.    Landscape (Visible from Adjacent Public Street).

1.    Alterations and new development shall incorporate traditional landscape elements evident in the historic properties in the surrounding area such as grass, trees, shrubs, and picket fences as applicable.

2.    Inappropriate landscape treatments, such as berms and extensive ground cover inconsistent with the historic landscaping of the property, are prohibited.

C.    Building Height.

1.    In addition to the zoning requirements, the height of new additions and new construction shall not exceed the height of the historic building being added onto, or of historic buildings in the surrounding area.

D.    Building Massing.

1.    New additions shall be articulated in such a manner that no single element is visually larger than the existing historic building.

E.    Proportion and Scale.

1.    The relationship of height to width of new additions and their sub-elements, such as windows and doors and of alterations, shall be compatible with related elements of the historic building and with the historic character of the surrounding area.

2.    The relationship of solids to voids (wall to window) shall be compatible with related elements on the historic building and with the historic character of the surrounding area.

F.    Exterior Features.

1.    General.

a.    To the extent practicable, original historic architectural elements and materials shall be preserved.

b.    Architectural elements and materials for new additions shall be compatible with related elements of the historic building and with the historic character of the surrounding area.

c.    The preservation, cleaning, repair, and other treatment of original materials shall be done in a manner as to retain the original materials to the most practical extent.

2.    Foundations.

a.    Concrete or masonry foundations to replace deteriorated wood foundations are permitted. Such new foundations shall be covered with board skirting or similar treatment to match the original appearance and extend to within six to eight inches of the ground level.

b.    Concrete or masonry foundations for new additions need not be covered with material that simulates construction techniques that were practiced at the original time of construction.

c.    New foundations shall not significantly alter the historic finish floor elevation of the building.

3.    Roofs.

a.    Roofs on new additions shall be of forms (gabled, hipped, etc.) that are compatible with the historic building and the historic character of the district.

4.    Garages/Carports.

a.    When feasible, garages and carports shall be located on the site where they have the minimum visual impact from public streets.

b.    Where garages must face the street front, they shall be designed to minimize their bulk and visual impact. Single-car garage doors should be employed. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014; Ord. NS-1970, 2005. Formerly Appendix “B.”]


10.20.140 Supplemental Information.

Design new buildings to be compatible with surrounding buildings that contribute to the overall character of the historic district in terms of height, form, size, scale, massing, proportion, and roof shape.

A.    The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties. The standards are neither technical nor prescriptive, but are intended to promote responsible preservation practices that help protect our nation’s irreplaceable cultural resources. For example, they cannot, in and of themselves, be used to make essential decisions about which features of the historic building should be saved and which can be changed. But once a treatment is selected, the standards provide philosophical consistency to the work. The four treatment approaches are Preservation, Rehabilitation, Restoration, and Reconstruction, outlined below in hierarchical order and explained:

1.    The first treatment, Preservation, places a high premium on the retention of all historic fabric through conservation, maintenance and repair. It reflects a building’s continuum over time, through successive occupancies, and the respectful changes and alterations that are made.

2.    Rehabilitation, the second treatment, emphasizes the retention and repair of historic materials, but more latitude is provided for replacement because it is assumed the property is more deteriorated prior to work. (Both Preservation and Rehabilitation standards focus attention on the preservation of those materials, features, finishes, spaces, and spatial relationships that, together, give a property its historic character.)

3.    Restoration, the third treatment, focuses on the retention of materials from the most significant time in a property’s history, while permitting the removal of materials from other periods.

4.    Reconstruction, the fourth treatment, establishes limited opportunities to re-create a nonsurviving site, landscape, building, structure, or object in all new materials.

B.    Standards for Preservation.

1.    A property will be used as it was historically, or be given a new use that maximizes the retention of distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. Where a treatment and use have not been identified, a property will be protected and, if necessary, stabilized until additional work may be undertaken.

2.    The historic character of a property will be retained and preserved. The replacement of intact or repairable historic materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be avoided.

3.    Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Work needed to stabilize, consolidate, and conserve existing historic materials and features will be physically and visually compatible, identifiable upon close inspection, and properly documented for future research.

4.    Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right will be retained and preserved.

5.    Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be preserved.

6.    The existing condition of historic features will be evaluated to determine the appropriate level of intervention needed. Where the severity of deterioration requires repair or limited replacement of a distinctive feature, the new material will match the old in composition, design, color, and texture.

7.    Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials will not be used.

8.    Archaeological resources will be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken.

C.    Rehabilitation projects must meet the following standards, as interpreted by the National Park Service, to qualify as “certified rehabilitations” eligible for the 20 percent rehabilitation tax credit. The standards are applied to projects in a reasonable manner, taking into consideration economic and technical feasibility.

The standards apply to historic buildings of all periods, styles, types, materials, and sizes. They apply to both the exterior and the interior of historic buildings. The standards also encompass related landscape features and the building’s site and environment as well as attached, adjacent, or related new construction.

1.    A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.

2.    The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.

3.    Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.

4.    Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.

5.    Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be preserved.

6.    Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.

7.    Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.

8.    Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.

9.    New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.

10.    New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.

D.    Standards for Restoration.

1.    A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new use which reflects the property’s restoration period.

2.    Materials and features from the restoration period will be retained and preserved. The removal of materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize the period will not be undertaken.

3.    Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Work needed to stabilize, consolidate and conserve materials and features from the restoration period will be physically and visually compatible, identifiable upon close inspection, and properly documented for future research.

4.    Materials, features, spaces, and finishes that characterize other historical periods will be documented prior to their alteration or removal.

5.    Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize the restoration period will be preserved.

6.    Deteriorated features from the restoration period will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials.

7.    Replacement of missing features from the restoration period will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence. A false sense of history will not be created by adding conjectural features, features from other properties, or by combining features that never existed together historically.

8.    Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials will not be used.

9.    Archaeological resources affected by a project will be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken.

10.    Designs that were never executed historically will not be constructed.

E.    Standards for Reconstruction.

1.    Reconstruction will be used to depict vanished or nonsurviving portions of a property when documentary and physical evidence is available to permit accurate reconstruction with minimal conjecture, and such reconstruction is essential to the public understanding of the property.

2.    Reconstruction of a landscape, building, structure, or object in its historic location will be preceded by a thorough archaeological investigation to identify and evaluate those features and artifacts which are essential to an accurate reconstruction. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken.

3.    Reconstruction will include measures to preserve any remaining historic materials, features, and spatial relationships.

4.    Reconstruction will be based on the accurate duplication of historic features and elements substantiated by documentary or physical evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different features from other historic properties. A reconstructed property will re-create the appearance of the nonsurviving historic property in materials, design, color, and texture.

5.    A reconstruction will be clearly identified as a contemporary re-creation.

6.    Designs that were never executed historically will not be constructed. [Ord. NS-2236, 2015; Ord. NS-2226, 2014]


Title 11 UTILITIES1  Revised 7/20

Chapters: 

11.16    Solid Waste Management  Revised 7/201

Code reviser’s note: Noncodified franchise ordinances can be viewed on the City website. 


Chapter 11.16 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT Revised 7/20 

Sections:

11.16.020    Purposes, Policy and Scope.

11.16.030    Definitions.

11.16.040    Persons and Practices Exempt from Franchise.

11.16.050    Practices Prohibited without a Franchise.

11.16.060    Grant of Exclusive Franchise, Franchise Territories. 

11.16.070    Franchise Term.

11.16.080    Franchisee Responsibility.

11.16.090    Suspension, Modification or Revocation of Franchise.

11.16.100    Termination/Failure to Provide Service.

11.16.110    Rate Determination.

11.16.120    Public Responsibility.

11.16.130    Penalties.

11.16.140    Complaints.

11.16.150    Franchise Fee. Revised 7/20

Exhibits


11.16.020 Purposes, Policy and Scope.

The City of Bend regulates solid waste service to:

A.    Ensure safe, efficient, economical and comprehensive solid waste service.

B.    Ensure fair and equitable consumer rates and to prohibit rate preferences or other practices that might be discriminatory.

C.    Conserve energy and material resources, reduce solid wastes and promote material and energy recovery in all forms.

D.    Provide for technologically and economically feasible resource recovery.

E.    Eliminate overlapping service and thereby increase efficiency and decrease truck noise, street wear, energy waste, air pollution and public inconvenience.

F.    Protect public health and the environment.

G.    Provide public service standards.

H.    Protect against improper and dangerous handling of hazardous wastes.

I.    Provide a basis and incentive for investment in solid waste equipment, facilities, sites and technology. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.030 Definitions.

A.    Franchisee means a person granted a franchise by this chapter, including that person’s employees, agents and subcontractors. 

B.    Generator or producer means a person who generates and produces solid waste as a result of that person’s household, business, agricultural, or governmental activities. Generator or producer does not include any third party who transports solid waste, without having generated or produced it. 

C.    Hazardous waste means any waste defined as hazardous waste by Federal or Oregon law. Conditionally exempt hazardous waste is waste generated in quantities below the threshold adopted by the Environmental Quality Commission under the terms of ORS 466.020.

D.    Resource recovery means the process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste, including reuse, recycling, and other materials recovery or energy recovery of or from solid waste.

E.    Service means the collection, transportation or disposal of or resource recovery from solid waste within the City of Bend.

F.    Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes including, without limitation, garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, ashes or swill, newsprint or waste paper, corrugated paper or cardboard, grass clippings, compost, residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional wastes, discarded home or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture, vehicle parts or tires, vegetable or animal wastes, infectious waste as defined by ORS 459.387, food waste and other wastes.

G.    Solid waste management means the prevention of or reduction of solid waste; management of service; and facilities and equipment necessary or convenient to those activities.

H.    Waste means solid waste and any other material that is no longer directly usable by the source, generator or producer of the material, which material is to be disposed of or to be resource recovered by another person.

1.    The fact that all or any part of a material may have value and thus be recovered does not remove it from this definition.

2.    The fact that the source, generator or producer of materials has separated or segregated such material from other waste does not remove the material from this definition. [Ord. NS‑2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1515, 1990; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.040 Persons and Practices Exempt from Franchise.

Nothing in this chapter requires a franchise for the following businesses or practices:

A.    The collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by a private charitable organization regularly engaged in such business or activity. 

B.    The collection, transportation and reuse or recycling of totally source separated materials or operation of a collection center for totally source separated materials by a religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization which organization was not organized or operated for any solid waste service or management purpose and which organization is using the activity for fund raising. 

C.    The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage containers under ORS Chapter 459A. 

D.    The generator or producer who transports and disposes of waste created as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business or service of licensed auto wrecking, demolition, land clearing, construction, gardening or landscaping; street sweeping, auto body recovery, or septic tank pumping or sludge collection. Janitorial service does not include cleanup of accumulated or stored wastes as a stand-alone service.

E.    The transportation by a person of solid waste generated or produced by such person to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market. The transportation by a landlord of residential property of solid waste generated or produced by tenants or occupants to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market.

F.    The purchase of totally source separated solid waste for fair market value. 

G.    The providing of service to a State or Federal agency under written contract with such agency.

H.    The providing of service for hazardous wastes conditionally exempt under Oregon Environmental Quality Commission rules.

I.    The burning of clean combustible waste products (wood, paper) in a residential fireplace, wood stove, or furnace. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.050 Practices Prohibited without a Franchise.

Unless exempted by BC 11.16.040 or franchised pursuant to BC 11.16.060, no person shall provide service in the City. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.060 Grant of Exclusive Franchise, Franchise Territories.

A.    Bend Garbage Company, Inc., and Waste Connections, Inc., are the City’s solid waste collection franchisees as established by Ordinance NS-1272, as amended, and have the exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide service within the City limits, including any area that is added to the City, and to use the streets of the City for that purpose. Bend Garbage Company, Inc., has transferred, with City approval, its franchise to Allied Waste Transfer Services of Oregon, LLC, dba Republic Services of Oregon (“Republic Services”). The respective exclusive franchise areas of Republic Services and Waste Connections, Inc., are shown on Exhibit A and the dividing line between the two areas is described in subsection (B) of this section.

B.    The dividing line between the two exclusive franchise areas extends from the western and eastern City limits (present and future). Republic Services provides service in the City limits north of this line and Cascade Disposal, Inc. provides service in the City limits south of this line:

1.    The southerly line of Sections 30, 29, 28, 27, 26, and 25, T17S, R10 and 11E W.M. easterly to the intersection of the centerline of NW Shevlin Park Road.

2.    The centerline of NW Shevlin Park Road from the intersection with the southerly line of Section 25, T17S, R11 W.M. to its easternmost point.

3.    The centerline of NW Newport Avenue from its westernmost point to the intersection with NW Nashville Avenue (centerline of Nashville Avenue).

4.    The centerline of NW Nashville Avenue from the intersection with NW Newport Avenue (centerline) to NW Nashville Avenue’s southeasternmost point (edge of right-of-way).

5.    A straight line connecting the centerline of the southeasternmost point of NW Nashville Avenue to the midpoint of the intersection of NW Louisiana Avenue and NW Riverside Boulevard.

6.    The centerline of NW Riverside Boulevard from the intersection with NW Louisiana Avenue to the point where NW Riverside Boulevard becomes NW Franklin Avenue.

7.    The centerline of NW Franklin Avenue from NW Riverside Avenue to the intersection with Oregon Trunk Railway tracks.

8.    The Oregon Trunk Railway tracks north to the intersection with the centerline of Greenwood Avenue.

9.    The centerline of Greenwood Avenue (Highway 20) from the intersection of the Oregon Trunk Railway easterly to the intersection of a line being the projection of Eagle Road south to the intersection with the centerline of Greenwood Avenue (Highway 20).

10.    The line being the projection of Eagle Road north from the centerline of Greenwood Avenue (Highway 20) north to the intersection of Eagle Road and Neff Road and the southerly line of Section 26, T17S, Range 13E W.M.

11.    The southerly line of Section 26, T17S, Range 13E W.M. from the intersection with Eagle Road easterly along the southerly line of Sections 26, 25, 30, 29, 28, 27, 26, 25 of T17S, Ranges 13E and 14E W.M. to the easterly Deschutes County Line. [Ord. NS-2329, 2019; Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-2092, 2008; Ord. NS-1416, 1985; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.070 Franchise Term.

The franchises described in BC 11.16.060 began on April 15, 1980, and are continuing seven-year franchises. That is, beginning on April 15 of each year, the franchise is renewed for one additional year, unless at least 30 days prior to March 15 of any year the Council notifies the franchisee in writing of intent to terminate the franchise. The franchise will terminate six years from the date of the notice of termination. The Council may alter, extend the term or reinstate continuing renewal with the mutual agreement with the franchisee. Nothing in this section restricts the City from suspending, modifying or revoking the franchise for cause under BC 11.16.090. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS‑1272, 1980]


11.16.080 Franchisee Responsibility.

A.    The franchisee shall:

1.    Dispose of solid waste at a Department of Environmental Quality-approved solid waste disposal or transfer site and comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.

2.    Provide and maintain liability insurance in the amount of not less than $500,000 for injury to a single person, $500,000 to a group of persons and $100,000 property damage, all relating to a single occurrence. In addition to the above-described insurance, franchisee shall keep and maintain “umbrella coverage” in the amount of $2,000,000. Each franchisee shall annually provide the City a certificate of insurance evidencing the required insurance. 

3.    Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities, personnel and finances to provide good service.

4.    Respond promptly and effectively to any complaint on service.

5.    Provide collection of infectious waste as defined in ORS 459.387, either directly or through a subcontract consistent with all applicable laws and regulations. Any subcontractor must agree to comply with this chapter as if the subcontractor were a franchisee.

6.    At the second Council meeting of January 2016 and every three years afterwards, provide an operations report to the Council in open session describing its activities for the prior three calendar years and a plan for future operations. The report shall include, at a minimum, the following information: disposal and recycling volumes, customer counts, rate comparisons, number and type of hauling and other major equipment, recycling program updates and proposed service plans. This report may be combined with any report required under BC 11.16.110. 

B.    The franchisee is not required to store, collect, transport, transfer, dispose of or resource recover any hazardous waste other than household amounts at typical household strength; provided, however, that the franchisee may provide hazardous waste collection and transportation service outside this chapter in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.

C.    The franchisee may, with City approval, subcontract with others to provide a portion of the franchised service. A subcontract does not relieve the franchisee of total responsibility for providing and maintaining service and complying with this chapter.

D.    The franchisee shall not:

1.    Give any rate preference to any person, locality or type of solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of or resource recovery. This subsection does not prohibit uniform classes of rates based upon length of haul, type, quantity or quality of solid waste handled and location of customers so long as such rates are reasonably based on the cost of the particular service. Franchisees shall charge only rates approved by the City Council. Franchisees may volunteer service at no or reduced cost for a charitable, community, civic or benevolent purpose. If a franchisee is requested to provide a service for which a rate has not been approved, the franchisee may charge a reasonable rate to cover its cost and a reasonable rate of return.

2.    a.    Transfer this franchise in any way or any interest therein, or transfer any ownership interest in franchise, including but not limited to the transfer of franchisee stock to any other person without prior written approval of the Council.

b.    A pledge of the franchise or any interest in franchisee or its stock as financial security shall be considered as a transfer for purposes of this section. 

c.    The Council may impose conditions on the approval of transfers. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1515, 1990; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.090 Suspension, Modification or Revocation of Franchise.

A.    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter after 60 days’ written notice by the City of the deficiency shall be grounds for modification, suspension or revocation of the franchise.

B.    The franchisee who has received a notice of deficiency may request a public hearing before the Council.



C.    At a public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall have an opportunity to present oral, written or documentary evidence to the Council.

D.    The Council may uphold, modify or withdraw the notice. If the Council upholds the notice, the time for compliance shall not be extended, but the Council may modify the notice and extend the time for compliance. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.100 Termination/Failure to Provide Service.

The franchisee shall not terminate or fail to provide service to any customers unless:

A.    The street or road access is blocked, and there is no alternate route; 

B.    Excessive weather conditions render providing service unduly hazardous to persons providing service or the failure to provide service is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an act outside franchisee’s control;

C.    A customer is not complying with BC 11.16.120 or has not paid for service provided after a regular billing and after a 15-day written notice to pay;

D.    A customer fails to comply with a franchisee’s reasonable requirements concerning the packaging of infectious waste. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.110 Rate Determination.

A.    The City has approved rates for service for each franchisee by resolution. The rates may be obtained from the City Recorder’s office, and each franchisee shall post the rates on its website and make hard copies available to the public at no charge.

B.    By May 15 of each year, each franchisee shall file a financial report. 

C.    A franchisee may, not later than May 15 of any year, apply for an adjustment in rates to take effect on July 1 of that year. The franchisee shall provide the City income and cost information sufficient to demonstrate franchisee’s profit and profit margin for the previous five years and projected profit and profit margin for the next three years. The City reserves the right to inspect documents that support the information required to be provided under this section. The Council may approve, disapprove or modify an application for rate adjustment. Any modification in rates shall be by Council resolution.

D.    Franchisees shall keep accurate accounting records throughout the term of the franchise and shall maintain those records for three years after termination of the franchise. The City may require an audit of the franchisee’s books, to determine the accuracy of the franchisee’s financial reporting. The cost of the audit shall be borne by City, unless the audit results reveal an underpayment of more than eight percent of the franchise fee for the period audited. In the case of an eight percent or greater underpayment, the full cost of the audit shall be paid by the franchisee. Franchisee shall, within 30 days of receiving the audit report, pay the underpayment determined by an audit to City together with nine percent per annum interest from the date payments should have been made to the date the payment is actually made, as well as the costs of the audit, if applicable. 

E.    Franchisees shall bill and collect on a current billing basis. If a franchisee has experienced collection problems on a particular account, the franchisee may require a reasonable deposit, advance payment, restart fee, or other security as a condition of continuing or restarting service. 

F.    Rates shall be uniform or uniform within zones and classes of service. The City may approve class discounts. 

G.    Franchisee may require the owner of rented premises to accept responsibility for the payment for service to those facilities as a condition for providing such service. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1930, 2004; Ord. NS-1562, 1992; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.120 Public Responsibility.

In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with ORS Chapters 459 and 459A and other applicable laws and regulations:

A.    No person shall place hazardous waste for collection or disposal by franchisee without notice. This shall not apply to minor quantities of hazardous wastes generated at or by a single-family residential unit.

B.    No person other than the person producing the materials, an officer or employee of the City, or an employee of a franchisee, shall remove the lid from any solid waste container, molest or scatter solid waste stored in such container, or deposit solid waste into a solid waste container. For the purpose of this section, the franchisee is the “owner” of containers supplied by the franchisee.

C.    No unauthorized person shall remove solid waste placed out for collection and resource recovery by the franchisee or a person exempted by BC 11.16.040 and operating solely within the exemption.

D.    Unless permitted by the franchisee, no person shall install or use any container for pick up by franchisee other than those supplied by franchisee. Any solid waste that does not fit in the container may be set out in plastic bags or other containers approved by the franchisee and shall be subject to an additional charge. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure safe equipment, sizes and weights and facilitate franchisee utilizing the most efficient collection equipment and methods.

E.    Franchisees are not required to collect solid waste from underground containers or containers located behind any locked or latched door, gate or inside of any building or structure. 

F.    Franchisees may establish maximum weights for each size of container and may refuse to collect from containers that exceed the maximum weight. 

G.    Except as provided in this section, all waste and recyclables placed for collection shall be placed in the solid waste, recycling or yard debris container or in the bins supplied for glass collection. Excess solid waste shall be placed in securely closed plastic bags or other containers approved by the franchisee, customers with franchisee-provided yard debris containers shall place excess yard debris in large compostable sacks designed for that purpose, and flattened corrugated cardboard may be set out in neatly stacked, securely tied, bundles. Any such sacks or bundles shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight.

H.    Where a customer requires an unusual volume of service or a special type of service requiring substantial investment in equipment, the franchisee may require a contract with the customer to finance and assure amortization of the equipment. The purpose of this provision is to assure that such equipment not become a charge against other rate payers who are not benefited.

I.    Franchisee may charge extra for return service to a container or drop box or roll off box that is blocked by automobiles or other obstacles.

J.    Every person who generates or produces wastes shall remove or have removed all putrescible wastes at least every seven days. More frequent removal may be required where facility or service involves the public health. All wastes shall be removed at sufficient frequency as to prevent health hazards, nuisances or pollution.

K.    The producer or generator of waste shall keep the area around such cans or containers free of accumulated wastes. 

L.    Except as otherwise exempted in this chapter, no person shall burn, dump, or in any other manner dispose of solid waste anywhere other than in an approved solid waste disposal facility or transfer station. 

M.    All customers of franchisees shall use reasonable efforts to separate recyclable matter from solid waste and set out the recyclable matter in designated recyclable containers. For purposes of this section, recyclable matter means materials accepted by the franchisee as part of its curbside recycling program. 

N.    Customers shall place solid waste, recycling, yard debris and glass recycling containers for collection in locations that do not block bike lanes, driveways or sidewalks. Containers may be placed at the edge of streets that do not have bicycle lanes. Containers may be placed on sidewalks if at least a three-foot passage area is maintained. Customers shall consult with their service provider if complying with these standards does not appear possible and comply with the service provider’s direction. 

O.    Customers should normally set out solid waste and recycling containers for collection no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day before the next scheduled collection and should normally retrieve them within 24 hours after collection. Additional time is allowed when customers will not be present to comply with these timelines.

P.    Persons who set out exempt wastes, including but not limited to oils and grease, for recycling or reuse by persons other than franchisees shall ensure that they are set out in leak-proof containers and are placed so as to not block passage of any street, sidewalk, bike lane or alley. Persons collecting oils and grease for recycling or reuse shall provide their customers with secure, lockable, leak-proof containers with secured lids that are designed to be stable and resistant to spillage. No person shall spill, damage or interfere with such containers or in any way cause their contents to be released onto the surface of any street, sidewalk, bike lane or alley. The City Manager may adopt regulations governing oil and grease waste containers. 

Franchisees are not responsible for enforcing the provisions of this section. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]


11.16.130 Penalties.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is a class A civil infraction. Each day of violation is a separate infraction. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980. Formerly 11.16.140]


11.16.140 Complaints.

If the City receives a complaint concerning a franchisee, the City will inform the franchisee and the franchisee shall provide a written response to the complaint within two weeks of being notified of the complaint. [Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980. Formerly 11.16.150]


11.16.150 Franchise Fee. Revised 7/20

Each franchisee shall pay the City of Bend a franchise fee of seven percent of the gross receipts of the franchisee from all customers served under its franchise. Gross receipts include all amounts collected by the franchisee for franchise services from City franchise customers. The franchise fee for each month shall be due and payable on or before the fifteenth day of the following month. The franchise fee will be used by the City for street maintenance or other purposes that benefit the City-administered rights-of-way. [Ord. NS-2334, 2019; Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1930, 2004; Ord. NS-1416, 1985; Ord. NS-1272, 1980. Formerly 11.16.180]


Exhibits


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2246, 2015; Ord. NS-1272, 1980]

 


Title 12 REVENUE AND TAXATION Revised 5/19 Revised 7/19

Chapters:

12.05    Room Tax Revised 5/19

12.10    System Development Charges 

12.15    Fees Revised 7/19

12.20    Recreational Marijuana Sales Tax


Chapter 12.05 ROOM TAX Revised 5/19

Sections:

12.05.010    Definitions.

12.05.015    Room Tax Imposed.

12.05.020    Collection of Room Tax by Operator.

12.05.025    Exemptions.

12.05.030    Registration of Operator – Form and Contents – Execution – Certification of Authority.

12.05.035    Remittance and Returns. Revised 5/19

12.05.040    Penalties and Interest.

12.05.045    Deficiency Determinations – Fraud, Evasion, Operator Delay. Revised 5/19

12.05.050    Redeterminations. Revised 5/19

12.05.055    Security for Collection of Tax.

12.05.060    Collection.

12.05.065    Lien.

12.05.070    Refunds. Revised 5/19

12.05.075    Authority of Tax Administrator. Revised 5/19

12.05.080    Administration.

12.05.085    Appeals to City Council.

12.05.090    Penalty.


12.05.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter.

A.    Occupancy means the right to the use or possession of any space in temporary lodging for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for less than 30 days.

B.    Occupant means the person with the right to occupancy or who is responsible for payment for the occupancy.

C.    Operator means any person who receives rent from an occupant or a person paying an occupant’s rent.

D.    Rent means the consideration paid or payable by an occupant for the occupancy of space in temporary lodging valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property, or other consideration. If a separate fee is charged for services, goods or commodities and the fee is optional, that fee is not included in rent. A guaranteed no-show charge based on the rate charged for the room is considered rent, but a cancellation fee is not rent. Examples of optional services may include, but are not limited to: pay-per-view movies, room service, long-distance telephone calls, use of an honor bar or parking. Optional charges require express permission of the occupant to incur the cost. If a group of rooms is booked or arranged at a negotiated rate, an additional charge is optional if the person acting for the group can avoid the charge for the group. Rent includes all fees and assessments based on the number of occupants, human and pets (including but not limited to cleaning, pet, smoking or recreational fees) for which payment is not optional to the occupant. If the operator offers a lodging package that includes something that is not associated with the actual lodging or is provided by a third party, the rent is the price of the package less the cost of the non-lodging portion of the package. If the operator charges room tax based on the total package price, the rent is the full amount of the package.

Because neither the operator nor the City can keep track of every transaction, whether particular charges are part of rent is based on the operator’s standard practices. When an operator’s practices would result in a specific fee being optional for some and not others, it will be treated as not optional for all.

Examples:

1.    An operator charges $100.00 per night for a room. Occupants are provided a breakfast that is included in the per night fee. Occupants may also have lunch or dinner at the property and may charge the cost of these meals to their room. The rent is $100.00 per night because the breakfast is included in the room fee. The rent does not include any charges for optional meals purchased by occupants.

2.    An operator charges $90.00 for a room and $10.00 for parking. If occupants are made aware of the parking charge and have the opportunity to avoid it before incurring the charge, the rent is $90.00. If they are not made aware of the charge for parking and not given the opportunity to avoid the charge, the rent is $100.00.

3.    a.    An operator charges $100.00 for a room, but adds a mandatory three percent “resort fee” for use of hotel amenities. The rent is $103.00 because the resort fee charge is mandatory, not optional.

b.    An operator adds a facilities charge to all bills but will drop the facilities charge if an occasional occupant objects on the basis that the occupant did not use the “facilities.” The facilities charge is part of the rent because it is imposed on occupants and is imposed on many who did not give permission to incur the cost.

4.    A third-party tour company offers a package that includes both hotel and ski lift tickets for $130.00 and pays the operator $100.00 for the room. The rent is $100.00.

5.    An operator charges $90.00 for a smoking room and $80.00 for a nonsmoking room, and charges a $100.00 penalty for smoking in a nonsmoking room. The rent for the smoking room is $90.00, but the $100.00 penalty imposed on improper use of the nonsmoking room is not part of the rent.

6.    An operator charges a pet fee of $10.00 per night for all pets. The pet fee is part of the rent because it is based on occupancy of the room. If the operator charges a refundable pet deposit of $100.00, the deposit is not part of the rent, even if not refunded due to damages to the room.

7.    A group reserves 50 rooms at $80.00 per room and also orders a daily newspaper at an additional $1.00 per room. The rent for each room is $80.00 per night because the person acting for the group could have avoided the $1.00 newspaper charge.

8.    An online room wholesaler sells a room in a lodging facility for $130.00 to customers and pays the owner of the lodging facility $100.00. The rent is $130.00 because that is the amount paid by the customer and the wholesaler must collect the tax based on the $130.00 rent and report and remit the tax to the City, less the administration fee authorized by BC 12.05.035, unless the wholesaler has an approved tax collection and remission agreement, in which case the entity operating the facility will report and remit the tax to the City based on the full amount collected by the wholesaler, less the administration fee.

E.    Tax Administrator means the Finance Director of the City of Bend.

F.    Room tax means the tax payable by the occupant under this chapter.

G.    Temporary lodging means:

1.    Hotel, motel and inn dwelling units that are used for temporary overnight human occupancy;

2.    Spaces used for overnight parking of recreational vehicles or placement of tents during periods of human occupancy; or

3.    Houses, cabins, condominiums, apartment units or other dwelling units, or portions of any of these dwelling units that are used for temporary human occupancy.

H.    Tax collection and remission agreement means a written agreement between a “transient lodging intermediary” as that term is used in State law and a person operating temporary lodging that requires the transient lodging intermediary to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, forward the full amount of the tax collected to the person operating the temporary lodging along with information as to the full amount of rent collected, and requires the person operating the temporary lodging to report the full amount of the rent paid and to remit the tax, less the authorized administration fee, to the City. A tax collection and remission agreement is not valid until approved by the City. [Ord. NS-2253, 2015; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.015 Room Tax Imposed.

A.    Effective June 1, 2015, each occupant shall pay a tax in the amount of 10.4 percent of the rent. The occupant shall pay the room tax with the rent payment. Tax amounts shall be rounded down to the nearest cent. The operator shall maintain records of all rent charged and room tax payments received. The amount of the room tax shall be stated separately from rent or any other charges on all receipts or invoices issued by the operator. If rent is paid in installments a proportionate share of the room tax shall be paid by the occupant to the operator with each installment unless the operator pays the entire amount with the first payment.

B.    Bills and invoices provided to occupants shall list the City of Bend room tax separately and must accurately state the amount of room tax. All amounts listed as room tax on invoices or bills must be reported as room tax and, after collection, must be turned over to the City, less the five percent administrative charge. [Ord. NS-2253, 2015; Ord. NS-2218, 2014; Ord. NS-2173, 2011; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.020 Collection of Room Tax by Operator.

Every operator shall collect the room tax at the time rent is paid, unless an exemption under BC 12.05.025 applies. If payment is by credit card, payment is made at the time credit card information is provided, not when the tax collector ultimately received credit for the transaction. The operator holds the room tax payment in trust for the City until the taxes are remitted to the City as provided in BC 12.05.035. An operator may commingle the tax proceeds with funds of the operator, but the operator is not the owner of room tax proceeds, except that, when a return is filed, the operator becomes the owner of the administrative fee authorized to be retained under BC 12.05.035. Operators may choose to file returns and remit payment based on amounts accrued but not yet collected, and if they do so, will be entitled to a credit for any uncollectibles. The operator is liable for any tax that should have been collected from the occupant, except in cases of nonpayment of rent by the occupant. [Ord. NS-2253, 2015; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.025 Exemptions.

No room tax shall be imposed upon:

A.    The United States or an employee of the Federal government while on Federal business;

B.    A dwelling unit in a hospital, health care facility, long-term care facility or any other residential facility that is licensed, registered or certified by the Department of Human Services;

C.    A dwelling unit in a facility providing treatment for drug or alcohol abuse or providing mental health treatment;

D.    A dwelling unit that is available for public lodging for fewer than 30 days per year (e.g., a hunting lodge that is only open one month during the year);

E.    A dwelling unit, the consideration for which is funded through a contract with a government agency and the purpose of which is to provide emergency or temporary shelter;

F.    A dwelling unit at a nonprofit youth or church camp, nonprofit conference center or other nonprofit facility; or

G.    A dwelling unit that is leased or otherwise occupied by the same person for a consecutive period of 30 days or more. The requirements of this subsection are satisfied even if the physical dwelling unit changes during the consecutive period, if:

1.    All dwelling units occupied are within the same facility; and

2.    The person paying consideration for the temporary lodging is the same person throughout the consecutive period. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.030 Registration of Operator – Form and Contents – Execution – Certification of Authority.

Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator shall provide a completed registration form to the Tax Administrator within 15 calendar days after commencing business. The registration form shall require the operator to provide the name of the business, any separate business address, and other information as the Tax Administrator may require. Operators who own or operate lodging facilities in Bend shall provide the address of the lodging facility. The registration form shall be signed by the operator. The Tax Administrator shall, within 15 days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax. The obligation to collect the tax is imposed once rent for a room is paid, even if the registration form has not been filed or if the certificate has not been issued. Operators who function as transient lodging intermediaries as that term is defined by State law are not required to register if they have and comply with tax collection and remission agreements with all entities within the City of Bend for whom they rent rooms.

Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and shall be surrendered to the Tax Administrator when the business is sold or transferred or when a lodging facility ceases to operate at the location specified in the registration form. Each certificate issued to an operator for a specific lodging facility shall be prominently displayed at the lodging facility and include:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.    The address of the lodging facility;

C.    The date the certificate was issued;

D.    The certificate number as assigned by the Tax Administrator. [Ord. NS-2253, 2015; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.035 Remittance and Returns. Revised 5/19

A.    Operators shall submit a completed tax return form to the Tax Administrator for each calendar month by the fifteenth day of the following month, accompanied by remittance of all tax collected, less a five percent administration fee. If the estimated monthly amount of average tax due is $100.00 or less, the operator has the option of filing the return and remitting the tax on a quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (April 15, July 15, October 15, and January 15). Operators shall also submit any tax that was due but not collected if the rent on which the tax is based was paid, unless the rent and tax were paid to a third party and not passed on in full to the operator, in which case the operator shall pay at least the tax based on the amount of rent received by the operator.

B.    Remittances are delinquent if not made by the twenty-fifth day of the month in which they are due.

C.    Returns shall show the gross rents collected, exempt rents, taxable rents, the total amount of room tax collected and the amount of the administrative fee retained by the operator. Returns shall also show the exempt rents and the basis for exemptions.

D.    Tax returns and remittances may be submitted in person, electronically or by mail. If the return and remittance are mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery.

E.    For good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend the time for making any return or remittance of room tax by up to 30 days. No further extension shall be granted, except by the City Council. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of the remittance due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the remittance and interest due are not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the room tax for computation of penalties.

F.    The Tax Administrator, in order to insure remittance of tax collected or facilitate collection, may in individual cases require returns and remittances more frequently than monthly periods. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2253, 2015; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.040 Penalties and Interest.

A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit room tax collected by the operator other than the five percent administrative fee prior to the date the remittance becomes delinquent shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount due.

B.    Continued Delinquency. Any operator who failed to remit any delinquent amounts within 30 days after the date the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount due. The second delinquency penalty does not apply if the operator has, in good faith, filed a return accompanied by remittance of the amount calculated on the return, and pays the delinquent amount within 30 days after notification of the error. For example, if a good faith error is discovered during an audit three years later and the operator pays within 30 days of notification of the audit result, the second delinquency penalty will not be charged.

C.    Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that failure to make any remittance is intended to evade the provisions of this chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount due is imposed in addition to all other penalties and remittance obligations.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax by the delinquency date shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction of a month without proration for portions of a month on the amount due to the City, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.    Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and accrued interest shall be merged with and become a part of the amount of room tax to be remitted by the operator.

F.    Petition for Waiver. An operator who has paid penalties may petition the City Council for waiver and refund of the penalty or a portion of the penalty. The City Council may waive and direct a refund of the penalty or a portion of the penalty for good cause.

G.    Settlements. The Tax Administrator may, after consultation with the City Attorney, adjust or enter into a settlement as regards any amount believed to be due if, as a result of a bankruptcy filing, foreclosure, bona fide legal or factual dispute, or similar circumstance, it is in the best interest of the City. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.045 Deficiency Determinations – Fraud, Evasion, Operator Delay. Revised 5/19

A.    Deficiency Determination. The Tax Administrator may review tax returns and adjust the amount due based on the information in the return, on information obtained during a review or audit of records, or on the basis of other evidence. In the event of a deficiency, the Tax Administrator shall provide notice of the deficiency to the operator, who shall remit deficiencies within 10 business days of the deficiency notice. Notice may be by electronic mail if an operator’s email address is on file or personal delivery or certified or registered mail.

1.    In reviewing and adjusting tax returns, the Tax Administrator shall offset any amount received in excess of the remittances due against any shortages in remittances.

2.    Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade the room tax, notice of deficiency determinations shall be issued within three years of the period for which the deficiency determination is made.

3.    The time to remit deficient amounts payment under this section shall be extended if the operator timely requests a redetermination under BC 12.05.050.

B.    Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator fails to collect, report or remit the room tax as required, submits a fraudulent return, or otherwise violates or attempts to violate this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall estimate the tax due, and calculate the amount owing from the operator for tax remittance, interest and penalties and provide notice to the operator of the assessment. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years of the discovery by the Tax Administrator of the violation. The determination is due and payable upon receipt of notice and shall become final 10 business days after the date notice was delivered if no petition for redetermination is filed. Notice will be mailed electronically if a valid email address is on file and by first class mail. If the notice is only mailed first class, then the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.050 Redeterminations. Revised 5/19

A.    Any person affected by a determination under BC 12.05.045 may file a petition for redetermination with the Tax Administrator within 10 business days of service of notice of the tax deficiency. A determination under BC 12.05.045 becomes final if a petition for redetermination is not timely filed.

B.    If a petition for redetermination is filed within the allowable period, the Tax Administrator shall reconsider the determination and grant an oral hearing if requested. The petitioner shall be allowed at least 20 business days to prepare for the hearing.

C.    After considering the petition and all available information, the Tax Administrator shall issue a redetermination decision and mail the decision to the petitioner. During the redetermination process, the Tax Administrator may agree to a compromise of the amount due if there is a good-faith dispute over the amount owing. The redetermination decision will be mailed electronically if a valid email address is on file and by first class mail. If the notice is only mailed first class, then the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery.

D.    The decision of the Tax Administrator on redetermination becomes final and payment is due 10 business days after the decision is mailed unless the petitioner files an appeal to the Council within that time. The appeal shall be filed with the Tax Administrator. The Council’s decision shall be final when reduced to writing and mailed to the petitioner and all amounts due must be paid within 10 business days of mailing of the Council decision. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.055 Security for Collection of Tax.

The Tax Administrator may require an operator to deposit security in the form of cash, bond or other security acceptable to the Tax Administrator. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average monthly liability for the period, or $5,000, whichever is less. The amount of security may be increased or decreased by the Tax Administrator so long as the minimum security remains in place. The operator may appeal any decision of the Tax Administrator requiring security under BC 12.05.085. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.060 Collection.

The City may bring legal action to collect on any amounts owed to the City under this chapter within three years after remittance is due to the City or within three years after any determination becomes final. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.065 Lien.

The City may record a lien in the City’s lien docket against any real property owned by the operator in the City as to any delinquent remittances by the operator. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.070 Refunds. Revised 5/19

A.    Refunds by the City to the Operator. If the operator remits more tax, penalty or interest than is due, the operator may file a claim in writing or electronically stating the facts relating to the claim, within three years from the date of remittance. If the claim is approved by the Tax Administrator, the excess amount shall be either refunded or credited on any amount due from the operator.

B.    Refunds by City to Occupant. An occupant may file a claim for refund by filing a claim in writing or electronically within three years of payment providing the facts relating to the claim for refund. If the Tax Administrator determines that the tax was collected and remitted to the city and the occupant was not required to pay the tax or overpaid, the City shall issue a refund.

C.    Refunds by Operator to Occupant. If an occupant has paid tax to an operator, but then stays a total of 30 or more consecutive days, the operator shall refund to the occupant any tax collected for any portion of the continuous stay. The operator shall account for the collection and refund to the Tax Administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to the refund or credit to the tenant, the operator shall be entitled to a corresponding refund or offset if the claim for refund is filed within three years from the date of collection.

D.    Burden of Proof. The person claiming the refund shall have the burden of proving the facts that establish the basis for the refund. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.075 Authority of Tax Administrator. Revised 5/19

The Tax Administrator shall have the power to enforce this chapter, and to adopt rules, regulations and forms consistent with this chapter. Rules and regulations of general application shall be mailed and emailed to all registered operators. The Tax Administrator may also issue written interpretations on request of an operator. As to the operator to whom the interpretation is issued, the City will act consistently with the interpretation until it is withdrawn, and the City shall provide 30 days’ written notice of withdrawal of an interpretation. [Ord. NS-2323, 2019; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.080 Administration.

A.    Use of Room Tax Funds. Thirty-one and one-fifth percent of total room tax revenues will be used for tourism promotion. The City may enter into contracts with any entity for tourism promotion.



Thirty percent of room tax revenues received by the City based on any increment of tax between a nine percent tax rate and a 10.4 percent tax rate shall be used for police and fire services.

B.    Records Required from Operators. Every operator shall keep records of each transaction involving rent and/or collection of tax. All records shall be retained for at least three years and six months.

C.    Examination of Records – Investigations. The Tax Administrator or agent may examine all records of an operator relating to receipt of rent and tax and remittance of tax during normal business hours and may obtain copies of the records to audit returns.

D.    Confidential Character of Information Obtained – Disclosure Unlawful. The City shall maintain the confidentiality of information provided by operators. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:

1.    The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another City official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or collecting City business license fees.

2.    Disclosure of information to the operator and the operator’s agents.

3.    The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom Certificates of Authority have been issued.

4.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City.

5.    Disclosures required by ORS Chapter 192. [Ord. NS-2291, 2017; Ord. NS-2218, 2014; Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.085 Appeals to City Council.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator may appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the Tax Administrator within 10 business days of the serving or mailing of the decision being appealed. The City Manager shall schedule the hearing on a Council agenda and provide the appellant notice of the hearing at least 10 business days before the hearing. The City Council may agree to a compromise of the amount of tax remittance if there is a good faith dispute over the amount owing. Any person may appeal the issuance of a rule or regulation issued by the Tax Administrator to the Council by filing a written appeal within 10 business days of the mailing of the notice of the regulation. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


12.05.090 Penalty.

A violation of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. Failing to register or file a return when required or submitting false or misleading information in a registration or return are violations of this chapter. Each day that a violation for failing to register, file a return, or remit when due remains uncured is a separate infraction. The Municipal Court may increase the amount of penalty up to 10 times the normal penalty imposed on an operator if the Municipal Court Judge finds that the operator collected the tax imposed by this chapter and intentionally failed to remit the tax proceeds to the City when required by this chapter. All amounts listed as room tax in bills or invoices issued by the operator shall be considered tax collected by the operator, unless the operator received no payment on the bill or invoice. [Ord. NS-2163, 2011]


Chapter 12.10 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

12.10.010    Purpose.

12.10.020    Scope and Interpretation.

12.10.030    Definitions.

12.10.040    System Development Charges Imposed – Method for Establishment.

12.10.050    Methodology.

12.10.060    Authorized Expenditures.

12.10.070    Expenditure Restrictions.

12.10.080    SDC Project List.

12.10.090    Adoption or Amendment of Methodology.

12.10.100    Collection of Charge, Deferral, Appeal.

12.10.105    Payment Deferral for Commercial Development.

12.10.110    Installment Payments.

12.10.120    Exemptions. 

12.10.130    Credits.

12.10.140    Notice.

12.10.150    Segregation and Use of Revenue.

12.10.160    Refunds.

12.10.170    Appeals.

12.10.180    Prohibited Connection.

12.10.190    Deferral.


12.10.010 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to authorize system development charges (“SDCs”) to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater, storm drainage, and transportation on developments and redevelopments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements, consistent with State law. The provisions of this chapter are to be interpreted to be consistent with State law. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.020 Scope and Interpretation.

The SDCs authorized by this chapter are separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee. SDCs are not taxes on property or on a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of property within the meaning of Article XI, Section 11B of the Oregon Constitution or the legislation implementing that section and are not subject to the limitations imposed by that section. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter.

A.    Active use means day-to-day residential, commercial, industrial or institutional use.

B.    Applicant means the person who applies for a residential, commercial, industrial, or other connection to the City’s water supply system or sanitary sewer system and/or who develops property within the City or within the City’s Urban Growth Boundary.

C.    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons or property of any kind and for any public, commercial, industrial, or other use. This term shall not include temporary construction sheds or trailers erected to assist in construction and maintenance during the term of a building permit.

D.    Capital improvements means public facilities or assets used for:

1.    Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal, or any combination.

2.    Water supply, treatment, distribution, storage, metering, fire protection, or any combination.

3.    Drainage and flood control.

4.    Transportation facilities including vehicle and multi-modal.

E.    Cost of a qualified public improvement means the actual cost of constructing the qualified public improvement, adjusted by the percentage that the public improvement is SDC improvement fee eligible (the growth portion). “Cost of a qualified public improvement” does not include permit fees, administrative charges and similar charges.

F.    Developer means the person who constructs a qualified public improvement entitled to a credit for the cost of the qualified public improvement.

G.    Development means any construction of improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and water and sewer fixtures. Development includes redevelopment of property requiring a building permit. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways.

H.    Owner means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser(s) under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

I.    Permittee means the person to whom a building permit, development permit, a permit or plan approval to connect to the sewer system, City water system, or right-of-way access permit is issued.

J.    Qualified public improvement means a capital improvement that is:

1.    Required as a condition of development approval;

2.    Included in an adopted SDC project list and:

a.    Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or

b.    Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

For the purposes of this definition, contiguous includes improvements within a right-of-way that abuts the parcel. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.040 System Development Charges Imposed – Method for Establishment.

A.    The amount of system development charges may be set and revised by resolution of the City Council. Any resolutions setting or amending the amount of any SDC shall state the amount of the charge and the methodology used to set the amount of the charge.

B.    Unless exempted in BC 12.10.120, SDCs for water, wastewater, stormwater, and transportation are imposed on all development within the City, on all development outside the City that connects to the water and/or sewer facilities of the City, and on all other development that increases the usage of the water and/or sewer system or that contributes to the need for additional or enlarged capital improvements. This includes new construction and the alteration, expansion or replacement of a building or development if the alteration, expansion or replacement results in a change in any of the components of the formula for determining the amount of SDCs to be paid. [Ord. NS-2298, 2017; Ord. NS-2247, 2015; Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.050 Methodology.

A.    The methodology used to establish or modify a reimbursement fee shall be based on the cost of then-existing facilities, including design, financing and construction costs; the value of unused capacity available to future system users; rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements; and other relevant factors identified by the City Council, consistent with applicable law. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

B.    The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related and other relevant factors identified by the Council. The methodology shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future users.

C.    The methodology used to establish or modify improvement fees or reimbursement fees, or both, shall be adopted and may be amended by Council resolution. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.060 Authorized Expenditures.

A.    Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for such improvements.

B.    Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or projected development.

C.    SDC proceeds may be expended only on projects identified in the SDC capital improvement project list or on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter (including the costs of developing SDC methodologies), system planning, providing an annual accounting of SDC expenditures and other costs directly related to or required for the administration and operation of this SDC program. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.070 Expenditure Restrictions.

A.    SDCs shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

B.    SDCs shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.080 SDC Project List.

A.    The Council has adopted, and may amend by resolution, SDC project lists for the various types of SDC that list:

1.    The capital improvements that the City intends to fund in whole or in part with the improvement fee revenues; and

2.    The estimated cost of each improvement and the percentage of that cost eligible to be funded with improvement fee revenues.

The project list included in the most recently adopted methodology shall be considered to be the SDC project list if no other list has been adopted.

B.    In amending the SDC project lists, the City may incorporate, by reference, all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvement plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section.

C.    If the amount of SDC charges will be increased by a proposed modification to the SDC project list, the City shall:

1.    Provide at least 30 days’ notice prior to adopting the modification to those who have requested notice; and

2.    Hold a public hearing if a written request for a hearing is received at least seven days prior to the date scheduled for adoption of the proposed modification. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.090 Adoption or Amendment of Methodology.

A.    The Council shall hold a public hearing prior to adopting or amending the methodology on which any SDC is based.

B.    The Council shall provide written notice to persons who have requested notice of any adoption or modification of SDC methodology at least 90 days before the hearing. If no one has requested notice, the City shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 90 days before the hearing.

C.    The revised methodology shall be available to the public at least 60 days before the first public hearing of the adoption or amendment of the methodology. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the City. If the City fails to provide sufficient notice, it can cure the defect by issuing a new notice and holding a new hearing. The City may consider comments submitted at improperly noticed hearings.

D.    A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the SDC methodology if the change is based on a change in project costs, including cost of materials, labor and real property, or on a provision for a periodic adjustment included in the methodology or adopted by separate ordinance or resolution, consistent with State law.

E.    A change in the amount of an improvement fee is not a modification of the SDC methodology if the change is the result of a change in the SDC project list adopted in accord with this chapter. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.100 Collection of Charge, Deferral, Appeal.

A.    The SDC is payable on:

1.    Issuance of a building permit or any construction activity for which a building permit is required but not obtained.

2.    Issuance of a development permit or approval for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit.

3.    Issuance of a permit to connect to the water system or actual connection to the water system if a permit is not obtained.

4.    Issuance of a permit to connect to the sewer system or actual connection to the sewer system if a permit is not obtained.

B.    SDCs are payable only for those types of improvements affected by the development, permit or connection. For example, a permit to connect an existing structure to the sewer system does not necessarily trigger an obligation to pay water or transportation SDCs.

C.    The amount of SDC payable shall be established by resolution relying on an approved methodology and SDC project list. The SDC project list, methodology and amount of charge may be adopted in a single resolution, and more than one type of SDC (water, sewer, storm, and transportation) may be included in a single resolution. The resolution may allow for a case-by-case determination of the amount payable under specific circumstances.

D.    Unless payment is deferred under subsection (E) of this section, no permit or approval listed in subsection (A) of this section may be issued unless applicable SDCs have been paid or an agreement entered to pay over time as allowed by this chapter. No certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval may be issued for a structure if SDCs are unpaid, unless an agreement to pay over time has been entered into.

E.    The City Council may by an ordinance allow categorical deferral of SDC payments for a period of time not to extend beyond the occupancy date. Individual deferrals are not permitted.

F.    The City may also collect Parks SDCs payable to the Bend Metropolitan Parks and Recreation District at the time that City SDCs are payable. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.105 Payment Deferral for Commercial Development.

As authorized by BC 12.10.100(E), any multifamily residential development may defer payment of SDCs from the time payment is otherwise due until the time an occupancy permit is issued.

To qualify for the deferral, the person applying for deferral must, at the time of building permit application, (A) pay a fee established by Council resolution to the City to cover all the City’s costs associated with the deferral, and (B) agree to pay all SDCs prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or actual occupancy. The amount of SDCs due shall be determined as of the date the occupancy permit is applied for. [Ord. NS-2278, 2016]


12.10.110 Installment Payments.

A.    The owner of the parcel of land subject to a systems development charge may apply for payment in 20 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with State law. A shorter payment plan is acceptable if approved by the City. The parcel of land shall be subject to a lien for the unpaid balance.

B.    Application forms for installment payments shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors.

C.    An applicant for installment payment shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

D.    The lien shall be docketed in the City’s lien docket. From that time, the City shall have a lien on the described parcel for the unpaid balance, together with interest on the unpaid balance. The lien shall be enforceable in any manner authorized or permitted by State law. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.120 Exemptions.

The following actions are exempt from payment of SDCs:

A.    Additions to single-family dwelling that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit.

B.    An alteration, addition, replacement, change in use or permit or connection that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use or potential use of a public improvement system is exempt from payment for the SDC payment applicable to that type of improvement. Some redevelopment may be subject to some types of SDCs and not to others.

C.    Development of housing for which the developer or property owner agrees to record a deed restriction to maintain the property as affordable housing, is within any of the categories in this section and is approved through the process set forth in subsections (D) and (E) of this section is exempt from 100 percent of water, sewer and transportation SDCs:

1.    Rental housing that is affordable for households with an income at or below 80 percent of the area median income (“AMI”) as determined by the State Housing Council based on information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

2.    Owner-occupied or lease-to-purchase housing for households with an income at or below 80 percent of the AMI as determined by the State Housing Council based on information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

3.    Homeless shelter developments.

D.    Exemption applications shall be evaluated by the Affordable Housing Advisory Committee to decide whether requested exemptions meet the standards set forth in this section.

E.    The City shall record documentation of the exemption with the Deschutes County Clerk’s office by the time the project receives a certificate of occupancy or final inspection. In the event the property for which an exemption is granted ceases to qualify for the exemption or is sold or transferred for use other than affordable housing within five years from the date the project is completed, the person or entity to whom the exemption was granted shall be required to pay the City the amount of the exempted SDCs, plus interest at the statutory rate for interest on a judgment from the date the exemption was recorded. A transfer from an owner to whom an exemption was granted to the initial lessee under a lease to purchase agreement shall not be deemed a transfer of ownership for purposes of this subsection.

F.    The affordable housing exemption authorized by subsections (C) through (E) of this section will automatically sunset and cease to be effective as of January 1, 2023.

G.    Development of new day care facilities or expansion of existing day care facilities are exempt from 70 percent of transportation SDCs. The exemption authorized by this subsection (G) will automatically sunset and cease to be effective as of December 31, 2020. [Ord. NS-2322, 2018; Ord. NS-2298, 2017; Ord. NS-2247, 2015; Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.130 Credits.

A.    Credit at Time of Change in Use or Redevelopment. When redevelopment or change in use occurs, the amount of SDCs payable shall be determined by the following rules:

1.    SDCs Previously Paid on Property. If SDCs had been previously paid for the property, a credit in the amount of the SDCs that would be payable for the existing structure and use under the current rate schedule shall be provided. For purposes of this section, existing structure and use means the structure and use for which SDCs have been paid. At the time of redevelopment, if the SDCs payable for the new structure and/or use exceed the amount of the credit, the difference shall be paid to the City. This rule applies regardless of the length of time between the end of the prior use and the redevelopment. Redevelopment to a use that results in a lower SDC amount does not reduce the amount of credit to be provided at the time of any future redevelopments. Any credits provided under subsection (C) of this section shall be deducted from the credits authorized by this section.

Examples:

a.    SDCs had been paid for three dwelling units on a property and the property is redeveloped with five dwelling units. A credit for three dwelling units’ worth of SDCs will be provided, so the amount payable would be the amount for two dwelling units.

b.    SDCs had been paid for two dwelling units and the property is redeveloped with a large retail use, with both residential units eliminated. The SDCs would be the difference between the SDCs payable for the new commercial structure and use and the SDCs that would be charged for two dwelling units.

c.    SDCs were paid based on restaurant use, but then the property was converted to another retail use with lower SDCs. The property is then reconverted back to restaurant use, using exactly the same configuration as the original restaurant. At the time of the conversion to retail use, no SDCs are payable, because the amount payable is less than the credit. The credit for restaurant use remains with the property, so at the time of reconversion to restaurant use, no additional SDCs are payable because the credit remained in effect and the credit for the original use is exactly the same as the amount that is owed. Thus, no payment is required, even if the SDC rates have increased in the interim.

2.    SDCs Not Previously Paid.

a.    Vacant Land. If SDCs have not been previously paid for the property, a credit in the amount of the SDC charges under the current rate schedule shall be provided for any structure on the property during the 10 years immediately prior to the filing of the building permit application. No SDC credit shall be provided under this subsection if there has been no structure on the property for 10 years or more. The credits shall be based on the predominant use of the structure in the last 10 years, or if there has been no use in the last 10 years, on the last use of the structure.

b.    No Prior Water Connection. Even if there is or has been a structure on the property, no water SDC credit shall be provided if the property has never been connected to the City water system.

c.    No Prior Sewer Connection. Even if there is or has been a structure on the property, no sewer SDC credit shall be provided if the property has never been connected to the City sewer system.

d.    Burden of Proof. The property owner shall have the burden to establish the facts to support the granting of a credit.

e.    No Refund. No refund or credit shall be given if the change in use or redevelopment results in a lower SDC.

f.    Implementation. The 10-year time period referred to in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section starts on the date that a property is demolished or July 1, 2011, whichever occurs later.

B.    Credit of Cost of Qualified Public Improvement.

1.    A credit for the improvement fee portion of the SDC shall be given to a developer for the cost of a qualified public improvement on acceptance by the City of the qualified public improvement and compliance with this section. For transportation improvements, the credit shall be the full cost of the improvements as determined by the City. For water, sewer and other nontransportation improvements, the amount of the credit shall be the cost of the portion of the qualified public improvement that exceeds the improvements needed to serve the development as determined by the City. An application for credit for the cost of a qualified public improvement must be submitted and approved prior to the start of construction of the qualified public improvement. The City shall deny the credit if the City determines that the application does not meet the requirements of this section or if the improvement for which credit is sought is not included in the SDC project list. No interest shall accrue on a credit for a qualified public improvement.

2.    The person seeking a credit based on providing a qualified public improvement has the burden of proving the cost of the qualified public improvement. Only immediate acquisition, construction, design and engineering costs may be included in the cost of a qualified public improvement. Immediate acquisition costs include only the cost of acquiring rights-of-way or easements required as a condition of development approval and do not include property already owned by the applicant. Engineering and design costs shall not exceed 15 percent of actual construction costs. When the cost is the incremental cost of providing excess capacity, engineering and design costs shall be allocated in the same percentage as the qualified construction cost as a portion of the total construction costs. The City Engineer’s determination of the cost of a qualified public improvement shall be final.

3.    Credits for the cost of qualified public improvements shall not be transferable from one property to another but may be used for future phases of development, redevelopment or change in use of the property. For property owned by the Bend LaPine School District, property includes all properties owned by the Bend LaPine School District within the same high school attendance boundary.

4.    Credit for qualified public improvements shall be only for the type of improvement provided and shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another.

5.    Credits for qualified public improvements may be used only within 10 years from the date the qualified public improvement was accepted by the City.

6.    The extent of the property to be considered in computing and allocating credit for construction of a qualified public improvement shall be stated in the application for the credit, which will be accepted only if authorized in writing by the property owner(s). If properties under different ownership are developed together, the City may require specification where any credits for the provision of capital improvements may be used and under which circumstances. Two or more contiguous properties may pool existing SDC credit rights as part of a common scheme for development of the contiguous properties. Noncontiguous property may not be included as a property for determining where the credit may be issued or used.

7.    At the time of application for the credit for a qualified public improvement, the applicant shall indicate which option for using the credit is to be used. Once an option is chosen, the option cannot be changed and will be applied to all SDC credits for qualified public improvements of all types for all phases of development on the property. The two options are:

a.    A credit usable at the time SDCs become payable within the property to reduce the amount of the improvement fee payable; and

b.    A credit personal to the person providing the qualified public improvement to be paid from improvement fees collected for development on the property. If this option is chosen, payment amounts shall be payable annually by the City on or before January 31 for SDC improvement fees collected in the previous calendar year. If this option is chosen, the 10-year expiration applies to the date the SDC is paid to the City, not the date the City passes on the payment. No interest shall accrue on any amounts received by the City.

The following example is provided as an illustration of how the credit for qualified public improvements under subsection (B)(7)(a) of this section is applied. A developer plans to build an off-site qualified public transportation improvement. The developer must apply for the credit before starting the improvement. If the City approves the credit and the developer completes the project and proves that the qualified costs total $400,000 for the qualified transportation public improvement that is 100 percent SDC eligible under the SDC project list, the developer would be entitled to a credit of $400,000 on acceptance of the completed capital improvement. If the amount of transportation improvement fees payable is less than $400,000, no transportation improvement fees would be paid and a credit for the difference would be provided to be usable for future development of the property. If the amount of transportation improvement fees is more than $400,000, the developer would pay the difference between $400,000 and the amount of the credit.

8.    The credit for the cost of qualified public improvements is in addition to other methods of financing public improvements and may be combined with other means of financing public improvement agreements, including reimbursement agreements under this chapter or developer agreements; provided, that the total amount of credit under a reimbursement agreement and a credit for qualified public improvements shall not exceed the approved cost of the public improvement.

9.    If a developer has applied for a credit for qualified public improvements, the developer may defer payment of the improvement fee for the type of improvement provided in an amount reasonably estimated to not exceed the amount of anticipated credit. Payment shall not be deferred more than one year unless an extension is provided and may not be deferred beyond the date of occupancy. An extension of the one-year deadline may be provided if satisfactory progress is being made towards completion of the qualified public improvement. Deferral under this section is available only if the development does not involve a land division.

C.    Advance Credit for Qualified Public Improvement. The City, by a development agreement approved by Council, may provide a credit for construction of a public improvement on the SDC project list. The credit shall be a credit only towards improvement fees of the same type of SDC. The locations where the credit may be used and transferability of the credits shall be established in the development agreement. The credit provided by this section shall be used only as a credit and the credit recipient shall not be provided the right to payment from SDCs collected by the City. The credit provided by this section may be used only within 10 years of the date the improvement was accepted by the City.

D.    On termination of a use for which SDCs have been paid, a credit certificate shall be issued on written request of the property owner.

1.    The credit shall be for water, sewer and transportation SDC improvement fees only.

2.    The credit shall be based on a “unit” basis, not on a “dollar” basis. The credit shall be for a specific number of trips, square footage, dwelling units or other units on which the SDC amount is calculated.

3.    The amount of the credit issued in the certificate shall be deducted from the credit authorized by subsection (A)(1) of this section for the property where the use was terminated. The deduction may not remove all credit from the property unless all structures are removed from the property. A credit in the lowest reasonable amount for any remaining structure must be maintained on the property. The credit in the certificate shall be the difference between the total amount of credit authorized by subsection (A)(1) of this section and the amount to be retained on the property.

4.    The credit certificate may be transferred and used anywhere in the City within five years of the date of issuance. If the credit is not used within five years, it shall be automatically applied to the property where the use was terminated.

E.    For all credits, the applicant has the burden of proof to justify the credit. For credits based on the cost of a qualified public improvement, the applicant shall provide receipts, cancelled checks or other written proof of actual costs incurred. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.140 Notice.

A.    The City shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for any SDC. Written notice shall be mailed to persons as provided in this chapter. The failure of a person on the list to receive notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the City.

B.    The City may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, the City must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.150 Segregation and Use of Revenue.

A.    All SDC proceeds are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the City. SDC proceeds shall be used only for capital improvement of the type for which they were collected and authorized costs and overhead.

B.    The City Manager shall provide the City Council with an annual accounting, based on the City’s fiscal year, for SDCs showing the total amount of SDC revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account in the previous fiscal year. A list of the amounts spent on each project funded in whole or in part with SDC revenues shall be included in the annual accounting.

C.    The monies deposited into each SDC account shall be used solely as allowed by this chapter and State law, including, but not limited to:

1.    Design and construction plan preparation;

2.    Permitting and fees;

3.    Land, easements, and materials acquisition, including any cost of acquisition or condemnation, including financing, legal and other costs;

4.    Construction of capital improvements;

5.    Design and construction of new utility facilities required by the construction of capital improvements and structures;

6.    Relocating utilities required by the construction of improvements;

7.    Landscaping;

8.    Construction management and inspection;

9.    Surveys, soils, and materials testing;

10.    Acquisition of capital equipment;

11.    Repayment of monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the City which were used to fund any of the capital improvements as herein provided; and

12.    Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and cost of issuance under bonds or other indebtedness issued by the City to fund capital improvements. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.160 Refunds.

A.    Refunds may be given by the City upon finding that there was a clerical error in the calculation of the SDC.

B.    Refunds shall not be allowed if the applicant fails to timely claim a credit or fails to timely seek an alternative SDC rate calculation.

C.    Refunds may be given on application of a permittee if the development did not occur and all permits for the development have been withdrawn. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.170 Appeals.

A.    Appeals of Expenditures.

1.    A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of SDC revenues may appeal the decision of the expenditure to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager describing with particularity the decision and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of the expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

2.    After providing notice to the appellant, the City Council shall determine whether the City Manager’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and State law. The Council may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision. If the Council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of SDC revenues, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. The decision of the Council shall be reviewed only by writ or review.

3.    A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the City Council shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption and shall use the writ of review process.

B.    Appeal of Amount Charged.

1.    A person responsible for paying SDCs (the “payor”) may request review of the amount of SDCs or SDC credits calculated by staff by submitting a written request for review to the Community Development Department Engineer (“CDD Engineer”) prior to paying the SDCs, at the same time as the SDCs are paid, or of appealing the credit calculation within five working days of being notified of the amount of SDC credits. The request for review must state the amount in dispute and must provide reasons why the amount charged is incorrect. The CDD Engineer shall respond to the request for review within 10 working days unless a meeting between the payor and CDD Engineer is requested. If a meeting is requested, the CDD Engineer shall meet with the payor and issue the response no later than five working days after the meeting. The CDD Engineer’s response may be to affirm the original amount, reduce the original amount, or require a traffic report prepared by a licensed traffic engineer. A decision requiring a traffic report is not a final decision. If a traffic report is requested and provided pursuant to parameters established by the City, the CDD Engineer shall provide a final decision within 15 working days of receiving the report.

2.    The payor may appeal the final decision of the CDD Engineer to a panel comprised of the City Manager, the Community Development Director, and the Public Works Director, by submitting a written appeal to the Permit Center stating the amount in dispute and specifying why the amount charged is incorrect. The appeal must be filed with the City within five working days of delivery to payor of the CDD Engineer’s decision. A mailed decision shall be deemed to be delivered three days after mailing. If the SDCs have not been paid in full at the time of the appeal, the payor shall pay an appeal fee in an amount set by Council resolution. The permittee may provide additional written argument or evidence regarding the amount within 10 days after filing the appeal. The City shall provide a final written decision on appeal within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. The appeal panel shall meet with the payor if requested in the appeal document.

3.    A payor challenging the amount of SDCs may pay the SDCs in full any time after the request for review is filed. The payor may also pay the uncontested portion of the SDCs any time after the request for review is filed provided the uncontested amount is reasonable as determined by the CDD Engineer. No building permit will be issued until the uncontested amount of the SDCs is paid unless deferral of payment is allowed under some other provision of law. If the uncontested amount of SDCs is paid and a building permit issued, the payor shall pay any additional amounts determined to be payable within 30 days of the City’s final decision on review or appeal. Failure to pay the additional amounts within 30 days will result in interest of 12 percent charged on the additional amounts from the date of the building permit. No certificate of occupancy will be issued or final inspection approved until SDCs are paid in full. If the amount originally charged by the City is paid in full and the final City decision reduces the amount payable, the City shall refund the difference. If the payor has paid the $250.00 appeal fee and the City reduces the amount payable on appeal, the appeal fee shall be refunded. No interest shall accrue on the amounts to be refunded to the payor.

C.    Delegation of Authority. The responsibilities of the CDD Director, CDD Engineer, City Manager and Public Works Director under this section may be exercised by the persons in those offices or their designees. Authority to act shall be delegated if needed to meet decision deadlines. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.180 Prohibited Connection.

No person may connect to the transportation, water or sewer system of the City or obtain a building permit or certificate of occupancy unless the appropriate SDCs have been paid, or the installment payment method has been applied for, approved, and the first payment made, unless the payment is deferred under a uniform system established by ordinance. [Ord. NS-2161, 2011]


12.10.190 Deferral.

A.    Qualified builders may be eligible to defer payment of transportation, water and sewer SDCs for up to nine months, or through the time of application for an occupancy permit for a particular structure, whichever is earlier.

B.    To qualify, builders must undergo an application process which may include a credit review and shall include the submission of a preliminary title report. Application for deferral shall be filed when the application for a building permit is submitted to the Community Development Department. Deferral of SDCs will not be granted if the application is not filed in accordance with this chapter.

C.    A lien in the amount of the SDCs deferred will be placed on the property unless security in a form acceptable to the City is provided to cover the amount deferred. In order to participate in the program, builders may be required to execute and record a trust deed regarding the applicable real estate and securing the amount of the SDCs.

D.    Interest will be charged at 12 percent annually in the event that the SDCs are not paid when due as provided for in subsection (A) of this section. In addition, participating builders will be required to waive all rights to contest the amount and means of calculating the SDC.

E.    The deferral program established by this section will expire on August 31, 2015. The City reserves the right to terminate the program at any time. The City Manager is authorized to establish additional rules and application forms for the implementation of this program.

F.    This program shall apply City-wide to residential and nonresidential developments, except for properties in the Juniper Ridge real property contained in the Juniper Ridge Conceptual Master Plan adopted in 2008; properties that are subject to existing development or settlement agreements or properties for which applications for a building permit have already been submitted. [Ord. NS-2204, 2013; Ord. NS-2191, 2012]


Chapter 12.15 FEES Revised 7/19

Sections:

12.15.005    Council Resolution. Revised 7/19

12.15.010    Fee Reduction for Business Relocations within City.


12.15.005 Council Resolution. Revised 7/19

A.    The City Council may, by resolution, establish and amend fees or service charges (collectively “fees”) for any and all services provided by the City. The fee shall not exceed the average cost of providing the service. A list of City fees shall be available for public inspection. The amount of each fee shall be set at an amount calculated to cover the City’s full costs of providing the service, except as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

B.    The fee for the following services shall be set at 50 percent of the cost of providing the service:

1.    Sign permits.

2.    Ambulance and EMT services for City and Fire District residents.

3.    Planning general services.

C.    Through the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019, the City General Fund provided financial support for the services listed in subsection (B) of this section, as well as City-initiated Comprehensive Plan/Development Code amendments. With the exception of ambulance and EMT services for City and Fire District residents, General Fund support for these services is suspended for the 2019-2021 biennium from July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2021. 

D.    The services for which the City may impose fees include, but are not limited to, all services and categories listed in the City Fees Resolution in effect at the time of service. [Ord. NS-2337, 2019; Ord. NS-2221, 2014; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


12.15.010 Fee Reduction for Business Relocations within City.

A.    The following definitions apply in this section:

1.    Eligible business means an existing business (meaning a business in operation as of November 1, 2010) with fewer than 20 total full-time equivalent employees.

2.    Relocate means to move from one business location in the City to another in the City.

3.    Relevant time period means October 2010 through November 1, 2012.

4.    Specified fees means building fees, planning fees and engineering fees. Specified fees do not include sign permit fees, system development charges, in-lieu-of fees, fire prevention plan review fees, or the affordable housing surcharge.

B.    An eligible business that applies for planning approval or building permits within the relevant time period shall be provided a 50 percent discount on specified fees associated with the application; provided, that the cap on total discounts under subsection (C) of this section has not been exhausted.

C.    The total discount to all businesses authorized by this section shall not exceed $50,000. If and when the total amount of discounts provided under this section reaches $50,000, no further discounts will be available. The discount shall be available on a first-come, first-served basis.

D.    Funds shall be transferred from the General Fund to fully compensate any fund affected by the discount authorized by this section. [Ord. NS-2170, 2011; Ord. NS-2157, 2011]


Chapter 12.20 RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA SALES TAX

Sections:

12.20.010    Definitions.

12.20.015    Recreational Marijuana Sales Tax Imposed.

12.20.020    Interest and Penalty.


12.20.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

A.    Consumer means a person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds, or uses marijuana items other than for the purpose of resale.

B.    Marijuana item means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, and cannabinoid extracts as defined in this chapter, Oregon State law, and any other applicable law.

C.    Marijuana retailer means a person licensed under ORS 47B.110 who sells marijuana items to a consumer in the State of Oregon.

D.    Recreational marijuana means any marijuana or marijuana item intended for recreational use which meets all requirements for recreational marijuana contained in this chapter, Oregon State law, and any other applicable law.

E.    Tax administrator means the Finance Director of the City of Bend. [Ord. NS-2275, 2016]


12.20.015 Recreational Marijuana Sales Tax Imposed.

Effective January 1, 2017, each consumer shall pay a local sales tax in the amount of three percent on recreational marijuana sold. Tax amounts shall be rounded down to the nearest cent. The marijuana retailer shall maintain records of all recreational marijuana items sold and local recreational marijuana sales tax received. The amount of the local recreational marijuana sales tax shall be stated separately from any other charges on all receipts or invoices issued by the marijuana retailer. [Ord. NS-2275, 2016]


12.20.020 Interest and Penalty.

A.    Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

B.    If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.

C.    Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.

D.    Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the City of Bend by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the City’s General Fund.

E.    If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the City of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and the City under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. [Ord. NS-2286, 2017]


Title 13 NUISANCES SUBJECT TO ABATEMENT Revised 6/20

Chapters:

13.10    Nuisances

13.20    Derelict Structures

13.25    Discarded Vehicles

13.30    Vegetation Revised 6/20

13.40    Graffiti

13.45    Nuisances

13.65    Procedure for Abatement


Chapter 13.10 NUISANCES

Sections:

13.10.005    Definitions.

13.10.010    Continuing Violation.

13.10.015    Attractive Nuisances.


13.10.005 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

A.    Person in charge of property means an agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or other person having possession or control of property or supervision of any construction project.

B.    Person Responsible. The person responsible for abating a nuisance shall include:

1.    The owner.

2.    The person in charge of property.

3.    The person who caused a nuisance to come into or continue in existence. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.10.010 Continuing Violation.

Each day that a nuisance continues to exist constitutes a separate violation, and a separate penalty may be assessed for each day the violation continues. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.10.015 Attractive Nuisances.

A.    No owner or person in charge of property shall permit on the property:

1.    Machinery, equipment, or other devices that are dangerous, accessible and pose a reasonable risk of injury to children.

2.    Lumber, logs or pilings placed or stored in a manner so as to be dangerous, accessible and pose a reasonable risk of injury to children.

3.    An excavation that remains open for an unreasonable length of time without proper barriers.

4.    A cistern, well, or any other similar type of hole that is dangerous, accessible, and poses a reasonable risk of injury to children.

B.    This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to children.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


Chapter 13.20 DERELICT STRUCTURES

Sections:

13.20.005    Derelict Structures.

13.20.010    Derelict Structures Prohibited.

13.20.015    Closing of Structures.

13.20.020    Prohibited Habitation.

13.20.025    Removal of Order.

13.20.030    Temporary Safeguards.

13.20.035    Derelict Structure Registration.

13.20.040    Derelict Structure Fees.

13.20.045    Waiver of Derelict Structure Fees.

13.20.050    Abatement by Demolition.

13.20.055    Failure to Follow Order to Demolish.


13.20.005 Derelict Structures.

A.    Definitions for This Chapter. Definitions in the State Structural, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes apply to terms not defined in this section. The words dwelling unit, dwelling, premises, structure, or building shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”

1.    Abandoned. A structure is abandoned when it is an attractive nuisance or is used for unlawful activity.

2.    Boarded building means an unoccupied building that has been secured against entry by material such as plywood, boards, or other similar material placed over openings that are designed for and/or are required for windows and doors, and which is visible off the premises and is not both lawful and customary to install on an occupied structure.

3.    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used.

4.    Occupant means any person living or sleeping in a building; or having possession of a space within a building or premises.

5.    Owner means any legal owner or any person having charge, care or control of a premises.

6.    Partially constructed means a structure that has been left in a state of partial construction for more than six months or after the expiration of any building permit or that has not had a required permit inspection within any six-month period.

7.    Person means any individual or entity.

8.    Pests means animals detrimental to humans or human concerns including but not limited to insects, rodents, rats or vermin.

9.    Premises means an area of land including any structures on the land.

10.    Skilled manner means executed in a manner that is generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, without marring adjacent work and completed in conformance with generally accepted construction and maintenance practices.

11.    Unfit for Human Habitation. A structure is unfit for human habitation whenever the City Manager finds that such structure is in disrepair, lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, is pest infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitation or heating facilities to the extent that habitation would be injurious to the health and safety of the occupants.

12.    Unoccupied means not being used for a lawful occupancy. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.010 Derelict Structures Prohibited.

No structure shall be occupied if it is:

A.    A boarded building;

B.    Partially constructed and abandoned;

C.    Unfit for human habitation; or

D.    An imminent hazard. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.015 Closing of Structures.

The City Manager may order that a structure be vacated for violation of this chapter. The order shall be posted on the structure and shall contain the information required in this chapter. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.020 Prohibited Habitation.

No person shall occupy or allow another to occupy a structure if the City Manager has ordered vacation of the structure. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.025 Removal of Order.

A.    The City Manager shall authorize removal of the order when the violation has been eliminated.

B.    No person shall deface or remove a posted order authorized in this chapter without the approval of the City Manager. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.030 Temporary Safeguards.

In case of an immediate danger to life or health, the City Manager may order boarding up of openings or other work to make a structure temporarily safe without following the procedures of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.035 Derelict Structure Registration.

The owner of a structure ordered vacated shall register the structure within 10 calendar days of the posting of the order by submitting a completed City registration form. The registration form shall include information relating to the location and ownership of the structure, the expected period of its vacancy, a plan for regular maintenance during the period of vacancy, and a plan for its re-occupancy and use, or its demolition. Any change in the information provided pursuant to this section shall be given to the City Manager within 30 days. When all violations have been corrected, the owner shall contact the City Manager or designee and request an inspection to determine compliance. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.040 Derelict Structure Fees.

A.    Every owner of a registered derelict structure shall pay a nonrefundable quarterly fee for each derelict structure. The fee is for each calendar quarter or portion of a quarter. The fee for the current quarter shall be paid with the submission of the registration form. Any payment of the fee that is more than 30 days past due is subject to a penalty of $100.00. The fee per quarter shall be $250.00 or other higher amount set by Council resolution.

B.    Derelict structure fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit for the demolition, alteration, or repair of a structure.

C.    The City may initiate a proceeding in Municipal Court to recover derelict structure registration fees that remain unpaid 90 days after they are due and to compel registration of derelict structures. The registration fee for a derelict structure that was not registered when registration was required shall be a year’s worth of registration fees. A Municipal Court order requiring payment of the derelict structure fee shall be filed as a lien against the property in the City lien docket. This remedy is in addition to any other legal remedy available to the City. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.045 Waiver of Derelict Structure Fees.

The City Manager may waive all or a portion of the fees imposed under this chapter, if the following conditions are met:

A.    All delinquent fees and penalties have been paid in full;

B.    A timetable for the repair or demolition of the structure has been submitted by the legal owner and approved by the manager;

C.    All appropriate permits have been obtained for the repair or demolition of the structure;

D.    The manager is satisfied that the repairs or demolition of the structure are being undertaken and will be prosecuted to completion in a timely fashion; and

E.    The legal owner provides written authorization for the City to enforce all applicable trespass and illegal camping ordinances and laws. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.050 Abatement by Demolition.

A.    In addition to the abatement remedies provided for in this title, the City Manager may request a hearing before the Municipal Court for the purpose of seeking authority to order the demolition of a derelict structure.

B.    Upon receipt of a demolition request from the City Manager, the Municipal Court Clerk shall set the matter for prompt hearing before the Municipal Court and give the owner(s) and occupant(s) notice by personal delivery or certified mail of the date and time set for hearing. Notice shall also be posted on or near the derelict structure. Failure of the owner(s) or occupant(s) to receive such notice or an error in the name or address of an owner(s) or occupant(s) shall not render the notice void.

C.    The Municipal Court may authorize the demolition of the structure if the City shows by a preponderance of the evidence that demolition would be in the public interest. The burden of proof shall be upon the City.

D.    In determining whether a structure is so derelict as to require its owner to demolish the structure, the Municipal Court may consider the number and extent of the following factors:

1.    Dilapidation;

2.    Disrepair;

3.    Structural defects noted by the Building Official;

4.    Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamity, such as parts standing or attached in such manner as to be likely to fall and cause damage or injury;

5.    Uncleanliness;

6.    Sanitary facilities;

7.    The presence of a public nuisance; and

8.    The history of unlawful activity in or around the derelict structure. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.20.055 Failure to Follow Order to Demolish.

A.    Whenever a demolition is not commenced by the owner within 30 days after an order to demolish, the City Manager may file with the Municipal Court a request to authorize the City Manager to have the demolition performed and the cost of demolition assessed as a lien against the property where the structure is located.

B.    The Municipal Court Clerk shall set the request for prompt hearing, and cause notice of the hearing to be served via certified mail to the owner(s) and occupant(s). Failure of the owner(s) or occupant(s) to receive the notice or an error in the name or address of a owner(s) or occupant(s) shall not render the notice void.

C.    At the hearing, the owner(s) and occupant(s) shall have an opportunity to show cause why the demolition should not be performed and the cost assessed as a lien against the property.

D.    The cost of demolition and 20 percent charge for administrative overhead will be assessed in the manner provided in BC 13.20.050. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


Chapter 13.25 DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

13.25.005    Definitions.

13.25.010    Discarded Vehicles.


13.25.005 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, discarded means any vehicle that is in one or more of the following conditions:

A.    Inoperable.

B.    Wrecked.

C.    Dismantled.

D.    Partially dismantled.

E.    Abandoned.

F.    Junked.

G.    Unlicensed. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.25.010 Discarded Vehicles.

A.    Discarded vehicles may be considered to include major vehicle parts, including, but not limited to, bodies, engines, transmissions and rear ends.

B.    No person shall store or permit the storing of a discarded vehicle on private property for more than 72 hours unless it is completely enclosed within a building or in a space entirely enclosed and hidden by a fence or screen.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


Chapter 13.30 VEGETATION

Sections:

13.30.005    Flammable Vegetation. Revised 6/20

13.30.010    Invasive Noxious Weeds.

13.30.015    Trees.


13.30.005 Flammable Vegetation. Revised 6/20

A.    It shall be the responsibility of every property owner and/or the person in charge of property within the City of Bend to reduce flammable or potentially flammable weeds, grass, vines, brush and other vegetation on the property by complying with the requirements of this chapter. The purpose of the flammable vegetation reduction shall be to protect property by confining fire and preventing its spread to other properties.

B.    Every property owner and/or the person in charge of property shall reduce and maintain the reduction of flammable or potentially flammable vegetation on the property in the following manner:

1.    A reduction can be completed with a combination of trimming, cutting or removing flammable or potentially flammable weeds, grass, vines, brush and other combustible vegetation as close to the ground as is reasonably practicable given the nature of the terrain and the property, or by the application of an EPA-approved herbicide.

2.    Any tax lot one-half acre (21,780 square feet) or less shall remove all flammable or potentially flammable weeds, grass, vines, brush, and other vegetation by trimming, cutting, removing, or by the application of an EPA-approved herbicide.

3.    Any tax lot greater than one-half acre (21,780 square feet) shall establish and maintain a 20-foot fuel break along the entire perimeter of the property, including all rights-of-way or easements. The fuel breaks shall be located along the boundaries of the property; and also around any structures, power poles, vehicles, trees or other improvements on the property that would be vulnerable to a fire hazard created by flammable weeds, grass, vines, brush and other combustible vegetation.

4.    The City may direct additional abatement for any situations not adequately covered by the fuel breaks described above.

5.    Flammable vegetation located in the right-of-way or easement shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner and/or the person in charge of the property.

6.    Accumulated waste vegetation shall be disposed of in a manner so as not to create a fire hazard or spread vegetation to other properties.

C.    A City-approved vegetation management plan may be allowed as an alternative to subsections (B)(1) through (3) of this section.

D.    A violation of this chapter shall be a Class A civil infraction. [Ord NS-2372, 2020; Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.30.010 Invasive Noxious Weeds.

A.    No person shall allow the growth of noxious vegetation on the property they own within the Bend City limits.

B.    The City Manager shall prepare and may revise a list of plants that are considered noxious vegetation under subsection (A) of this section. The City Manager may incorporate all or part of any existing list developed by any state or county entity as all or part of the list.

C.    Property owners are responsible for removal of noxious vegetation on public rights-of-way adjacent to their property, excluding medians and roundabouts.

D.    Violation. A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2205, 2013; Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.30.015 Trees.

A.    No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a dead or decaying tree to stand if it is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property.

B.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2147, 2010]


Chapter 13.40 GRAFFITI

Sections:

13.40.005    Graffiti Nuisance Property.

13.40.010    Procedure.


13.40.005 Graffiti Nuisance Property.

For the purposes of this code section, the following definitions apply:

A.    Abate means to remove graffiti from public view.

B.    Graffiti means any unauthorized markings of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance which are visible from premises open to the public and that have been placed upon any real or personal property such as buildings, fences, structures or the unauthorized etching or scratching of such described surfaces where the markings are visible from premises open to the public, such as public rights-of-way or other publicly owned property.

C.    Graffiti nuisance property means property to which graffiti has been applied, if the graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way, from any other public or private property, or from any premises open to the public, and if the graffiti has not been abated within 14 days of written notification of its existence.

D.    Property means any real property including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, house, building, fence, or items of machinery, drop boxes, waste containers, utility poles and vaults, and post office collection boxes.

E.    Unauthorized means without consent of the owner, occupant or responsible party. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.40.010 Procedure.

A.    The City shall maintain a system for members of the public to report incidence of graffiti they observe on public and private property.

B.    The owner or occupant of any property in the City shall remove any graffiti from such property within 14 days of the graffiti’s appearance.

C.    When the Chief of Police determines that property has become graffiti nuisance property, the chief shall:

1.    Notify the owner(s) of record and/or occupant in writing, via first class mail service, that the property has been determined to be graffiti nuisance property.

2.    The notice shall contain the following information:

a.    The street address and description sufficient for identification of the property.

b.    A statement that the property is graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to those findings.

c.    An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance programs available through the City or private contractors.

d.    A statement that the owner and/or occupant shall either remove the graffiti within 15 days from the date of the notice or describe in writing what steps have been or will be taken to remedy the graffiti nuisance on the property.

D.    If the graffiti cannot be removed due to inclement weather, a waiver of the time restrictions may be authorized by the Chief of Police.

E.    Violation of this chapter is a Class B civil infraction. Each day after the initial citation is issued may be considered a separate violation. In addition, any person, firm, corporation or other entity not complying with this section shall be subject to the abatement procedures provided in this chapter. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


Chapter 13.45 NUISANCES

Sections:

13.45.005    Nuisances Affecting the Public Health.

13.45.010    Offensive Debris and Un-cleaned and Un-graded Property in the Central Business and Commercial Zoning Districts.

13.45.015    Surface Waters – Drainage.

13.45.020    Unenumerated Nuisances.


13.45.005 Nuisances Affecting the Public Health.

No person shall cause, or permit on property owned or controlled by him or her, a nuisance affecting the public health. Nuisances affecting the public health include but are not limited to:

A.    An accumulation of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that is not removed within a reasonable time and that affects the health or livability of adjacent residents. All household or solid waste shall be managed in accordance with the following:

1.    All household waste shall be stored in leakproof containers with close-fitting covers.

2.    Every person who generates or produces wastes shall remove or have removed all putrescent wastes at least every seven days. More frequent removal may be required to protect the public health.

3.    Subsection (A)(2) of this section does not apply to waste removed through a City-approved waste removal program that is less frequent than seven days.

B.    Stagnant water that affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

C.    Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

D.    Maintaining premises or keeping animals in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or that are in an unsanitary condition.

E.    Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.

F.    Septic tanks that are in an unsanitary condition or that cause an offensive odor.

G.    An abandoned refrigerator or other appliance with an air-tight door that has a space large enough that a child or infant may be enclosed. The City may remove any such appliance immediately.

H.    A violation of this section is a Class A civil infraction. Any person found by a Judge to be in violation of subsection (A) of this section shall be required to utilize weekly trash service provided by an approved garbage service franchisee for at least one year. [Ord. NS-2205, 2013; Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.45.010 Offensive Debris and Un-cleaned and Un-graded Property in the Central Business and Commercial Zoning Districts.

A.    No person may place offensive debris or allow offensive debris to remain on public or private property in the Downtown CB Zone or other commercial zoning districts more than 36 hours after the City Council makes a finding that the debris is substantially detrimental to commerce in that zoning district.

B.    No person may allow public or private property in the CB or other Commercial Zoning Districts to remain in a state of disrepair for more than 36 hours after the City Council determines that the property is in a state of disrepair. Property is in a state of disrepair when it is un-cleaned or un-graded in such a manner that the City Council determines is substantially detrimental to commerce in that zoning district.

C.    Following any finding by the City Council as provided in subsection (A) or (B) of this section, the City will provide notice to the property owner to repair the offensive condition and may thereafter abate the offensive condition as a nuisance. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.45.015 Surface Waters – Drainage.

A.    No owner or person in charge of property shall permit water, ice or snow to fall from a building or structure or otherwise accumulate on a street or public sidewalk except as authorized by the City.

B.    The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain, in a proper state of repair, adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or onto the sidewalk.

C.    A violation of this section is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.45.020 Unenumerated Nuisances.

A.    The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in this title are declared public nuisances and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in BC Chapter 13.65.

B.    In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated in this code, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the City Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this code. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


Chapter 13.65 PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT

Sections:

13.65.005    Notice.

13.65.010    Abatement by the Person Responsible.

13.65.015    Joint Responsibility.

13.65.020    Abatement by the City.

13.65.025    Assessment of Costs.

13.65.030    Summary Abatement.

13.65.035    Administrative Warrants Authorized.


13.65.005 Notice.

A.    If the City Manager is satisfied that a nuisance exists, the City Manager shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

B.    At the time of posting, the City Manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person responsible at the last known address of such person.

C.    The notice to abate shall contain:

1.    A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists.

2.    A direction to abate the nuisance within 10 days from the date of the notice.

3.    A description of the nuisance.

4.    A statement that unless the nuisance is removed, the City may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible.

5.    A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine.

6.    A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the City of Bend Municipal Court within 10 days from the date of the notice.

D.    If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

E.    On completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

F.    An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.65.010 Abatement by the Person Responsible.

A.    Within 10 days after posting and mailing the notice, as provided in this chapter, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or file a written request for a hearing with the Municipal Court.

B.    The hearing on the question of whether a nuisance exists shall be heard by the Municipal Court at the first available time following the person’s request for a hearing before the Municipal Court.

C.    If the Municipal Court determines that a nuisance, in fact, exists, the person responsible shall abate the nuisance within 10 days after the Municipal Court decision. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.65.015 Joint Responsibility.

If more than one person is responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the City in abating the nuisance. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.65.020 Abatement by the City.

A.    If the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible within 10 days of the date of posting the notice of the nuisance if no hearing is requested or within 10 days of the Municipal Court decision, the City Manager may cause the nuisance to be abated.

B.    The City may enter property to inspect and abate only with the permission of the owner or other person in charge of the property or pursuant to a judicially issued warrant. The Municipal Court Judge has the authority to issue warrants to enter and abate.

C.    The City Manager shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the City in physically abating the nuisance and shall include in the record a charge of $150.00 or 20 percent of those expenses (whichever is greater) for administrative overhead. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.65.025 Assessment of Costs.

A.    The City Manager, by registered or certified mail, shall send to the person responsible a notice stating:

1.    The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead.

2.    That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property, unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice.

3.    That if the owner or person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the administrator no more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

B.    If an objection to the cost of abatement is filed as provided in subsection (A) of this section, the Municipal Court shall hear and make a decision on the objections to the costs assessed.

C.    If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice or the date of the Municipal Court decision if an objection is filed, the costs of abatement shall be entered in the City lien docket and shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

D.    The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

E.    An error in the name of the owner or person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.65.030 Summary Abatement.

The procedure provided in this chapter is not exclusive, but is in addition to procedures provided by other sections of the code. The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Chief of Police or the City Manager may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers health or property. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


13.65.035 Administrative Warrants Authorized.

The Bend Municipal Court shall have the authority to issue warrants authorizing any Bend police officer or City official authorized by the City Manager to enforce provisions of the Bend Code to make searches and seizures reasonably necessary to enforce any provision of the Bend Code pertaining to nuisances. Every warrant authorized by this section shall be supported by affidavit or sworn testimony establishing probable cause to believe that a nuisance violation has occurred. Searches and seizures authorized by this section may be executed by any City official authorized to apply for a warrant under this section. All searches and seizures authorized by this section shall be conducted according to requirements of Oregon law relating to search warrants. [Ord. NS-2141, 2010]


Title 14 WATER

Chapters:

14.10    Water

14.20    Use of Water

14.30    Cross Connection Control for Water Systems

14.40    Prohibition of the Addition of Fluoride Compounds to the City Water Supply


Chapter 14.10 WATER

Sections:

14.10.010    Restrictions on Use.

14.10.020    Use of City Water Facilities.

14.10.030    Connections to City Water System.

14.10.040    Extraterritorial Connections.

14.10.050    Standards and Specifications.

14.10.060    Ownership and Responsibility.

14.10.070    Fees and Charges.

14.10.080    Meters.

14.10.090    Surface Water Withdrawals.


14.10.010 Restrictions on Use.

A.    City water customers may use City water only for purposes stated in the customer’s application for City water service. All City-supplied water must be used on the premises where service is provided unless written City permission is obtained.

B.    No person other than the City may sell water by piped delivery to a property without a City franchise. No person may resell water delivered to it by the City without written City permission. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.020 Use of City Water Facilities.

A.    No person other than a City employee in the course and scope of employment may open or in any way tamper with any portion of the City water distribution system, including valves, water meters and fire hydrants, without a City permit.

B.    No person shall interfere with access to any City water facilities, including valves, water meters and hydrants. Interference with access to facilities includes placing any materials on or near a facility that makes access more difficult or delays access. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.030 Connections to City Water System.

A.    No person may connect to the City water system without permission from the City or turn on a connection that has been shut off by the City.

B.    All developed properties must connect to the City water system or a franchised water system if water service is available from the City or franchised system. Water service is considered available if a water main from which service may be taken is within 300 feet of the property. Any developed property within 500 feet of a fire hydrant must either connect to the City water system or a franchised water system or pay a fire flow access fee in an amount set by Council resolution. If a separate fire flow access fee is not established, the fire flow access fee shall be the lowest minimum base charge for service.

C.    The City Manager may adopt regulations governing connections to the City water system. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.040 Extraterritorial Connections.

The City may provide water service outside the City limits at its discretion and only if the property owner enters into a consent to annexation contract with the City. [Ord. NS-2262, 2016; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.050 Standards and Specifications.

Developers that provide water system infrastructure must construct the infrastructure in compliance with the City’s Standards and Specifications and consistent with the City’s Water System Master Plan. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.060 Ownership and Responsibility.

A.    The City owns its public water supply system, including water rights, wells, pumps, water delivery system, water treatment facilities, raw and treated water storage facilities, and the distribution system (mains) to and including water meters. All lines and other facilities beyond the water meter are private property and the responsibility of the property owner whose property is served. Water meter boxes are the property and responsibility of the property owner whose property is served until the time the water meter is installed and accepted by the City and service is provided through the meter, at which time the water meter boxes become the property and responsibility of the City. The property owner’s responsibility includes the obligation to upgrade or replace water meter boxes to meet City Standards and Specifications or the water meter box otherwise becomes noncompliant before the water meter box and/or assembly is accepted by the City and water service begins. The property owner owns and is responsible for the customer service line (the line leading out from the water meter), even those portions of the customer service line in the right-of-way.

B.    For fire suppression lines that do not have premises isolation at the property line, the property owner is responsible for lines that provide fire suppression service to the point that the fire suppression line connects with a City main. [Ord. NS-2295, 2017; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.070 Fees and Charges.

A.    Persons receiving water service shall pay the City the fees established by Council resolution for the service. All properties connected to the City’s system shall pay at least a minimum charge. For purposes of this section, a property is considered connected to the City’s system even if service has been turned off.

B.    The City shall bill for water service on a monthly basis, and may establish different billing dates for different customers. Payment is due 13 days after the billing date. If a customer has not paid for the last two billing cycles, the City will send a shut-off notice any time after the due date for the second unpaid bill. The shut-off notice will specify the date by which payment in full must be made, which must be at least 10 calendar days after the shut-off notice. The City may add a fee to be set by Council resolution to cover the cost of the shut-off notice.

C.    The City may combine billing for sewer, stormwater and other utilities and services with its water utility billing. If less than full payment is received, payment will be applied first to any service other than water, stormwater or sewer utilities, second to stormwater service, third to sewer service, and last to water service. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.080 Meters.

All water service other than service solely to a fire suppression system shall be metered. All service solely to a fire suppression system shall at a minimum have a detect meter. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.10.090 Surface Water Withdrawals.

The City water system uses both surface water and groundwater. The instantaneous rate allowed from the Bridge Creek point of diversion shall be limited to the demand for municipal use, up to a maximum of 18.2 cubic feet per second. [Ord. NS-2211, 2014]


Chapter 14.20 USE OF WATER

Sections:

14.20.010    Applicability.

14.20.020    Water Waste Prohibited.

14.20.030    Water Waste Defined.

14.20.040    Emergency Water Use Curtailment.

14.20.050    Irrigation Hours.

14.20.060    Exceptions and Variances.

14.20.070    Penalty.


14.20.010 Applicability.

A.    This chapter applies to all City of Bend water customers.

B.    This chapter also applies whenever water:

1.    Flows onto or accumulates in publicly owned rights-of-way;

2.    Flows onto adjoining properties from irrigation systems, drains, or other nonnatural water sources on a property; or

3.    Has an impact that violates or may lead to a violation of stormwater regulations or permits. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.20.020 Water Waste Prohibited.

Water shall be used only for beneficial uses. Water waste is prohibited. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.20.030 Water Waste Defined.

A.    Water waste includes:

1.    Applying more water than is reasonably necessary to establish and maintain a healthy landscape.

2.    Applying water intended for irrigation to an impervious surface, such as a street, parking lot, alley, sidewalk or driveway. Water that travels beyond the property line is considered water waste. Allowing water to flow onto adjoining properties due to poorly designed, maintained or adjusted irrigation systems that allow water to be applied beyond intended irrigated areas or spray or run off onto adjoining walls or fences.

3.    Allowing water to pool or flow across the ground or into any drainage way, such as gutters, streets, alleys or storm drains.

4.    Failing to repair, for a period of more than 10 business days after notice, leaking, misadjusted or damaged irrigation components, service lines or other plumbing fixtures.

5.    Washing vehicles, sidewalks, driveways, or other hardscape areas with a hose end that lacks a shut-off valve. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.20.040 Emergency Water Use Curtailment.

A.    The City Manager is authorized to determine the need for water curtailment and to declare a water curtailment stage. Curtailment Plan provisions, as contained in the State-approved Water Management and Conservation Plan (WMCP), will remain in effect until the City Manager terminates the curtailment requirement. Actions may be applied to the entire system, or only to those water use sectors or those geographic areas that are directly affected by any water supply shortage.

1.    Stage 1: Water Shortage Alert. Forecast of below normal summer stream flows, forecasts of above normal temperatures, minor damage to transmission mains or distribution system, minor mechanical or electrical malfunction at one to three wells.

2.    Stage 2: Mild Water Shortage. Demand reduction target 10 percent of maximum daily demand; supply capacity is 91 to 100 percent of demand, mechanical or electrical malfunction at four to seven wells, extended periods of above normal temperatures or below normal stream flows, declaration of drought by Governor pursuant to ORS 536.720, extensive damage to water supply infrastructure.

3.    Stage 3: Serious Water Shortage. Demand reduction target 20 percent of maximum daily demand; supply capacity is 81 to 90 percent of demand, mechanical or electrical malfunctions at eight to 12 wells, imminent terrorist threat against supply system, multiple failures to transmission mains or distributions system.

4.    Stage 4: Severe Water Shortage. Demand reduction target 40 percent of maximum daily demand; supply capacity is less than 81 percent of demand, loss of utility electrical service to wells, fire in Bridge Creek watershed or near wells, contamination of source of supply, extensive damage to transmission, pumping, or treatment processes caused by natural disaster or any other event, intentional acts or fire, contamination of source, or any other event resulting in an immediate sustained deprivation of water supply. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.20.050 Irrigation Hours.

A.    Irrigation hours apply all year.

B.    Irrigation is not allowed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.

C.    Even address numbers may water only on even-numbered days of the month.

D.    Odd address numbers may water only on odd-numbered days of the month.

E.    Watering is allowed for all addresses on the thirty-first day of the month.

F.    These regulations apply to hoses or hose-end devices left unattended.

G.    These regulations do not apply to watering by hand-held hose while continuously being attended.

H.    For the purpose of determining if an address is watering on an even or odd day, it is the day in which the first irrigation cycle begins. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.20.060 Exceptions and Variances.

A.    The following activities are exempt from the day and time restrictions of this chapter:

1.    Watering for up to 21 days to establish new turf from seed or sod.

2.    Watering for new plant material such as flowers, trees, and shrubs on the day of planting.

3.    Watering essential to preserve turf subject to heavy public uses.

4.    Watering or operating an irrigation system for installation, repair, adjustments, locating sprinkler heads or lines or other reasonable maintenance related uses, so long as the system is attended throughout the period of operation.

B.    Water utility staff may allow temporary variances for reasonable cause to allow for special circumstances not described in this code, including the use of new irrigation technology. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.20.070 Penalty.

Any violation of this chapter is a Class B civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 14.30 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL FOR WATER SYSTEMS

Sections:

14.30.010    Purpose.

14.30.020    Definitions.

14.30.030    Application.

14.30.040    Cross Connection Regulations.

14.30.050    Backflow Prevention Assembly Requirements.

14.30.060    New Construction.

14.30.070    Retrofitting.

14.30.080    Irrigation Systems.

14.30.090    Thermal Expansion.

14.30.100    Mobile Units.

14.30.110    Installation.

14.30.120    Pressure Loss.

14.30.130    Fire Systems.

14.30.140    Temporary Meters and Hydrant Valves.

14.30.150    Access to Property.

14.30.160    Annual Testing and Repairs.

14.30.170    Maintenance of Assemblies.

14.30.180    Backflow Assembly Testers.

14.30.190    Costs of Compliance.

14.30.200    Termination of Service.


14.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the water supply and distribution system of the City from contamination or pollution from cross connections. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in this chapter. Terms used in this chapter and not defined in this section shall have the meaning defined in OAR Chapter 333, or the Manual of Cross Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California.

A.    Backflow means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the City.

B.    Certified backflow assembly tester means a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Department of Human Services – Health Services to be a tester in the State of Oregon.

C.    Contamination means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.

D.    Cross connection means any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nondrinkable water system or auxiliary system, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers or any other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices or other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow may occur are considered to be cross connections.

E.    Degree of hazard means the non-health hazard or health hazard or high hazard classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross connections.

F.    Double check detector assembly or DCDA means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. It shall also be provided with a factory bypass arrangement with a meter and a minimum of an approved double check assembly.

G.    Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical, chemical or biological nature to the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system that would be a danger to health.

H.    Mobile units means units that are temporary in nature, connecting to the water system through a legally permitted hydrant, hose bib, or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the City’s water system or a permanent water service to a premises. Examples can include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units or tanks, waste hauler’s trucks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/concrete batch plants or any other mobile equipment or vessel that poses a threat of backflow in the City Water System. Uses that are excluded from this definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance with other City policies pertaining to recreational vehicles and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other provisions of these, or other, City policies pertaining to provision of water service to a premises.

I.    Non-health hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that could allow a substance that may be objectionable, but not hazardous to one’s health, to backflow into the potable water supply.

J.    Pollution hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system, but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.

K.    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time, below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off valves. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.030 Application.

This chapter applies to all premises served by the City Water System, regardless of date of connection. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.040 Cross Connection Regulations.

A.    All cross connections must be installed, used and maintained in compliance with this chapter.

B.    The City may survey and inspect to determine if any actual or potential cross connection exists and order the installation of an assembly meeting City Standards and Specifications be installed at the service connection.

C.    The owner, occupant or person in control of any given premises is responsible for all cross connection control within the premises, including purchase, installation, testing, repair and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies.

D.    Reduced Pressure Backflow Assembly must be installed and maintained when required by State regulations as determined by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.050 Backflow Prevention Assembly Requirements.

The City shall determine the type of backflow assemblies to be installed. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection unless the City approves installation at the point of use. An approved assembly shall be required in the following circumstances:

A.    Where any material dangerous to health could enter the City’s water system, the water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

B.    When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity at premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.

C.    When a premises has one or more cross connections.

D.    When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable.

E.    When intricate plumbing arrangements are present making it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist.

F.    When the premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established.

G.    When entry to the premises is restricted so that surveys for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure cross connections do not exist.

H.    When materials are being used that would result in a health hazard if backflow occurred.

I.    When an appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the City.

J.    Any and all used-water return systems.

K.    If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this chapter, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.

L.    There is piping or equipment for conveying liquids other than potable water and the piping or other equipment is under pressure and installed and operated in a manner that could cause a cross connection.

M.    When any type of chemical spray attachment is connected to the plumbing, including garden hose fertilizers and pesticide applicators, without proper protection from the potential of backflow occurring.

N.    The use of any type of radiator flush kits attached to the plumbing without proper protection from backflow occurring.

O.    Wherever reclaimed water or ditch water is used on premises.

P.    When there is a premises with an auxiliary water supply which is interconnected to the City service system.

Q.    Any other situation in which the City determines that a backflow prevention assembly is appropriate. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.060 New Construction.

A.    On all new nonresidential construction, an approved backflow assembly shall be installed at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by the City.

B.    When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of the building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the most hazardous use of the building. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.070 Retrofitting.

Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or potential cross connection exists, and wherever the City deems retrofitting necessary to comply with the State regulations or this chapter. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.080 Irrigation Systems.

All irrigation systems shall be protected according to Uniform Plumbing Code regulations. In the event any system is equipped with an injector system, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.090 Thermal Expansion.

If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, or other appurtenances, it is the responsibility of the property owner, the occupant, or person in control of the property to eliminate the possibility of damage from thermal expansion in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.100 Mobile Units.

Any mobile unit that uses the water from any premises served by the City water system must obtain a permit from the City and be inspected to assure an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle assembly is installed on the unit. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.110 Installation.

A.    All backflow prevention assembly installations shall comply with City Standards and Specifications and applicable State regulations.

B.    If the premises isolation assembly is allowed to be installed at a location other than the point of connection to the City water system, the City must have access to the assembly. No connections can be made between the meter and the backflow assembly.

C.    The type of backflow prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists and meet standards set by State regulations. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.120 Pressure Loss.

Any decrease in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.130 Fire Systems.

A.    An approved double check detector assembly shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through. A reduced pressure principle detector assembly must be installed, if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:

1.    When improper maintenance has occurred;

2.    On all high hazard systems;

3.    When the City deems necessary; or

4.    When required by State regulations.

B.    In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a detector assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required consistent with State regulations and in a location approved by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.140 Temporary Meters and Hydrant Valves.

Backflow protection is required on all temporary meters and hydrant valves before use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard and will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.150 Access to Property.

City personnel may enter property to which the City provides water service during reasonable hours for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter or if backflow prevention devices are needed. If any owner, occupant or person in control refuses City personnel access, a reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.160 Annual Testing and Repairs.

All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested immediately upon installation, and at least annually thereafter by a certified backflow assembly tester at the expense of the property owner, tenant or other person in charge of the property. All assemblies found not functioning properly shall be promptly repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises. An assembly must be retested immediately if moved, repaired or replaced.

All repairs on backflow assemblies must be performed according to State regulations and the City’s Standards and Specifications. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.170 Maintenance of Assemblies.

Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained, tested and repaired in accordance with this chapter and applicable regulations. The assembly owner is responsible for protecting the assembly from freezing, vandalism or other damage. If an assembly is not properly tested and repaired, the City will have the assembly tested and repaired and apply all costs associated with this to the water bill issued for the premises. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.180 Backflow Assembly Testers.

Only State-certified backflow assembly testers may test backflow assembly devices. Backflow assembly testers shall submit records of all backflow assembly test repairs to the City within 10 business days of completing the test. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.190 Costs of Compliance.

A.    All costs associated with purchase, installation, surveys, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts and repairs of the backflow prevention assembly, and all costs associated with enforcement of this chapter, are the financial responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises.

B.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter and who causes damage to or impairs the City system, including, but not limited to, allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution or used water to enter the City water system, shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage caused by the violation. The City shall collect from the violator the cost incurred by the City for any cleaning, purifying, repair or replacement work or any other expenses caused by the violation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation and shall result in termination of service.

C.    All cost associated with any disconnect or reconnect fees resulting from the enforcement of this chapter are the sole responsibility of the water utility account holder and/or owner of the premises. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


14.30.200 Termination of Service.

Failure of any owner, occupant or person in control of the premises to install a required assembly, have it tested annually and/or to discontinue the use of all cross connections and to physically separate cross connections in accordance with this chapter is sufficient cause for the discontinuance of public water service to the premises pursuant to applicable State regulations. In an emergency or where an immediate threat to life or public health is found to exist, the City may immediately terminate service to the premises.

The City may, at the property owner’s expense, install a reduced pressure assembly at the meter. Testing, maintenance and repair of the assembly will be the responsibility of the property owner or service recipient. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 14.40 PROHIBITION OF THE ADDITION OF FLUORIDE COMPOUNDS TO THE CITY WATER SUPPLY

Sections:

14.40.005    Fluoridation Prohibited.


14.40.005 Fluoridation Prohibited.

No person may cause fluoridation of the Bend water supply or system or install machinery intended to be used for fluoridation as part of Bend’s water system. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Title 15 SEWER Revised 2/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 7/20

Chapters:

15.10    General Sewer Regulations Revised 2/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 7/20

15.20    Wastewater Pretreatment

15.30    Wastewater Discharge Permits

15.40    Wastewater Reporting Requirements

15.50    Sampling and Analytical Requirements

15.60    Wastewater Compliance Monitoring

15.70    Enforcement

15.80    Wastewater Fees

15.90    Sewer Extra Strength Charge


Chapter 15.10 GENERAL SEWER REGULATIONS Revised 2/20 Revised 7/20

Sections:

15.10.005    Definitions. Revised 2/20

15.10.010    Use of Public Sewer – Requirements for New Development and Septic to Sewer Conversion Program. Revised 2/20 Revised 7/20

15.10.015    Private Sewage Disposal.

15.10.020    Building Sewer Connections and Responsibilities.

15.10.025    Use of Public Sewers.

15.10.030    Protection from Damage.

15.10.035    Inspection.

15.10.040    Penalties.


15.10.005 Definitions. Revised 2/19 Revised 2/20

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

Alteration means expansion or change in location of an existing system or any part of it. Major alteration is the expansion or change in location of the soil absorption facility, treatment unit, or any part of it. Minor alteration is the replacement or relocation of a septic tank or other components of the system other than the soil absorption facility, or a change in distribution technique or method.

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (MG/l).

Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.

Building sewer means the privately owned sewer line in two parts. First part, a building sewer “lateral” wholly contained on private property, which is the line extending from the building drain to the edge of the private property boundary; second part, the sewer “stub out,” which is the line extending past the edge of private property boundary into the public rights-of-way up to where it connects to the public sewer. “Stub-outs” are wholly contained within public rights-of-way. Building sewers include not only sewer lines on private property, called “building sewer laterals,” but also includes the sewer “stub-outs” within rights-of-way up to the point where the line connects with a public sewer main. “Building sewer laterals” and “sewer stub-outs” are not part of the public sewer, and are not owned by the City, even if located in rights-of-way.

Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.

Neighborhood extension project (NEP project) means design and construction of a public sewer to provide public sewer service to existing properties served by on-site septic systems within the City limits as shown on the City of Bend Comprehensive Plan Map at the time of the urban growth boundary expansion by Ordinance No. 2271, effective on acknowledgment on December 6, 2016. It does not include extension of public sewer to existing property within urban growth expansion areas, which are governed by annexation agreements and/or City codes related to new annexation areas.

Private on-site septic system means an individual residential or other property on a septic system or any private sewer system (i.e., drill holes, mounded sand beds, etc.) within the City limits.

Public sewer means any sewer main owned and controlled by the City. A building sewer is not a sewer main and is not a public sewer.

Repair means installing all portions of a system necessary to eliminate a public health hazard or pollution of public waters a failing system creates. Major repair is replacing the soil absorption facility, treatment unit, or any part of it. Minor repair is replacing a septic tank, broken pipe, distribution unit, or any part of the on-site system external to the septic tank or treatment facility except the soil absorption system. Unless classified as a major repair or major maintenance, any replacement of a part of a system with a part that does not meet the original design specifications is a minor repair.

Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

Sewage means the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, and institutions.

Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

Slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards of this code or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.

Storm sewer means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

Suspended solids means a total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. [Ord. NS-2360, 2020; Ord. NS-2320, 2018; Ord. NS-2182, 2012; Ord. NS-2146, 2010]


15.10.010 Use of Public Sewer – Requirements for New Development and Septic to Sewer Conversion Program. Revised 2/20 Revised 7/20

A.    The intent of this section is to:

1.    Require connection to the public sewer system for newly developed property as defined in this chapter.

2.    Facilitate a comprehensive program whereby individual properties with private on-site septic systems within the City limits shown as on the City of Bend Comprehensive Plan Map at the time of the urban growth boundary expansion by Ordinance No. 2271, effective on acknowledgment on December 6, 2016, will connect to the public sewer system when a public sewer system becomes legally available as defined in this chapter.

3.    Provide for financial assistance for connection fees to qualifying property owners with private on-site sewer systems converting to the public sewer system.

B.    New Private On-Site Septic Systems. No person shall construct any new private on-site septic system, including a secondary system on an existing developed property. Replacing an existing septic system is an alteration, not a new system. Any system not operated by the City is a private on-site septic system.

C.    New Development. New development as defined below shall require the property to connect to public sewer. The City will require that public sewer is extended to the property frontage in accordance with the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. New development includes any of the following:

1.    A land division.

2.    Construction of a new dwelling unit.

a.    Exemptions.

i.    New accessory dwelling units (ADUs) may be served by an existing septic system if an alteration permit is not required to adequately serve the ADU, as defined by subsection (C)(3) of this section;

ii.    A new single-family dwelling (SFD) on a vacant parcel located over 300 feet from an existing sewer main is not required to connect to public sewer. Distance to existing sewer is measured from the termination of the nearest sewer main along the centerline of the right-of-way to the nearest property line intersecting the right-of-way.

(A)    The City Engineer may allow a waiver to connect to public sewer if the sewer main to be extended is required to be installed at an average depth of over five feet below ground surface. If a waiver is granted, a waiver of remonstrance will be recorded on the property at the property owner’s expense. The waiver will also require the property owner to connect to public sewer within two years from when public sewer becomes legally available, as defined in subsections (E) and (I)(1)(b) of this section.

3.    Any improvements requiring an alteration permit as defined by Deschutes County Environmental Soils Division and/or OAR 340-071-0100.

D.    Existing Development. Existing development is property served by a private on-site septic system within the City limits as shown on the City of Bend Comprehensive Plan Map at the time of the urban growth boundary expansion by Ordinance NS-2271, approved on November 14, 2016. Development annexed into the City served by private, on-site septic systems shall connect to sewer as set forth in the annexation agreement(s), policies or decisions of the City Council.

E.    Legal Availability. Sewer service is legally available if public sewer with capacity exists along the frontage of the property, following privately or publicly funded extension of sewer. Properties that receive sewer service from a neighborhood extension project (NEP project), capital improvement project (CIP project), or privately funded sewer project will receive a notice of operational completion per subsection (I)(1)(a) or (I)(3)(a) of this section, at which time will indicate that sewer is legally available.

F.    Septic to Sewer Conversion Program. There is hereby established a City of Bend Septic to Sewer Conversion Program with the goal of connecting properties served by private on-site septic systems to the Cityâs public sewer system over time. The program applies to properties within the City limits shown on the City of Bend Comprehensive Plan Map at the time of the urban growth boundary expansion on December 6, 2016, Ordinance NS-2271. In furtherance of the Septic to Sewer Conversion Program, the City will engage in neighborhood extension projects (NEP projects) in a systematic manner, as funds are available and allocated. NEP projects may be selected based on a pool of applicants. The City Manager is authorized to solicit and receive applications from property owners who wish their neighborhood or street(s) be considered for a sewer extension project. Any property owner who signs a NEP project application that is selected for funding will be required to connect to sewer within two years of receiving the City-issued Notice of Operational Completion.* Applications will be considered at least annually, based on the following considerations:

1.    Cost of the sewer extension project, including design;

2.    Total number of homes or properties to be connected to the public sewer system from the project;

3.    Whether other City construction projects are planned for the street identified in the application;

4.    The percentage of property owners who would be served by the neighborhood sewer extension project who have joined or signed onto the application;

5.    The age of existing septic systems that would be replaced by the proposed neighborhood sewer extension project and evidence of failing septic systems; and

6.    Other factors established by the City Manager.

G.    A committee, to include one to three City Councilors, the City Engineer, the Engineering, Infrastructure and Planning Director, the Septic to Sewer Program Manager, and the City Manager, or their designees, will review submitted applications in light of the available funds and the factors in subsection (F) of this section. The committee will select one or more NEP project(s) for funding and construction to proceed pursuant to applicable City processes.

H.    Capital Improvement Program. In addition, there may be areas of the City that receive public sewer service through the extension of a sewer main or interceptor along their frontage and a stub-out from the construction of a project associated with the City’s Collection System Master Plan and Capital Improvement Program (CIP projects). Properties that receive sewer service from a CIP project shall pay applicable system development charges (SDCs) and a connection fee at the time of plumbing permit issuance as further defined in subsection (I)(1)(d) of this section.

I.    Timing of Connection and Payment of Fees.*

1.    The following sections apply to properties that receive sewer service from a NEP project or CIP project after establishment of the Septic to Sewer Conversion Program by Ordinance No. 2320, approved on December 19, 2018.

a.    Upon completion of a NEP project or CIP project, the City will issue a notice of operational completion to all property owners with frontage along the newly completed public sewer line within 30 days of operational completion. The notice will be recorded and will run with the land, explaining the provisions of this subsection (I). City issuance of the Notice of Operational Completion indicates legal availability of sewer service.

b.    Property owners who signed the successful application for the NEP project are required to connect to the public sewer within two years of the Notice of Operational Completion.*

c.    Connection is voluntary for property owners with frontage along a NEP project who did not sign the application for the project or with frontage along a CIP project, except that connection is always mandatory when any of the following occurs at any time:

i.    The existing on-site septic system requires repair as defined by Deschutes County Environmental Soils Division and/or OAR 340-071-0100; or

ii.    The property owner applies for new development, as defined in subsection (C) of this section.

d.    Connection Fees and System Development Charges (SDCs). The connection fee will be established by the City Council in the annual fee resolution, adjusted annually for inflation (using the Engineering News-Record (ENR) construction cost index). Except as provided in subsection (I)(1)(e) of this section, a property owner must pay all connection fees in effect at the time of plumbing permit issuance, except that any property that connects within two years from the Notice of Operational Completion will be granted a 50 percent discount to the current sewer connection fee. Properties that do not connect within the two-year frame must pay the full sewer connection fee established by Council at the time of application for connection.* All property owners must pay the SDCs in effect at the time of application for connection.

e.    A qualifying property owner required or requesting to connect to public sewer under the Septic to Sewer Conversion Program can request that the City fund their connection fees under the City’s customer assistance program. “Qualifying property owner” means a property owner with a household income at or below 80 percent of the area median income based on the most recent HUD calculation available (US Census Bureauâs ACS estimate for Bend, OR MSA).*

2.    The following subsections apply to properties that do not have legally available sewer service as defined in subsection (E) of this section:

a.    Property owners shall connect to public sewer if they apply for new development defined by subsection (C) of this section. All property owners must pay the SDCs in effect at the time of application for connection.

b.    Property owners are permitted to repair existing on-site septic systems.

3.    The following subsections apply to properties with legally available sewer that received sewer service via a privately funded sewer project or a CIP project prior to establishment of the Septic to Sewer Conversion Program by Ordinance No. 2320, approved on December 19, 2018.

a.    Upon completion of a privately funded sewer project, the City will issue a notice of operational completion to all property owners with frontage along the newly completed public sewer line within 30 days of operational completion. The notice will be recorded and will run with the land, explaining the provisions of this subsection (I). City issuance of the notice of operational completion indicates legal availability of sewer service.

b.    Property owners shall connect to public sewer if any of the following occurs:

i.    The existing on-site private septic system requires repair as defined by Deschutes County Environmental Soils Division and/or OAR 340-071-0100; or

ii.    The property owner applies for new development defined by subsection (E) of this section.

c.    Property owners are not permitted to repair existing on-site septic systems.

d.    All property owners must pay the SDCs in effect at the time of application for connection.

J.    City water service may be terminated to any property that has not hooked up to the sewage system in compliance with the provisions of this title or any other applicable law, rule or regulation.

K.    Sewer Billing Accounts. All persons receiving sewer service from the City shall pay the monthly fee for the service and connection established by Council resolution and all applicable system development charges. The Council may set sewer rates based on type of use, on volume discharged, on strength of the discharge, and/or on any other basis the Council determines to be appropriate.

L.    The City Manager shall have the authority to establish administrative rules and regulations and departmental procedures to clarify, carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to implement the Septic to Sewer Conversion Program consistent with the intent of this chapter.

M.    All connections to public sewer shall be completed in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and City laws, regulations and policies. [Ord. NS-2373, 2020; Ord. NS-2360, 2020; Ord. NS-2320, 2018; Ord. NS-2182, 2012]

*  A Septic to Sewer COVID-19 Relief Program was established by City Council resolution in 2020 due to the novel coronavirus pandemic, to provide financial relief to qualifying affected residents. The temporary program applies to property owners receiving sewer service from the Southeast Interceptor Project and the Desert Woods and Neighborhood Extension Project and includes modified connection timing, connection fee discount timing, and connection fee waiver approval criteria. See Resolution No. 3203 for the information on the criteria and administration of this temporary program.


15.10.015 Private Sewage Disposal.

A.    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with this chapter and State regulations.

B.    All applicable State and County permits and approvals must be obtained before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system.

C.    A private sewage disposal system shall not be used until the installation is approved by responsible State and County departments.

D.    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all State regulations. No private sewage disposal system may discharge into any natural outlet.

E.    When a property with a private sewage disposal system is connected to the public City sewer, the private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with State regulations.

F.    The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage facilities in a sanitary manner at all times. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.10.020 Building Sewer Connections and Responsibilities.

A.    No unauthorized person shall uncover, connect with, use, alter or disturb any public sewer without a written permit from the City.

B.    Applications for a sewer connection shall be on City forms. The permit application must be accompanied by plans and specifications and any other information requested by the City.

C.    The owner is responsible for all costs and expenses relating to the installation and connection of the building sewer. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from the installation of the building sewer.

D.    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each lot or parcel.

E.    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only if the City determines that they meet all requirements of this chapter.

F.    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Codes and City Standards and Specifications.

G.    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to a public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City.

H.    All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with the City Standards and Specifications related to work zone protection.

I.    Streets, sidewalks, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in accordance with the City Standards and Specifications unless the City approves otherwise in writing.

J.    The owner of property served by a building sewer shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of the building sewer to the point where the building sewer is connected to a City sewer main. This responsibility includes responsibility for any costs of maintenance or repair. In the event of any break, leak or other damage to a building sewer, the owner of the property served by the building sewer shall cause repairs to be made immediately to minimize any sewer spillage. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012; Ord. NS-2146, 2010]


15.10.025 Use of Public Sewers.

A.    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unreasonably large amounts of uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted process waters to any sanitary sewer.

B.    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet if the discharge is approved in writing by the City and Oregon DEQ.

C.    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

1.    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.

2.    Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the effluent disposal system of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of 0.5 mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.

3.    Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.

4.    Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction of the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works including, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

D.    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the effluent disposal system, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In review of the acceptability of these wastes, the City will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

1.    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 149 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius).

2.    Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble, dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding, or polishing wastes.

3.    Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, lead and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds established City limits.

4.    Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State or Federal Government.

5.    Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the State or Federal regulations.

6.    Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 11.0.

7.    Materials which exert or cause:

a.    Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, (including but not limited to: fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (including, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).

b.    Excessive discoloration (including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).

c.    Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.

d.    Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs.

8.    Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the State and Federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving water. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.10.030 Protection from Damage.

No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the City’s sewage treatment system. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.10.035 Inspection.

A.    The City shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The City shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspections, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.10.040 Penalties.

Failure to comply with this chapter or any regulation or order issued under this chapter is a Class A civil infraction. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.20 WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT

Sections:

15.20.005    Purpose and Policy.

15.20.010    Administration.

15.20.015    Definitions.

15.20.020    Abbreviations.

15.20.025    Prohibited Discharges.

15.20.030    Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

15.20.035    State Requirements.

15.20.040    Local Limits.

15.20.045    Right of Revision.

15.20.050    Special Agreement.

15.20.055    Dilution.

15.20.060    Pretreatment Facilities.

15.20.065    Compliance Deadline.

15.20.070    Additional Pretreatment Measures.

15.20.075    Slug Control Plan.

15.20.080    Septic Tank Wastes.

15.20.085    Permits.


15.20.005 Purpose and Policy.

A.    BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80 regulate discharges into the City’s sewage system to protect the functioning of the system, including the treatment plan, and to comply with applicable regulations. The objectives of these chapters are:

1.    To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system that will interfere with the operation of the treatment plant;

2.    To prevent the introduction of pollutants that cannot be adequately treated before discharge from the treatment plant or that are otherwise incompatible with the treatment plant;

3.    To ensure that the quality of the treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level that allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;

4.    To protect City personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; and

5.    To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids from the treatment plant.

B.    This title shall apply to all who discharge into the City sewage system. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees to recover the City’s costs. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.010 Administration.

Except as otherwise provided, the Public Works Director shall administer, implement and enforce this title. The Public Works Director may delegate authority and responsibilities granted by this title. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.015 Definitions.

The following definitions apply in BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80:

Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.

Applicable pretreatment standards means, for any specified pollutant, City prohibitive standards, City specific pretreatment standards (local limits), State of Oregon pretreatment standards, or EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is appropriate or most stringent.

Authorized representative of the user means:

1.    By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports required by this chapter is a corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a responsible corporate officer means:

a.    A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

b.    The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

2.    If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

3.    If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee.

4.    The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City.

Best management practice(s) (BMPs) means a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to comply with this chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).

Bio-solids means solid or semisolid material obtained from treated wastewater, often used as fertilizer.

Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA that apply to a specific category of users. The standards are listed in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

Categorical user means a user regulated by one of EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards.

Chemical oxygen demand means a test to measure the amount of oxygen consumed where the oxygen is derived from chemicals.

Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.

Cooling water/noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.

DEQ means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

Discharge, including indirect discharge, means any liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, that are discharged into the City sewage system and ultimately to the treatment plant.

Domestic user (residential user) means any person discharging wastewater into the City sewage system similar in volume and/or chemical make-up to the discharge of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to 80 gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita per day, and 0.17 pounds of TSS per capita per day.

EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, including its authorized officials.

Existing source means a wastewater discharge source that was in operation or began construction before the EPA’s publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards applicable to the source if and when the standard is promulgated.

Existing user means any noncategorical user that was discharging wastewater prior to the effective date of the City’s pretreatment regulations.

Grab sample means a sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time.

Interference means:

1.    Inhibition or disruption of the City sewage system, including treatment processes or operations;

2.    Inhibition or disruption of sludge processes, use or disposal; or

3.    Causation of a violation of the City’s WPCF permit or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued under those provisions (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. Interference is normally caused by a discharge.

Maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration or mass loading of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

Medical wastes means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

NAICS codes means North American Industry Classification System codes.

New source means:

1.    Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standards are then promulgated; provided, that:

a.    The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

b.    The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

c.    The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

2.    Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

3.    Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:

a.    Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

i.    Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or

ii.    Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

b.    Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.

New user means a user that is not regulated under Federal categorical pretreatment standards but that applies to the City for a new building permit or occupies an existing building and plans to commence discharge of wastewater to the City’s collection system after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. Any person that buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an existing user if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.

Pass through means a discharge that exits the treatment plant into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of the City’s WPCF permit. This includes an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

Permittee means a person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit by the City.

Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, or local governmental entities.

pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.

Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, or odor).

Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the City sewage system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).

Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits established by the City.

Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances imposed by this chapter.

Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks, trucked waste and waste tanks.

Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

Sewage system means the entire system used by the City to collect, transport, treat, and discharge treated effluent, including all sewers and treatment plants.

Sewer means any pipe, conduit ditch, or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source.

Significant industrial user means:

1.    A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or a user that:

a.    Discharges an average of 25,000 GPD or more of process wastewater to the City sewage system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or

b.    Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or

c.    Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the treatment plant’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

2.    A significant industrial user is an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR, 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.

3.    Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)(a) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user and in accordance with procedures established according to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.

Sludge means semisolid material such as the type precipitated by sewage treatment.

Slug control plan (40 CFR 403.8 (B)(6)(iv)) means requirements to control slug discharges, which include development of a compliance schedule for installation of technology required to meet pretreatment standards and submission of all notices and reports.

Slug load means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in this code or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.

Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.

Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.

Total suspended solids or TSS means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

Treatment plant means a “treatment works,” as defined by the Act, that is owned by the City.

Treatment plant effluent means liquid discharge from the treatment plant.

User or industrial user means a source of a direct or indirect discharge to the sewage system other than a domestic user.

Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged to the sewage system and treated by the treatment plant.

Wastewater discharge permit means an authorization or equivalent control mechanism issued by the City to users discharging wastewater to the sewage system. The permit or control mechanism may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements.

Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means the facility that treats municipal sewage and industrial waste. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.020 Abbreviations.

The following lists the meanings of abbreviations used in BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80:

BOD means biochemical oxygen demand.

CFR means Code of Federal Regulations.

COD means chemical oxygen demand.

DEQ means Department of Environmental Quality.

EPA means U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

GPD means gallons per day.

l means liter.

LEL means lower explosive limit.

mg means milligrams.

mg/l means milligrams per liter.

NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

O&M means operation and maintenance.

POTW means publicly owned treatment works.

RCRA means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.

SIC means standard industrial classifications.

Slug control plan means requirement to control slug discharges.

SWDA means Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.).

TSS means total suspended solids.

USC means United States Code.

WPCF means water pollution control facility. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.025 Prohibited Discharges.

A.    General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage system any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

B.    Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage system the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

1.    Pollutants that create a fire or explosive hazard, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.

2.    Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the sewage system or equipment.

3.    Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in or to the sewage system resulting in interference (but in no case solids greater than one-half inch or one and one-quarter centimeters in any dimension).

4.    Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the sewage system.

5.    Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 77 degrees Fahrenheit (25 degrees Celsius) unless the DEQ, upon the request of the City, approves alternate temperature limits not to exceed 125 degrees.

6.    Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or synthetic oils in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

7.    Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewage system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.

8.    Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City.

9.    Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.

10.    Wastewater that imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions that impart color to the treatment plant’s effluent. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than 10 percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.

11.    Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.

12.    Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized in writing by the City.

13.    Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes.

14.    Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the City.

15.    Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.

16.    Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the sewage system.

17.    Any liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage system or to the operation of the sewage system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent nor any single reading over 10 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.

18.    Grease, animal renderings or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gasoline, tar asphalt residues, petroleum products, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, glass grinding or polishing wastes.

19.    Any substance which will cause the City to violate its WPCF and/or other disposal or discharge permits or system permits.

20.    Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the City can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the groundwater or receiving waters; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.

21.    The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank waste, or other wastewater unless the operator has obtained testing and approval by the City and paid all fees assessed for the privilege of the discharge.

22.    Any hazardous wastes as defined in State regulations or in 40 CFR Part 261.

23.    Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).

24.    Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the City’s WPCF permit.

Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this chapter shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the sewage system. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.030 Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

The national categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by EPA and found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are incorporated into and are enforceable under this title. When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the City convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the City.

A.    The City may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the following criteria:

1.    The industrial user employs or demonstrates that it will employ water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit.

2.    The industrial user uses control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, without using dilution as a substitute for treatment.

3.    Sufficient information is provided to establish the facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions.

4.    Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge.

5.    Consistent compliance with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request for equivalent mass limits.

B.    An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:

1.    Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;

2.    Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;

3.    Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify the City whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates. Upon notification of a revised production rate, City will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

4.    Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented under this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.

C.    Where the Authority chooses to establish equivalent mass limits, it will:

1.    Calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor;

2.    When notified of a revised production rate, reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

3.    Retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent control mechanism terms if the industrial user’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(d) and this title. The industrial user must also be in compliance with 40 CFR 403.17 (regarding the prohibition of bypass). [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.035 State Requirements.

State requirements and limitations on discharges to the sewage system shall be met by all users which are subject to the standards if they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or this title. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.040 Local Limits.

In addition to categorical pretreatment standards, no significant industrial user (SIU) shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants into the system in excess of limitations specified in its wastewater discharge permit or any other limits established by the City. The City may establish and revise from time to time standards for specific restricted substances. These standards shall be developed in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5 and shall implement the objectives of this title. These standards, including best management practices (BMPs), are only applicable to significant industrial users. Standards established in accordance with this title will be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the Clean Water Act. Wherever a discharger is subject to both categorical pretreatment standards and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall apply. The City may also develop best management practices (BMPs) to implement permit specific and local limits for industrial users. BMPs shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards. The City may impose mass limitations in addition to (or in place of) concentration-based limitations. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.045 Right of Revision.

The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, resolution or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the sewage system. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.050 Special Agreement.

The City may enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the sewage system. Users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.30. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from DEQ in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard, Federal pretreatment requirement, or this title. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.055 Dilution.

No user may increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may impose mass limitations on users that may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.060 Pretreatment Facilities.

Users shall provide wastewater treatment to comply with BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80 and shall achieve compliance within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State, or the City, whichever is most stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review and construction shall not proceed until the plans are approved in writing by the City. The review of the plans and operating procedures does not relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge that complies with BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.065 Compliance Deadline.

Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The City shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the Federal categorical pretreatment standards.

New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users shall install, have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.

Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit who is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.070 Additional Pretreatment Measures.

A.    The Director of Public Works may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the sewage system and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this title.

B.    Each user discharging into the sewage system more than 25,000 gallons per day or more than five percent of the average daily flow into the sewage system, whichever is less, shall install and maintain, on its property and at its expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a 24-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50 percent of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller, and shall be regulated as directed by the City. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.

C.    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. All records for inspections, cleaning and repair must be maintained and readily available for review by City staff. Records should include third party cleaning manifests.

D.    Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.075 Slug Control Plan.

A.    General Provisions. All users shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of materials that may interfere with or cause pass through to the sewage system by developing and implementing a slug control plan. Facilities necessary to prevent the discharge of prohibited or restricted substances shall be provided and maintained at the user’s cost and expense. A plan showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and approval before implementation of the plan. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures by the City does not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80. The plan shall be posted and available for inspection at the facility during normal business hours. SIUs must notify the City immediately of any changes at their facilities, not already addressed in their slug control plan or other slug control requirements, that may affect the potential for a slug discharge.

B.    Specific Provisions. The City may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a slug control plan. The need and requirement for a plan shall be included in the user’s wastewater discharge permit.

C.    A slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

1.    Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

2.    Description of stored chemicals;

3.    Procedures for immediately notifying the City of any accidental or slug discharge; and

4.    Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.

D.    Users shall notify the City immediately after the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated by BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80. The notification shall include location, date and time of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the City, in addition to the amount of any penalties imposed on the City as a result of the discharge.

E.    Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the City a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification does not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property. The notification does not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80 or other applicable law.

F.    Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user’s premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.080 Septic Tank Wastes.

A.    Septic tank waste may be introduced into the sewage system only at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and only at times designated by the City. Those wastes must comply with BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80 and all other requirements imposed by the City. Wastewater discharge licenses for individual vehicles to use the facilities shall be issued by DEQ. Licenses must be current, up to date, in good standing, and have obtained testing and approval by the City before discharge will be allowed.

B.    Septic tank waste haulers may only discharge loads at locations specifically designated by the City. The City may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.

C.    Septic tank waste haulers must provide a City waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, license number, truck identification, sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.20.085 Permits.

A.    No significant industrial user (SIU) may discharge wastewater into the sewage system without first applying for and obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit is a violation of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of the obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards and requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law.

B.    The City may require other users, including those delivering trucked waste, to obtain wastewater discharge permits to carry out the purposes of this title. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.30 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS

Sections:

15.30.010    Existing SIU.

15.30.020    New Sources and New Users.

15.30.030    Application Contents.

15.30.040    Signatory and Certification Requirement.

15.30.050    Wastewater Discharge Authorizations.

15.30.060    Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions.

15.30.070    Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents.

15.30.080    Appeals.

15.30.090    Duration.

15.30.100    Modification.

15.30.110    Transfer.

15.30.120    Revocation.

15.30.130    Reissuance.


15.30.010 Existing SIU.

Any SIU that does not currently have a wastewater discharge permit must cease discharges until a wastewater discharge permit is obtained. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.020 New Sources and New Users.

Any new source and any new user that is an SIU must apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days before startup and may not discharge until its wastewater discharge permit is issued. New sources and new users must include in their application information on the method of pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.030 Application Contents.

All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit, at a minimum, the following information. Submitting the following information complies with 40 CFR 403.12(b).

A.    Identifying Information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.

B.    Permits. The user shall submit a list of all environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

C.    Description of Operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the sewage system; number and type of employees; hours of operation; each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the sewage system from the regulated or manufacturing processes; site plans; floor plans; mechanical and plumbing plans; and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.

D.    Flow Measurement.

1.    Categorical User. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the sewage system from each of the following:

a.    Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and

b.    Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)).

2.    Noncategorical User. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the sewage system from each of the following:

a.    Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the Director of Public Works. The City may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.

E.    Measurements of Pollutants.

1.    Categorical User.

a.    The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.

b.    In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the City) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the City or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. Sampling performed shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures required by BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80.

c.    The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

d.    Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.

2.    Noncategorical Significant Industrial User (SIU).

a.    The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.

b.    In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass where required by the City) of regulated pollutants, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures required by BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80.

c.    The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

F.    Certification. The user shall submit a statement that has been reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

G.    Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The user’s schedule shall conform to the requirements of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established by BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80.

1.    Where the user’s categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this subsection, the information required by this section shall pertain to the modified limits.

2.    If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the user submits the report required by this section, then a report containing modified information shall be submitted by the user within 60 days after the new limit is approved.

H.    Submittal of Information. The user shall submit any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.040 Signatory and Certification Requirement.

All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

[Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.050 Wastewater Discharge Authorizations.

The City may use alternate control mechanisms to control wastewater being discharged into the City’s sewage system. These control mechanisms may include best management practice (BMP) or a general control permit. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.060 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions.

The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the City will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The permit shall be issued within 60 days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished if all requirements are complied with. The City may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit that does not meet applicable standards or that lacks sufficient information. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.070 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents.

Wastewater discharge permits shall include conditions as to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the sewage system.

A.    Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:

1.    A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration shall not exceed five years;

2.    A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the City, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;

3.    Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special State requirements;

4.    Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored (including the process for seeking a waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge or a specific waived pollutant in the case of an individual control mechanism), sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law;

5.    Requirement for immediate notification to the City where self-monitoring results indicate noncompliance;

6.    Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;

7.    Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the City to be necessary;

8.    Requirement to report immediately to the City all discharges, and facility changes, including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the sewage system;

9.    Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results to the City within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation;

10.    A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule.

B.    Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:

1.    Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

2.    Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

3.    Requirements for the development and implementation of spill/slug control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;

4.    Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewage system;

5.    The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sewage system;

6.    Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

7.    A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;

8.    Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this title, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.080 Appeals.

Any person, including the user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit or the denial of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance or denial. A wastewater discharge permit or notice of denial of such permit shall contain notice of the petition for review procedures that a person may follow to obtain administrative review of the permit decision.

A.    Failure to submit a timely petition for review waives any right to an administrative appeal.

B.    A petition for review shall be in writing and served either in person or by certified mail to the City. In its petition, the appealing party must specify the name and address of the person filing the petition for review, the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.

C.    The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

D.    The City shall conduct a hearing to determine the merits of the petition. Prior to the hearing, the person conducting the hearing shall notify the petitioner of the time and place of the hearing, and that the petitioner will have the opportunity to present evidence and make statements in support of the appeal. The person conducting the hearing shall have the sole discretion to determine the amount of time allowed for the appeal hearing. The person conducting the hearing may rely on any relevant evidence provided by City staff, or obtained by any other reasonable means. The decision on the hearing shall be in writing. If the City fails to make a determination on the petition within 30 days, the petition shall be deemed to be denied, and the permit denial or permit conditions appealed from shall be the final decision of the City.

E.    The decision on the petition for review is the final decision of the City. The final decision may only be challenged under the writ of review provisions of Oregon law. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.090 Duration.

Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the City. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate its expiration date. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.100 Modification.

The City may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:

A.    To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;

B.    To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;

C.    A change in the sewage system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

D.    Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the sewage system, City personnel, or the receiving waters;

E.    Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;

F.    Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required report;

G.    Revision of categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

H.    To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or

I.    To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.110 Transfer.

Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days’ advance notice to the City and the City approves the transfer. The notice must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator that:

A.    States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;

B.    States the date on which the transfer is to occur; and

C.    Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit beginning on the date of the transfer.

Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.

Provided that the notice required above occurred and that there were no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be considered an existing user and will be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner’s permit. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.120 Revocation.

Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:

A.    Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

B.    Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions;

C.    Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

D.    Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

E.    Tampering with monitoring equipment;

F.    Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;

G.    Failure to meet discharge limitations;

H.    Failure to pay fines;

I.    Failure to pay sewer charges;

J.    Failure to meet compliance schedules;

K.    Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;

L.    Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;

M.    If the City has to invoke its emergency provision; or

N.    Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this title.

Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.30.130 Reissuance.

A user who is required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application, at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who has submitted its re-application in the time period specified herein shall be deemed to have an effective wastewater discharge permit until the City issues or denies the new wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to timely submit its re-application will be deemed to be discharging without a wastewater discharge permit. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.40 WASTEWATER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

15.40.010    Baseline Monitoring Reports.

15.40.020    Final Compliance Report.

15.40.030    Periodic Compliance Report.

15.40.040    Pretreatment Standards Compliance Schedules.

15.40.050    Notification of Significant Production Changes.

15.40.060    Hazardous Waste Notification.

15.40.070    Notice of Potential Problems.

15.40.080    Noncompliance Reporting.

15.40.090    Notification of Changed Discharge.

15.40.100    Reports from Unpermitted Users.

15.40.110    Record Keeping.

15.40.120    Annual Certification.


15.40.010 Baseline Monitoring Reports.

A.    Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the sewage system shall submit to the City a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the City a report that contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.

B.    Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.

1.    Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.

2.    Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

3.    Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.

4.    Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

5.    Measurement of Pollutants.

a.    The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

b.    The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the City) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the Control Authority or the applicable pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.

c.    Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures required by BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the City.

6.    Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

7.    Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80.

8.    Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified as required by this chapter. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.020 Final Compliance Report.

A.    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance of an existing significant industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this title, in Federal categorical standards, or in a wastewater discharge permit, or, in the case of a new source or a new user considered by the City to fit the definition of SIU, within 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage system, the affected user shall submit to the City a report containing the information outlined in BC 15.40.010.

B.    For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the City in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.030 Periodic Compliance Report.

A.    Any user that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit and performs self-monitoring shall submit to the City during the months of June and December, unless the City has determined that the self-monitoring may be reduced to report no less frequently than once a year, or unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the DEQ, a report indicating the nature of the effluent over the previous reporting period. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the industrial waste discharge permit. A reporting form will be provided by the City. At a minimum, users shall sample their discharge at least twice per year, unless required less frequently as described above. In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by City to determine the compliance status of the user.

B.    Periodic compliance reports are to be postmarked or received by the Industrial Pretreatment Department by on or before the fifteenth of the month following the conclusion of the reporting period.

C.    The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if specified in the wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants listed in the wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling locations and shall also include any additional information required by this title or the wastewater discharge permit. Production data shall be reported if required by the wastewater discharge permit. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required by the City or by this title, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period. All laboratory reports providing data for organic and metal parameters shall include the following information: sampling date, sample location, date of analysis, parameter name, CAS number, analytical method/number, method detection limit (MDL), laboratory practical quantitation limit (PQL), reporting units, and concentration detected. Analytical results from samples sent to a contracted laboratory must have information on the chain of custody, the analytical method, QA/QC results, and documentation of accreditation for the parameter.

D.    The City may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user.

E.    Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the City or by unit production limits specified in the applicable categorical standards shall report production data.

F.    If the City calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or nonregulated flows, the user will be responsible for providing flows from the regulated process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated flows.

G.    Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided, however, that the City may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques if the City determines that an actual measurement is not feasible.

H.    Discharges sampled shall be representative of the user’s daily operations and samples shall be taken in accordance with this title. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required by the City or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.

I.    The City may require reporting by users that are not required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit if information or data is needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of the sewage system.

J.    The City may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by the user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the City agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it may charge the user for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the City for the sampling and analyses. The user may be charged for the cost of resampling by the City in the event of a violation or violations. Any such charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The City is under no obligation to perform periodic compliance monitoring for a user.

K.    Users that have approved monitoring waivers as to specific pollutants must certify on each report that there has been no increase in the specific pollutant in the wastestream due to activities of the user. The certification shall be in the following form:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ____ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Parts], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of _____ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since the filing of the most recent report.

[Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.040 Pretreatment Standards Compliance Schedules.

A.    The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).

B.    No increment referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall exceed nine months.

C.    Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the City including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.050 Notification of Significant Production Changes.

Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the City within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.060 Hazardous Waste Notification.

Any user discharging more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) is required to provide a one-time notification in writing to the City, to the EPA Region 10 Office of Waste and Chemicals Management Director, and to DEQ. Any existing user exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein within 30 days of becoming aware of a discharge of 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or any discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the City sewage system. The notification shall include:

A.    The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261;

B.    The EPA hazardous waste number; and

C.    The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).

D.    If an industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the sewage system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:

1.    An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;

2.    An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month; and

3.    An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.

These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements.

Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the City of the discharge of such a substance within 90 days of the effective date of the regulations.

In the case of any notification made under this subsection, an industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.070 Notice of Potential Problems.

A user shall notify the City immediately of all discharges and changes at the facility that could cause adverse impacts to the sewage system, including any slug loads. The notification shall include the concentration and volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact should also be noted during the notification. Any user who discharges a slug load of pollutants shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the sewage system, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the City under State or Federal law. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.080 Noncompliance Reporting.

If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling within five days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if:

A.    The City performs sampling at the user at a frequency of at least once per month; or

B.    The City performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.090 Notification of Changed Discharge.

All users shall promptly notify the City in advance of any substantial change in the volume or any change in character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). Substantial change is defined to mean a change of 10 percent or more in discharge volume. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.100 Reports from Unpermitted Users.

All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide reports when and if required in writing by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.110 Record Keeping.

Users subject to the reporting requirements of this title, including documentation associated with best management practices, shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this title and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the sewage system or where the user has been notified in writing of a longer retention period by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.40.120 Annual Certification.

A.    A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user must annually submit the following certification statement. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the City:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that (a) during the period from __________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year], the facility described as ____________________ [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical Industrial User; (b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon information provided elsewhere in this document.

B.    A nondischarging categorical industrial user must annually submit the following certification statement.

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from __________, ________ to ________, _______________ [months, days, year] (a) The facility described as ____________________ [facility name] met the definition of a non-discharging categorical Industrial User as described in BC 15.20.015; (b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon information provided elsewhere in this document.

[Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.50 SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

15.50.010    General Requirements.

15.50.020    Sampling.

15.50.030    Analytical Requirements.

15.50.040    City Monitoring.


15.50.010 General Requirements.

All sample preservation procedures, container materials, maximum allowable holding times and analytical techniques to be submitted as part of any application or report required by this division shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and techniques specified in 40 CFR Part 136. Alternatively, a contractor with the required protocols listed in an approved comprehensive quality assurance plan may sample and analyze according to the protocols specified in that document. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.50.020 Sampling.

A.    Sampling for baseline monitoring reports (BMR) and 90-day compliance reports must include a minimum of four grab samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. The City may authorize a lower minimum for facilities with historical sampling data. The numbers of grab samples for periodic compliance reports shall be the number the City determines to be necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

The City will determine on a case-by-case basis whether the user will be able to composite the individual grab samples. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow or time-proportional composite sampling techniques, depending on circumstances. The City may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow-proportional composite sampling is infeasible. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the City, as appropriate.

In those cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.

B.    Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from any pretreatment facilities, immediately downstream from the regulated or manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by the City and specified in the user’s wastewater discharge permit. For categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the City has adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standard(s). In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the City to determine the compliance status of the user.

C.    All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that the wastestream sampled is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than required in its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.50.030 Analytical Requirements.

All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.50.040 City Monitoring.

The City will follow the procedures outlined in BC 15.50.020 and 15.50.030 when sampling to monitor compliance. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.60 WASTEWATER COMPLIANCE MONITORING

Sections:

15.60.010    Inspection and Sampling.

15.60.020    Monitoring Facilities.

15.60.030    Search Warrants.

15.60.040    Vandalism.

15.60.050    Confidential Information.

15.60.060    Users in Significant Noncompliance.


15.60.010 Inspection and Sampling.

The City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain compliance with this title and any wastewater discharge permit or order. Users shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

A.    Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, on presentation of suitable identification, City representatives will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their responsibilities under this title.

B.    The City shall have the right to set up or require to be set up monitoring and sampling devices on the user’s property to monitor compliance with this title.

C.    Any obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the City and shall not be replaced unless and until authorized in writing by the City. The user is responsible for the cost of clearing obstructions.

D.    Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this title. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.60.020 Monitoring Facilities.

Each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility (including installation of a wastewater sample port), to allow inspection, sampling, continuous monitoring and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to the City in all commercial/industrial areas. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user’s premises, except, where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the City may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The City may require the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line or a wastewater treatment system).

There shall be ample room in or near sampling facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including the sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the user’s expense.

The City may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.

All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.60.030 Search Warrants.

If the City has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this title, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City designed to verify compliance with this title or any wastewater discharge permit or order, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from the Bend Municipal Court. The warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the City in the company of a uniformed City police officer. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.60.040 Vandalism.

No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the sewage system. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.60.050 Confidential Information.

Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from City inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, except when disclosure is required by the Oregon Public Records Law. Information shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the WPCF permit or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” will not be recognized as confidential information. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.60.060 Users in Significant Noncompliance.

The City shall publish annually, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(D)(viii) in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a list of the industrial users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user or any industrial user which violates subsection (C), (D), or (H) of this section is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:

A.    Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);

B.    Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

C.    Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the City believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of City personnel or the general public);

D.    Any discharge of pollutants that have caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or have resulted in the City’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

E.    Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

F.    Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

G.    Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

H.    Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.70 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

15.70.010    Notice of Violation.

15.70.020    Consent Orders.

15.70.030    Show Cause Hearing.

15.70.040    Compliance Orders.

15.70.050    Cease and Desist Orders.

15.70.060    Emergency Suspensions.

15.70.070    Termination of Discharge Permit (Nonemergency).

15.70.080    Administrative Penalties.

15.70.090    Injunctive Relief.

15.70.100    Judicially Imposed Civil Penalties.

15.70.110    Criminal Prosecution.

15.70.120    Remedies Nonexclusive.

15.70.130    Performance Bonds.

15.70.140    Liability Insurance.

15.70.150    Water Supply Discontinuance.

15.70.160    Administrative Review of Permit.

15.70.170    Public Nuisances.

15.70.180    Informants.

15.70.190    Contractor Listing.

15.70.200    Affirmative Defense of Upset.

15.70.210    Affirmative Defense – Lack of Knowledge.

15.70.220    Affirmative Defense – Bypass.


15.70.010 Notice of Violation.

When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, the City may serve that user with a written notice of violation via certified mail. Within five days of the receipt of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City. Submission of the correction plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the City to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.020 Consent Orders.

The City may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Those documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document.

The documents shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued under this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.030 Show Cause Hearing.

The City may, in addition to other remedies, order a user that has violated or continues to violate any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice shall include the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. The notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.040 Compliance Orders.

When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.050 Cease and Desist Orders.

When the City finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the City may, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

A.    Immediately comply with all requirements; and

B.    Take appropriate remedial or preventive action needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.060 Emergency Suspensions.

The City may immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit when suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the human health or welfare. The City may immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit after notice and opportunity to respond if the discharge threatens to interfere with the operation of the sewage system or may endanger the environment.

A.    Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City may take steps, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage system or endangerment to any individuals. The City shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings of this title are initiated against the user.

B.    A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing.

Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.070 Termination of Discharge Permit (Nonemergency).

Any user that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge permit termination:

A.    Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;

B.    Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

C.    Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;

D.    Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or

E.    Violation of the pretreatment standards in this title.

The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the City shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.080 Administrative Penalties.

A.    When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may assess a penalty against the user in an amount not to exceed $6,250.

The penalty may be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, penalties shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.

B.    Users desiring to dispute the penalty must file a written request for the City to reconsider the penalty along with full payment of the penalty amount within 30 days of being notified of the penalty. Where a request has merit, the Public Works Director shall convene a hearing on the matter within 60 days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with interest, shall be returned to the user. The City may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the penalty.

C.    Issuance of an administrative penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.090 Injunctive Relief.

When the City finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit, or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may petition the Circuit Court for Deschutes County through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, to restrain or compel the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this title on activities of the user. The City may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.100 Judicially Imposed Civil Penalties.

A.    Violation of any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is a civil infraction with a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per violation, for each day the violation persists. The violation shall be enforced through the civil infraction procedures of this code. In a proceeding under this section, the City shall not be required to prove that the user has acted intentionally, knowingly or willfully. The City shall be required to prove that the violation occurred, but the user’s mental state shall not be an element of proving the violation.

B.    The City may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City, in addition to the civil penalty.

C.    In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the Municipal Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.

D.    Initiation of a civil infraction proceeding shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.110 Criminal Prosecution.

A.    Intentional, willful or knowing violation of any provision of BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $6,250 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.

B.    Intentional, willful or knowing introduction of any substance into the sewage system that causes personal injury or property damage is a Class A misdemeanor punishable by a maximum penalty of not more than $6,250 and/or one year in prison. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law. Nothing in this title precludes prosecution under other criminal statutes, including statutes pertaining to damage to public utilities or injury to property or persons.

C.    The knowing making of any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to BC Chapters 15.20 through 15.80, wastewater discharge permit or order, or falsification, tampering with, or knowingly rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this title is a Class A misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $6,250 per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.

D.    If the user is a corporation, the penalty provisions of ORS 161.655 shall be applicable. An employee, officer or agent of a corporation that commits a misdemeanor under this chapter may be prosecuted in that person’s individual capacity, and, upon conviction, be personally subject to the penalties provided under this section if the person committed the offense intentionally, knowingly or willfully, notwithstanding that the permit was issued in the name of a corporation. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.120 Remedies Nonexclusive.

The remedies provided by this chapter are not exclusive remedies. The City reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement in response to pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City’s enforcement response plan. However, the City reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.130 Performance Bonds.

The City may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user that has failed to comply with any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless the user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the City to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.140 Liability Insurance.

The City may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user that has failed to comply with any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained insurance or other financial assurances satisfactory to the City sufficient to restore or repair damage to the sewage system that may be caused by its discharge. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.150 Water Supply Discontinuance.

The City may discontinue water service to a user for violation of any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. Service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. The user shall be required to reimburse the City for expenses incurred for disconnecting service. Any person, including the user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of water supply severance within 30 days of termination or notice of termination. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.160 Administrative Review of Permit.

A wastewater discharge permit or notice of denial of the permit shall contain notice of the petition for review procedures that a person may follow to obtain administrative review of the permit decision.

A.    Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

B.    A petition for review shall be in writing and filed with the City Manager’s office. In the petition, the appealing party must specify the name and address of the person filing the petition for review, and the reasons for this objection.

C.    The City Manager shall conduct a hearing to determine the merits of the petition. Prior to the hearing, the person conducting the hearing shall notify the petitioner of the time and place of the hearing, and that the petitioner will have the opportunity to present evidence and make statements in support of the appeal. The person conducting the hearing shall have the sole discretion to determine the amount of time allowed for the appeal hearing. The person conducting the hearing may rely on any relevant evidence provided by City staff, or obtained by any other reasonable means. The decision on the hearing shall be in writing. If the City fails to make a determination on the petition within 30 days, the petition shall be deemed to be denied, and the permit denial or permit conditions appealed from shall be the final decision of the City.

D.    The decision on the petition for review is the final decision of the City. The final decision may only be challenged under the Writ of Review provisions of Oregon Law. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.170 Public Nuisances.

A violation of any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit, or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is a public nuisance and may be corrected or abated as provided by this code. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.180 Informants.

The City may pay up to 100 percent of any collected fine or penalty imposed by Municipal Court, to a maximum amount of $1,000, to an informant, subject to reduction by the amount of any assessments required by State law. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.190 Contractor Listing.

Users that have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to enter into contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.200 Affirmative Defense of Upset.

A.    For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

B.    An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought under this chapter for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (C) of this section are met. The affirmative defense of “upset” shall not be applicable to enforcement actions under any provision of this title other than those provided in this chapter, although facts indicating that an upset occurred may be considered in determining the appropriate remedy under enforcement proceedings other than those provided in this chapter.

C.    A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:

1.    An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;

2.    The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and

3.    The user has submitted the following information to the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days.

a.    A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;

b.    The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

c.    Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

D.    In any enforcement proceeding under this title, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.

E.    Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards under this title.

F.    Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of their treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.210 Affirmative Defense – Lack of Knowledge.

A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibited discharge standards if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (A) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or (B) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its WPCF permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


15.70.220 Affirmative Defense – Bypass.

A.    For the purposes of this section:

1.    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.

2.    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. “Severe property damage” does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

B.    A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

C.    Notice of Bypass.

1.    If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the City at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.

2.    A user shall submit oral notice to the City of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The City may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.

D.    Bypass Conditions.

1.    Bypass is prohibited, and the City may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:

a.    Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

b.    There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

c.    The user submitted notices as required under subsection (C) of this section.

2.    The City may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the City determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.80 WASTEWATER FEES

Sections:

15.80.010    Fees.


15.80.010 Fees.

All persons receiving sewer services shall pay the fees established by Council resolution. Fees shall be set at an amount to cover the City’s costs relating to the service for which the fee is paid. Fees may include:

A.    Fees for wastewater services. The fees for wastewater services may include a component or additional charge based on the strength of the discharge;

B.    Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;

C.    Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;

D.    Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

E.    Fees for filing appeals; and

F.    Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this title. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this title and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City. [Ord. NS-2182, 2012]


Chapter 15.90 SEWER EXTRA STRENGTH CHARGE

Sections:

15.90.010    Imposition of Sewer Extra Strength Charge.

15.90.020    Purpose.

15.90.030    Rate Types.

15.90.040    New Development and Redevelopment.

15.90.050    Reclassification Requests.

15.90.060    Appeals.

15.90.070    Enforcement.


15.90.010 Imposition of Sewer Extra Strength Charge.

All nonresidential sewer customers are subject to evaluation to determine if they are required to pay a sewer extra strength charge (ESC). Nonresidential sewer customers whose wastewater discharges exceed or have the potential to exceed residential levels of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or total suspended solids (TSS) shall pay an ESC in an amount established by Council resolution, consistent with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


15.90.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the ESC is to recover the cost of treating extra strength wastewater discharged into the City of Bend sewer system. Extra strength discharges have a concentration of BOD or TSS higher than the concentration assumed as part of the City’s base sewer user charge. Additional charges to ratepayers for extra strength wastewater are necessary for rate equity and to prevent the high cost of treatment of extra strength wastewater from being passed on to all other ratepayers. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


15.90.030 Rate Types.

Ratepayers who discharge extra strength wastewater shall pay an ESC using either the industry average rate or the monitored rate.

A.    Industry Average Rate.

1.    All nonresidential customers who are not in the monitored program whose wastewater discharges exceed residential strengths for BOD or TSS shall pay the industry average rate.

2.    The ESC industry average rate shall be established by Council resolution setting rates based on the following categories: low, medium, high, and super high. The City Council shall establish by resolution an Extra Strength Category Table that lists the industries in each category. The City Manager shall maintain and may amend the Extra Strength Category Table.

3.    The ESC sewer volume charge shall be based on the winter quarter average water consumption of the customer, and the amount shall be adjusted annually in the spring based on the most recent winter quarter average data. For new customers, the volume charge shall be based on a default average consumption value established in the City’s fee resolution. The rates in the ESC industry average rate may include a phased rate increase, with initial rates that do not cover all extra strength costs, over a period to be established by City Council resolution.

4.    Any changes in use of a nonresidential property or in processes that may affect the strength of wastewater discharges shall be reported to the City’s Utility Billing Department by the customer.

5.    When a single sewer account includes discharges from multiple sources, the account holder shall assign a proportionate share to each use, subject to City review and approval. The sewer volume charge will be applied by the City taking into account the proportionate use provided by the account holder. In the event that the account holder does not provide the City with an assignment of proportionate use, the total volume for the account will be assigned the highest strength among the sources of discharge on the account.

6.    Any customer may request reclassification under BC 15.90.050 at the time the classification is initially assigned, after any change in classification, or after any change in use or practice at the property.

B.    Monitored Rate.

1.    Nonresidential sewer customers may pay the ESC based on their sewer discharge if they are eligible for and participate in the monitored rate program as established in this subsection (B).

2.    Customers are eligible to participate in the monitored rate program if there is a secure and accessible sampling location for the customer’s discharge that allows representative samples to be taken; and

3.    Customers with an average peak BOD or TSS greater than 3,000 must participate in the monitored rate program.

4.    Any nonresidential customer may apply to be in the monitored rate program. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount established in the City’s fee resolution. Customers that paid an ESC to the City prior to January 1, 2013, shall be exempt from the application fee for applications submitted prior to January 1, 2015.

5.    An individual monitored program for each customer shall be established and agreed to in writing by the applicant for inclusion in the monitoring program. Each monitoring program shall be consistent with the City’s sampling standards and include:

a.    A description of the sampling location.

b.    A sampling schedule for the samples to be taken by the customer.

c.    The ability for the City to access the sampling site and take samples.

d.    A requirement that the customer samples be analyzed for BOD and TSS by an independent laboratory approved by the City.

e.    An agreement on when the data will be presented to the City for monthly billing purposes.

6.    On determination of the actual strength of the discharge as monitored, the customer shall pay the rate based on monitored load established by the Extra Strength Category Table, based on a 12-month rolling average basis.

7.    The application for participation in the monitoring program shall include a consent to the City’s inspection of the property where the sewage discharge occurs to take samples and to inspect for compliance with the monitoring program. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


15.90.040 New Development and Redevelopment.

Any new development that will likely host a business that has the potential to discharge wastewater at strengths above residential levels shall install a sampling manhole at time of development or redevelopment. Sampling manholes shall comply with the City’s standards and specifications in effect at the time of installation. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


15.90.050 Reclassification Requests.

A.    Application. Any customer in an industry that is required to pay a sewer extra strength charge may request reclassification at any time by submitting a written application on a City-approved form and payment of a fee in an amount to be established in the City’s fee resolution.

B.    Standard. The City shall reclassify the applicant’s discharge if the applicant establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that:

1.    The applicant has in place a process, program and/or facilities that reduce the discharge strength to a lower category than would otherwise be applicable.

2.    Reliable published data indicates that the expected discharge strength of the industrial use type would place the use in a lower category.

C.    Effect of Reclassification. A reclassification shall be effective for a maximum of 12 months. Reclassifications may be extended for an additional 12 months using the same process and standards applicable to an original reclassification.

D.    Conditions. This City may impose conditions on a reclassification, and may terminate a reclassification if the discharge no longer meets the standards established in subsection (B) of this section. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


15.90.060 Appeals.

A.    An applicant for reclassification may appeal a whole or partial denial of the application for reclassification.

B.    Any applicant for participation in the monitoring program may appeal denial of participation in the monitoring program or any component of the monitoring program when finally approved.

C.    All appeals shall be filed within 10 business days of the date of the decision being challenged. The appeal shall be submitted to the City Recorder and shall be accompanied by payment of the appeal fee established in the City’s fee resolution.

D.    Within 45 days of filing the appeal, the appellant shall provide written justification, supported by evidence, in support of the appeal. The City shall provide a written response within 60 days of receiving the written materials from the appellant. The City and the appellant may agree in writing that the appeal will be determined on the written submissions.

E.    The appeal shall be submitted to the City Manager, who will hold an in-person hearing unless the parties have agreed that the appeal will be determined on written submissions. The City Manager may delegate responsibilities under this section to the Assistant City Manager or the Bend Business Advocate.

F.    The decision on appeal shall be reduced to writing and issued within 15 days of (1) the date of hearing, or (2) the date that the written agreement to submit on written submission is submitted.

G.    The written decision of the City Manager or designee shall be the City’s final decision and reviewable only by writ of review.

H.    If a final decision is issued denying the reclassification, the appellant may not seek reclassification or a change to the monitored rate program unless the use is discontinued or new facilities are put in place that would change the strength category. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


15.90.070 Enforcement.

A.    A customer’s failure to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter is a Class A civil infraction.

B.    Knowingly submitting false information on any application provided for in this chapter or knowingly submitting false or erroneous information in connection with any monitoring program, or taking action that would lead to inaccurate or unrepresentative sampling, is a Class A civil infraction. [Ord. NS-2242, 2015; Ord. NS-2212, 2014]


Title 16 GRADING, EXCAVATION, AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

Chapters:

16.05    General Provisions

16.10    Clearing, Grading, and Erosion Control on Construction Sites

16.15    Stormwater Management Design Standards and Post-Construction Maintenance Controls

16.20    Illicit Discharge Controls

16.25    Well Drilling

16.30    Stormwater Drainage Utility


Chapter 16.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

16.05.010    Purpose.

16.05.015    Organization of Title 16.

16.05.020    Regulatory Consistency.

16.05.030    Responsibility.

16.05.040    Central Oregon Stormwater Manual.

16.05.050    Enforcement.

16.05.060    Definitions and Acronyms.


16.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to establish minimum grading, drainage and stormwater management requirements and controls for new and existing developments within Bend, as described in each section of this title. The specific objectives of this title are:

A.    To minimize the negative impacts of increased stormwater discharges from new land development and redevelopment.

B.    To maintain the integrity and quality of the Deschutes River and Tumalo Creek for their biological functions, aesthetic and recreational properties, and natural recharge of groundwater.

C.    To preserve the natural infiltration of groundwater to maintain the quantity and quality of groundwater resources.

D.    To protect against and minimize the pollution of public drinking water supplies and surface waterbodies resulting from development and redevelopment (whether private or public projects).

E.    To control the rate, quality and volume of stormwater originating from development and redevelopment sites so that surface water and groundwater are protected, and flooding and erosion potential are not increased.

F.    To control nonstormwater discharges to storm drains, dry wells and drill holes, and to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges.

G.    To provide design, construction, operation and maintenance standards for temporary and permanent on-site stormwater management practices so as to control stormwater runoff.

H.    To promote the public health, safety, property, general welfare, and aesthetics for the citizens of Bend by regulating clearing and grading activities associated with land development including but not limited to initial clearing, brushing, grubbing, excavating, filling and any other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil.

I.    To preserve and enhance the City’s physical and aesthetic character, to reduce erosion, and to reduce the volume of polluted stormwater runoff by preventing untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and ground cover; by limiting clearing of native vegetation and trees; and by keeping grading to the minimum amount needed to build lots, allow access, and provide fire protection.

J.    To promote building and site planning practices that are consistent with the City’s natural topography, soils, and vegetative features.

K.    To provide long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater best management practices (BMPs) and facilities.

L.    To enable the City to comply with provisions in the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, as well as adhere to provisions contained in the City’s water pollution control facilities permit for Class V stormwater underground injection control systems, as anticipated through Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) permit templates, in a manner promoted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that implements innovative solutions including increased use of low impact development (LID) and best management practices.

M.    To make people responsible for costs of mitigation if they drill wells that impact existing stormwater facilities. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.05.015 Organization of Title 16.

This title is organized into six chapters. BC Chapter 16.05, General Provisions, provides general standards applicable to the entire title. BC Chapter 16.10, Clearing, Grading and Erosion Control on Construction Sites, contains a requirement to obtain a permit for certain clearing and grading activities, describes the exemptions from the permit requirements, and establishes standards for clearing, grading, erosion and sediment control. BC Chapter 16.15, Stormwater Management Design Standards and Post-Construction Maintenance Controls, provides standards for stormwater management systems on private property and requirements for ongoing maintenance. BC Chapter 16.20, Illicit Discharge Controls, prohibits certain discharges to stormwater systems and groundwater. BC Chapter 16.25, Well Drilling, imposes mitigation responsibility on those responsible for new wells that impact existing stormwater facilities. BC Chapter 16.30, Stormwater Drainage Utility, contains standards and procedures and imposes charges for the City’s stormwater drainage utility. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.05.020 Regulatory Consistency.

This title is consistent with Federal laws, rules and regulations including the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq. (1972, as amended) (Clean Water Act)), the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 USC 300f et seq. (1974, as amended)); the State of Oregon’s air quality standards; the State of Oregon’s Administrative Rules related to groundwater quality, underground injection controls and surface water quality; Oregon Drainage Law; the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit; the City’s water pollution control facilities permit for Class V stormwater underground injection control systems; and any other provisions of the Bend Code. No permit or approval issued pursuant to this title shall relieve a person of the responsibility to secure permits and approvals required for activities regulated by any other applicable rule, code, act, permit or ordinance. Compliance with this title does not exempt any person from complying with other applicable ordinances, rules, codes, acts or permits. The requirements of this title are minimum requirements. If any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law also applies, the provisions that are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards shall take precedence. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.05.030 Responsibility.

Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken land development or redevelopment shall ensure that soil erosion, sedimentation, increased pollutant loads, and changed water flow characteristics resulting from the activity are controlled to minimize pollution of receiving waters and minimize any increased threat of localized flooding. The requirements of this title are minimum standards and a person’s compliance shall not relieve the person from existing duties relating to stormwater or to enacting measures and best management practices necessary to minimize pollution of receiving waters, and minimize threat of localized flooding resulting from increased runoff or impacted drainage systems as a result of development. By approving a plan under this title, the City does not accept responsibility for the design, installation, and operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs unless specifically agreed to in a separate agreement. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.05.040 Central Oregon Stormwater Manual.

The Central Oregon Stormwater Manual (COSM) is adopted by the City as the design manual for stormwater. Stormwater design professionals are required to be familiar with and use the COSM. All activities and facilities governed by this title shall be in compliance with the COSM and the City Standards and Specifications. The City Manager may adopt guidance documents and procedures manuals related to implementation of provisions of this title. The COSM may be updated and expanded periodically by the City Manager, including by adding a Bend Supplement, after public notice and input, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.05.050 Enforcement.

Violation of permits, plans, provisions, and/or performance standards authorized or contained in this title are subject to the following enforcement actions. With the exception of BC Chapter 16.10, which is based closely on long-standing clearing and grading standards, during the first year of implementation (January 30, 2012, through January 31, 2013), enforcement will be limited to education and administrative enforcement remedies as described in subsection (A) of this section. Thereafter judicial enforcement remedies may also be imposed in cases where education or administrative enforcement remedies are not proving to be effective in meeting the purpose of this title.

A.    Administrative Enforcement Remedies.

1.    Withholding Inspections/Approvals. The City may withhold inspections or approvals for projects that are not in compliance with any provision of this title.

2.    Notification of Violation. When the City determines that a land owner has violated or continues to violate any provision of this title including any permit, agreement or plan authorized by this title, the City may serve upon the owner a written notice of violation (NOV) describing the violation. Within five working days of the receipt of the notice or other deadline agreed to in writing by the City, an explanation of how the violation was rectified or a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention, to include specific actions, shall be submitted by the land owner to the City. Submission of this plan does not relieve the owner of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. Nothing in this title shall limit the authority of the City to take any action, including emergency actions, stop work orders, or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a NOV.

3.    Consent Orders. The City may enter into voluntary compliance agreements with any land owner responsible for noncompliance. The voluntary compliance agreement will include specific action to be taken by the owner to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the agreement. The agreements shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a voluntary compliance agreement shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the land owner.

4.    Cease and Desist Orders. When the City determines that a land owner has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this title including a clearing, grading and erosion control permit; performance standards; or any other required plan or other remedies provided for by this title, or that the owner’s past violations are likely to recur, the City may, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, issue an order to the land owner identifying the violation(s) and directing the land owner to cease and desist all violations and directing the owner to:

a.    Immediately comply with all requirements; and

b.    Take appropriate remedial or preventive action as needed to properly address the violation, including halting land clearing, grading or other land development actions. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the land owner.

5.    Emergency Suspensions. The City may immediately suspend a land owner’s permit or approvals (after oral or written notice to the user identifying the violation and provide notice within two working days as to the violation to the permit holder) whenever the suspension is necessary to stop an actual, recurring or explicitly threatened action that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, property, or water quality in the City. The City may also immediately suspend a land owner’s permit or approvals (after notice and opportunity to respond) that presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.

Land owners notified of a suspension of their permit or approvals shall immediately stop or eliminate the violation. In the event of the owner’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, at the owner’s expense, the City may take steps to prevent or minimize endangerment to any individuals or harm to the environment including unauthorized discharges to surface water and/or groundwater. The City shall allow the land owner to recommence land development activities for the site when the owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the period of endangerment has passed. Notwithstanding any permit suspension, the land owner may take whatever action(s) are needed to correct the violations.

B.    Judicial Enforcement Remedies.

1.    Injunctive Relief. The City may seek a temporary or permanent injunction from the Circuit Court for Deschutes County to restrain or compel specific performance of permits, plans, approvals, orders issued or other requirements imposed or authorized by this title on the land owner. The City may also initiate other action for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the land owner to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a land owner.

2.    Civil Penalties.

a.    Violation of any provision of this title or of any permit or order issued under this title is a Class A civil infraction. Each day that a violation remains uncured in effect is a separate violation.

b.    The City may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities (i.e., subsection (A)(5) of this section), including expenses related to stormwater BMP maintenance and/or repair, monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.

c.    In determining the amount of civil penalty, the Municipal Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the owner’s violation, corrective actions by the owner, the compliance history of the owner, and any other factor as justice requires.

d.    Initiation of a civil infraction proceeding shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a land owner.

3.    Remedies Nonexclusive. The provisions in this section are not exclusive remedies. The City reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant land owner or other responsible person. The City is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant land owner or other responsible person. These actions may be taken concurrently. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.05.060 Definitions and Acronyms.

The following definitions apply in this title:

Access road means a road within one mile of a construction site, designated on an approved construction plan and used during site clearing, grading and construction for the transport of equipment, hauling of fill, and other equivalent vehicular traffic to and from the construction site.

Approval authority means the respective City Department/Division that approves the required permit or measure. This could include the Community Development Director, City Engineer, or the Public Works Director or his/her designees.

Areas of special interest (ASI) means river corridor and upland areas of special interest as described in BDC 2.7.630 and 2.7.700.

Bedrock means naturally occurring solid rock.

Berm means a mound, small rise or hill that is used for landscaping or visual screening purposes.

Best management practice (BMP) means a technique, activity, maintenance procedure, structural and/or managerial practice, and/or prohibition of a practice that, when used singly or in combination in a designated manner, is proven to be effective in preventing or reducing the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to downstream or down-gradient systems. BMPs include, but are not limited to, those listed in the COSM.

Blasting means any activity entailing the use of explosives for the purpose of producing an explosion to demolish structures or to fragment rock for mining, quarrying, excavation and construction.

Blasting performance standards mean measures intended to provide a minimum threshold for controlling stormwater pollution associated with blasting activity, and are used to determine if the requirements in this title have been met (see BC 16.10.090).

Brushing means the selective removal of vegetation.

Building footprint means the outline of a building, as measured around its foundation.

Central Oregon Stormwater Manual (COSM) means the most current version of the stormwater design guidance manual and any City of Bend-specific supplements.

City means City of Bend, Oregon.

Clearing and grading performance standards mean measures intended to provide a minimum threshold for controlling stormwater pollution associated with clearing and grading activity, and are used to determine if the requirements in this title have been met (see BC 16.10.070(A)).

Clearing, grading, and erosion control permit (permit) means a permit that is issued for construction, demolition, and site development for improvements related to all land divisions, multifamily developments, and commercial, industrial, and institutional sites (see BC 16.10.020(A)).

Construction activity means any activity occurring in the furtherance of a construction project, including, but not limited to, land disturbing activities; hauling of soil and rock; handling of building materials; concrete, stone and tile cutting; and operation of motorized machinery and motor vehicles on the site or on any access routes to the construction site.

Cut and fill performance standards mean measures intended to provide a minimum threshold for controlling stormwater pollution associated with cut and fill activity, and are used to determine if the requirements in this title have been met (see BC 16.10.070(B)).

DBH (dbh) means the diameter at breast height, which is a measurement of tree diameter taken between four and five feet from natural ground level.

Detention means the process of collecting and holding surface and stormwater runoff temporarily in a designed facility such as a pond.

Detention facility means an above ground or below ground facility, such as a pond or tank, that temporarily stores stormwater runoff and subsequently releases it at a slower rate than it is collected by the drainage facility system.

Development. See definition in BDC Chapter 1.2.

Development approval means written consent from the approval authority.

Discharge means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, surface runoff, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal storm sewer system, a dry well, drill hole or into waters of the State.

Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise responsible for a discharge including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or commercial/industrial facility.

Drainage submittal means the submittal of documentation including narrative, basin maps, plans, calculations and other supporting documentation to demonstrate that the proposed project will adequately treat and dispose of the stormwater (see BC 16.15.010 and COSM Chapter 3).

Drip-line means an imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread.

Earth material means any rock, natural soil or fill, and/or any combination of those materials.

Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means a configuration of development or impervious surface estimated to contribute an amount of runoff to the City’s stormwater system that is approximately equal to that created by the average developed single-family residence. One ERU is equal to 3,800 square feet of impervious surface area. All single-family residences are one ERU, regardless of impervious surface area.

Erosion means the progressive detachment and removal of particles, including soil and rock fragments, from the earth’s surface by means of water, wind, ice, gravity or mechanical processes, including vehicular traffic.

Erosion and sediment control (ESC) measures are those best management practices that when implemented correctly help prevent soils from moving and eroded sediment from leaving a site.

Erosion and sediment control (ESC) performance standards mean measures intended to provide a minimum threshold for controlling stormwater pollution associated with erosion and sediment control activity, and are used to determine if the requirements in this title have been met (see BC 16.10.080).

Erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan means a specific plan prepared by or under the direction of a Oregon licensed professional engineer or other certified professional as authorized by the City Engineer that includes a specific set of best management practices and construction sequencing that are designed to control surface runoff and erosion, and to retain sediment on a site both before, during and after development. For the purposes of this title, an ESC plan shall be prepared in accordance with the COSM.

ERU means equivalent residential unit.

ESC means erosion and sediment control.

Good housekeeping practice means a BMP related to the transfer, storage, use, or cleanup of materials performed in a regular manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters.

Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface. Existing grade means the existing condition of the elevation of the ground surface or the natural grade prior to grading, placement of fill, or the excavation or removal of earth from the site. Rough grade means the stage at which the grade substantially conforms, in an unfinished state, to an approved clearing and grading sketch or plan. Finished grade means the final grade of the site after all clearing and grading has been completed that conforms to an approved clearing and grading sketch or plan. For sloping sites exceeding 12 percent slope, the finished grade shall not exceed four feet above or below the existing grade, unless the finished grade has been set through a site map and grading plan as specified in this title and approved by the City.

Grading means land disturbance including excavation or filling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.

Grading plan means a document that defines and describes what activities will take place in clearing and grading a site, typically in preparation for development.

Ground cover means a plant material or non-plant organic material (e.g., mulch, bark chips/dust) that is used to cover bare ground.

Grubbing means the removal of trees and other large plants by their roots.

IBC means International Building Code.

Illicit discharge means any discharge to a catch basin, surface water body, dry well or drill hole that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except conditionally exempt discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit or WPCF permit or rule authorization requirement specific to the inlet, discharges resulting from firefighting activities, or other exempt discharges as outlined in BC Chapter 16.20.

Illicit Discharge Manual means City of Bend Illicit Discharge Minimization Best Management Practices Manual.

Illicit drainage connection means any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm drain system composed of nonstormwater that has not been permitted by the public entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the system.

Impervious surface means a hard surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle. Common impervious surfaces include building roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, and packed earthen materials.

Infiltration means the passage of water through the soil surface into the underlying geologic material.

Land disturbance and land disturbing activities mean moving or removal of earth material or significant removal of vegetation (e.g., clear-cutting) by manual or mechanical means that results in a denuded landscape that could result in significant erosion problems.

Limited clearing and grading mean clearing and grading resulting in only minor land disturbing activity.

Low impact development (LID) means a stormwater management strategy that emphasizes conservation and use of existing natural site features integrated with distributed, small-scale stormwater controls to more closely mimic natural hydrologic patterns and prevent, reduce and treat runoff and pollutant loadings as close to the source as possible in residential, commercial, and industrial settings.

Minor land disturbing activities mean those activities that are equivalent to or less than:

1.    Excavation or fill of two feet or less (other than foundation areas of single-family or duplexes);

2.    Alteration to or creation of a slope that is 20 percent or less; and

3.    An excavation of fill that is two feet or further away from the property line.

Mitigation means measures undertaken to rectify, repair, rehabilitate, restore and/or compensate for negative impacts that result from other actions.

MS4 means a municipal separate storm sewer system that is a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curb, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by a public body (created under State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes that discharge to the waters of the United States and which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a stormwater discharge permit issued by the U.S. EPA, Region X, in compliance with the Federal Clean Water Act and its amendments, for the discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States as defined in 40 CFR 122.2.

Native vegetation means plants commonly found growing in, and adapted to, Central Oregon soils and climate.

Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system or receiving waters that is not entirely composed of stormwater or melted snow and ice.

NOV means notice of violation.

NRCS means Natural Resource Conservation Service.

OAR means Oregon Administrative Rules.

ODEQ means Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

ORS means Oregon Revised Statutes.

P.E. means professional engineer in the State of Oregon.

Performance standards mean provisions of this title intended to provide a minimum threshold for controlling stormwater pollution in the subject area, and are used to determine if the requirements of the section have been met. (See BC 16.10.070 through 16.10.100 and 16.15.040.)

Perimeter control means any barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site, either by filtering sediment-laden runoff or by diverting runoff to a sediment trap or basin.

Permit means a clearing, grading and erosion control permit.

Person responsible means the occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, owner, agent or other person having possession of property, or if no person is in possession, then the person in control of the use of the property, or in control of the supervision of development on the property.

Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, and stabilizing each phase using erosion and sediment control measures, before clearing the next phase.

Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, sewage sludge, garbage, munitions, oils and grease, paints, solvents, fertilizers, pesticides, other chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, concrete washout, rock, sand, dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water, and as otherwise defined in 40 CFR 122.2.

Pollution prevention means implementing one or a series of BMPs to prevent pollutants of any kind from entering the storm drainage system including drainage to a surface waterbody, a dry well or a drill hole.

Pollution source control plan means a plan that addresses the prevention and/or control of stormwater pollutants at their source.

Post-construction performance standards mean measures intended to provide a minimum threshold for controlling stormwater pollution associated with post-construction activity, and are used to determine if the requirements in this title have been met (see BC 16.15.040(A)).

POTW means publicly owned treatment works.

Predevelopment means the natural condition before any type of development.

Redevelopment means a project for which a building permit is required that proposes to add, replace and/or alter impervious surfaces, other than routine maintenance, resurfacing, or repair.

Retaining wall means a wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other material, as defined in the current International Building Code (IBC).

Retention means the process of collecting and holding surface and stormwater runoff with no surface outflow.

Revegetation means placement of living plant material on sites or excavation and fill slopes where the natural vegetation has been removed.

Riparian Area. See definition in BDC Chapter 1.2.

Riparian corridor means the area within and adjacent to the Deschutes River and Tumalo Creek that includes water areas, fish and wildlife habitat, wetlands, and riparian vegetation and other State Planning Goal 5 resources to be conserved and protected. For purposes of this title, the riparian corridor is defined as the area within the WOZ.

Sensitive areas means wetlands, areas within a site with individual trees with a specific trunk diameter for deciduous trees of six inches or greater and for coniferous trees of 10 inches or greater as measured four feet dbh, steep slopes, floodplains and other natural resource areas designated for protection or conservation by the Bend Area General Plan or the State of Oregon.

Site means any lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination of lots, parcels and/or easements under the same ownership or unified control.

Site development envelope means that area of a site that is best suited for development, as determined by identifying sensitive areas (as defined in this title) for protection, setbacks, and other local standards and requirements.

Site map means a document that defines and describes specific attributes of a site proposed for development.

Site map and grading plan means a document that defines and describes specific attributes of a site proposed for development and what activities will take place in clearing and grading a site in preparation for development (see BC 16.10.020(B)).

Slope means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance or expressed as a percent of the change in elevation over a given distance.

SM Zone means surface mining zone.

Soil means naturally occurring unconsolidated sediments and deposits that overlay bedrock.

Soils and geological reconnaissance report (soils report) means a report based on adequate test borings (as necessary) that contains data regarding the nature, distribution, strength and erodibility of both existing soils and soils to be placed on the site, if any (see BC 16.10.020(B)).

Source control practice means one or a series of best management practices that, when implemented correctly, controls pollutants at their source and limits their discharge into the storm drainage system, dry well or drill hole.

Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding and/or increases the structural strength of a graded area.

Standards and Specifications mean the most recent version of the City of Bend Public Improvement Construction Procedures.

Steep slope means slopes that are greater than 10 percent.

Stormwater means water from precipitation that collects on or runs off surfaces such as roofs, buildings, roads, or paved or unpaved land surfaces; that portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but flows, via overland flow, interflow pipes and other features of a stormwater drainage system, into a defined surface water body or constructed infiltration or evaporation facility.

Stormwater facility means a detention and/or retention pond, swale, dry well, or other surface water feature that provides storage during high rainfall events and/or water quality treatment.

Stormwater management means the process of collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater to ensure control of the magnitude and frequency of runoff and to minimize the hazards associated with flooding. It also includes implementing controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants to streams and groundwater including management practices, control techniques and systems, design and engineering methods.

Stormwater service means the operations of the City’s stormwater utility in providing programs and facilities for maintaining, improving, regulating, collecting, and managing stormwater quantity and quality within the City’s service area.

Stormwater system means any structure or configuration of ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where stormwater flows or is accumulated, including but not limited to dry wells, drill holes, swales, pipes, curbs, gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, creeks, open drainage ways, ditches and their appurtenances. City stormwater system means the portions of the stormwater system in public rights-of-way, within easements owned by the City, or on City property. Private stormwater facility means any stormwater facility on private property and not within an easement owned by the City.

Stormwater system maintenance agreement means a document executed by the property owner that is recorded in the Deschutes County Clerk’s office to run with the land, that requires the current and successor owners to maintain the stormwater system on the property so that the system continues to function as planned (see BC 16.15.050).

Stream means a year round flowing watercourse.

Surface runoff means that portion of rain, snow melt, or irrigation water that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but instead flows over the land or impervious surfaces.

Swale means a type of stormwater facility consisting of a broad, shallow depression used to provide a required volume of on-site storage for stormwater, typically planted with vegetation that filters and processes contaminants.

SWMP means stormwater management plan.

TMDL means total maximum daily load, a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a waterbody can receive and still safely meet water quality standards. Under Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act, states, territories, and authorized tribes are required to develop lists of impaired waters (e.g., waters that are too polluted or otherwise degraded to meet the water quality standards set by the states, etc.) and TMDLs for these waters. (Source: United States Environmental Protection Agency.)

Tree preservation performance standards mean measures intended to provide a minimum threshold for preserving trees during clearing and grading activities, and are used to determine if the requirements in this title have been met (see BC 16.10.100).

Tree protection plan means a plan developed in accordance with BDC 3.2.200(C).

UIC means underground injection control.

Underground injection control (UIC) system means any structure or activity that discharges fluids such as stormwater or septic effluent below the ground or subsurface. Common UIC designs include dry wells, drill holes, floor drains, trench drains, and drain fields.

Water Overlay Zone (WOZ) means areas of special designation adjacent to the Deschutes River and Tumalo Creek as described in BDC 2.7.600.

Wellhead protection area means an area within 500 feet of an undelineated water well (e.g., drinking or irrigation water); or within the modeled two-year-time-of-travel area for a delineated water well.

Work schedule means the schedule of anticipated clearing, grading, installation of ESC measures, and proposed inspection and maintenance schedule(s) for a construction site (see BC 16.10.020(F)).

WOZ means Waterway Overlay Zone.

WPCF means water pollution control facility. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


Chapter 16.10 CLEARING, GRADING, AND EROSION CONTROL ON CONSTRUCTION SITES

Sections:

16.10.010    Applicability and Exemptions.

16.10.020    Clearing, Grading and Erosion Control on Construction Sites.

16.10.030    Permit Fees.

16.10.040    Issuance and Implementation of Permits.

16.10.050    Clearing, Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and Pollution Prevention Inspections.

16.10.060    Erosion and Sediment Control and Pollution Prevention Compliance.

16.10.070    Clearing and Grading Performance Standards.

16.10.075    Temporary Rock Crushing Outside of the SM Zone.			

16.10.080    Erosion and Sediment Control and Pollution Prevention Performance Standards.

16.10.090    Blasting Performance Standards.

16.10.100    Tree Preservation Performance Standards.


16.10.010 Applicability and Exemptions.

A.    Applicability. This chapter applies to all construction activity and all land disturbing activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, and all persons engaged in construction activity and land disturbing activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, within the City.

1.    Erosion and sediment pollution must be prevented on all construction sites, regardless of whether a clearing, grading and erosion control permit (permit) is required, to prevent migration of sediment and construction related pollutants off site. Erosion must be controlled to keep sediment and debris from streets, storm drainage facilities, and surface water bodies. All construction sites must be cleaned up and stabilized to avoid erosion and sedimentation.

2.    Unless exempt, no clearing and grading shall occur without a valid permit.

3.    Unless exempt, the applicant for a permit must submit a written commitment to comply with this title to the maximum extent practicable.

4.    If a permit has been suspended, revoked or has expired, all work covered by the permit shall cease until the suspension or revocation is lifted by the City or a new permit is issued.

B.    Exemptions. Projects in the following categories do not need to apply for, and are exempt from the permit requirements, but not from the performance standards (described in BC 16.10.070 through 16.10.100 and 16.15.040), provided the project does not include an existing or proposed UIC facility:

1.    Commercial agriculture practices involving working the land for production are generally exempt, except land disturbance related to the construction of new, permanent impervious surfaces as related to commercial agriculture or the construction of agricultural drains that are designed to act as UICs.

2.    Forest practices regulated under the Oregon Forest Practices Act (ORS 527.610 through 527.770, 527.990(1) and 527.992), except conversions from forest lands or timberlands to other land uses.

3.    Actions by a public utility or any other governmental agency to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, or reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic.

4.    Remodeling permits or tenant improvements that do not add 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface.

5.    Change of use permits.

6.    Records of survey, boundary (i.e., minor lot line) adjustments, and property aggregations, unless the action affects drainage tracts or easements.

7.    Permits or applications for projects not physically disturbing the land; issuance of permits and/or approvals for land divisions; interior improvements to an existing structure; or other approvals for which there is no physical disturbance to the surface of the land.

8.    Public or private road and parking area preservation/maintenance projects such as:

a.    Pothole and square cut patching;

b.    Crack sealing;

c.    Resurfacing with in-kind material without expanding the area of coverage;

d.    Overlaying existing asphalt or concrete pavement with bituminous surface treatment (or chip seal), asphalt or concrete without expanding the area of coverage;

e.    Shoulder grading;

f.    Maintaining existing drainage systems including reshaping or regrading drainage systems to original design; and

g.    Vegetation maintenance.

9.    Operation and maintenance or repair of existing facilities.

10.    Landscaping and maintenance on residential lots, including gardening, noncommercial agricultural activity, and limited clearing and grading. (Note: this exemption does not apply to landscaping modifications to stormwater drainage or treatment swales.)

11.    Cemetery graves.

12.    Landfill operations by a governmental entity consistent with an Oregon Department of Environmental Quality permit for the operation of post-closure activities at a landfill.

13.    Archaeological exploration conducted under State permit.

14.    Removal of selected individual plants for storage or replanting.

15.    Removal of trees on single-family residential lots on one acre or less.

16.    Removal of trees less than eight inches dbh.

17.    Removal of flammable vegetation and combustible growth within 30 feet of a structure for fire safety.

18.    Normal maintenance, pruning or limbing of trees.

19.    Removal of noxious weeds.

20.    Removal of trees within an area approved by Deschutes County for a sanitary septic system.

21.    Normal and customary excavation and fill associated with the ongoing maintenance activities on golf courses such as reconstruction of tee boxes, re-sculpturing of fairway bunkers and greens, etc.

22.    Normal pruning, limbing and removal of trees and vegetation in routine landscaping maintenance of public school grounds, parks and trails, golf courses and cemeteries that is not associated with preliminary grading or clearing of a development project.

23.    An emergency that immediately affects life or property.

Any of the exemptions from treatment requirements are superseded by requirements set forth in a total maximum daily load (TMDL), water cleanup plan, groundwater cleanup plan, surface water management plan (SWMP), Safe Drinking Water Act, Oregon Administrative Rules specifically OAR 340-040-0030, and UIC permit requirements. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.020 Clearing, Grading and Erosion Control on Construction Sites.

A.    Permit Requirements.

1.    The City shall issue a clearing, grading, and erosion control permit (permit) for nonexempt construction work.

2.    The permit is required for clearing and grading activities related to construction, demolition, and site development for improvements related to all land divisions, multifamily developments, and commercial, industrial, and institutional sites. Single-family and duplex site developments are exempt from the permit requirement (but not from the standards described in BC 16.10.010 and 16.10.070 through 16.10.100) unless one of the following activities is proposed:

a.    Excavation or fill exceeding two feet other than foundation areas of single-family or duplexes.

b.    Alteration to or creation of a slope exceeding 20 percent.

c.    An excavation or fill within two feet of the property line.

d.    Tree removal of trees more than eight inches dbh on properties greater than one acre.

e.    Any clearing and grading activity located entirely or partially on sensitive areas or within a designated area of special interest or Waterway Overlay Zone as described in BDC Chapter 2.7.

f.    Any other site determined by the City to have conditions necessitating additional control measures on a site-specific basis for the protection of health, safety, property, or water quality protection.

B.    Applications. A permit must be obtained prior to performing activities authorized by a City building permit or other permit authorizing construction. The application for a permit shall include:

1.    A completed permit application form.

2.    A fee in an amount set by Council resolution.

3.    A site map and grading plan containing all the following information:

a.    Existing and proposed topography of the site taken at a contour interval sufficiently detailed to define the topography over the entire site. Ninety percent of the contours shall be plotted within one contour interval of the true location.

b.    One-foot contour intervals that extend off site sufficient to show on- and off-site drainage.

c.    The site’s property lines shown in true location with respect to the plan’s topographic information.

d.    The location of all sensitive lands including area of special interest (ASI) lands, and any areas on the site that are intended to remain undisturbed.

e.    The location and dimensions of the site development envelope as defined in this title.

f.    Location and graphic representation of all existing and proposed natural and man-made drainage facilities, including the direction of drainage within 300 feet of the site boundaries in all directions. The site map and grading plan shall demonstrate that clearing and grading activities will have minimal impact on the existing water flow through the natural and existing drainage routes, except in instances where an approved surface water collection facility is incorporated into this plan.

g.    The site’s point(s)-of-entry and/or access road(s) that will be used for clearing and grading activity access.

h.    Location of existing vegetation types, and the location and type of vegetation to be left undisturbed, per the requirements specified in BDC 3.2.200, Landscape Conservation, and shown in the Planning Development approval.

i.    A description of the tree protection standards to be implemented during construction.

j.    Location and graphic representation of all drainage features, existing and proposed underground injection controls (UICs), and erosion and sediment control measures.

k.    Location of any buildings or structures on the work site, and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet of the work site, or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations. These would include, but not be limited to, utilities locations.

l.    For applicable sites, an overlay map including the 100-year flood zone, WOZ, ASI, or otherwise depicting the sensitive areas.

4.    The City may require the site map and grading plan be prepared by a registered professional licensed to prepare such documents by the State of Oregon.

5.    An erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan prepared in accordance with the COSM.

6.    A soils and geological reconnaissance report (soils report) prepared by an Oregon licensed professional engineer (P.E.) or an Oregon licensed professional geologist may be required if the City determines that special circumstances warrant such information.

a.    The report shall contain all geotechnical engineering information and recommendations applicable to the project including data, based on adequate test borings (as necessary), regarding the nature, distribution, strength and erodibility of both existing soils and soils to be placed on the site, if any; and shall be sealed and signed by an Oregon licensed professional engineer or an Oregon licensed professional geologist.

b.    The report shall be incorporated into the site map and grading plan and statement and be provided during clearing, grading and erosion and sediment control inspections.

C.    Approval Criteria. An application for a permit may be approved only if it includes all materials required by this title and demonstrates compliance with applicable standards of this title, including compliance with performance standards described in BC 16.10.070 through 16.10.100. The application must show that receiving ground and surface waters are protected and that surface runoff, erosion and off-site sediment transport are minimized to the maximum extent possible.

If a permit application cannot be approved as submitted, the City may require the applicant to do any or all of the following:

1.    Reduce the area of land to be disturbed.

2.    Change a BMP or any facet of, where deemed necessary.

3.    Submit a soils report to inform conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and soil stabilization.

4.    Restrict land disturbing, filling or soil storage activities during precipitation.

5.    Revise and resubmit the plan as per the direction of the approval authority.

D.    Compliance. All construction activity under a clearing, grading and erosion control permit must comply with the conditions of the permit and approved plans. Construction activity shall be conducted in compliance with performance standards (described in BC 16.10.070 through 16.10.100 and in BC 16.15.040) to the maximum extent practical unless otherwise specified in the permit. During construction, a copy of the ESC plan must be kept on the construction site and readily available to construction personnel and inspectors. The permit holder is responsible for ensuring that contractor(s), subcontractor(s), and all other persons entering the site abide by the conditions of the permit and plan.

Land disturbing activities involving one acre or more of disturbed area may also require a NPDES stormwater discharge permit (1200-C for construction activity) from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) when the site discharges to surface water or to a conveyance system that leads to surface water.

E.    Conditions of Approval. All permits shall contain standard conditions to ensure compliance with this title and construction consistent with the approved plans.

The following items are required as conditions of approval to be included in each permit:

1.    A requirement to provide the City any updates to the site map and grading plan and work schedule.

2.    A tree protection plan, if required by BDC 3.2.200(C).

3.    A requirement to maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans, site map and grading plan addenda in conformance with subsection (G) of this section, and required reports on the work site, available for inspection during work hours.

4.    A requirement to construct and maintain BMPs in conformity with the permit and approved plans.

F.    Work Schedule. A detailed work schedule must be provided prior to grading that includes the following:

1.    Anticipated grading schedule (e.g., the proposed sequence, schedule and/or timing for excavation, filling, and other land disturbing and filling activities, and earth material storage and disposal).

2.    Anticipated clearing and grading and/or construction status conditions of the site at the end of each month during which the permit is in effect.

3.    Proposed schedule for installation of all erosion and sediment control measures described in the erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan including, but not limited to, the stage of completion of erosion and sediment control devices and vegetative measures on each of the dates set forth in the work schedule.

4.    Proposed project inspection and maintenance schedule(s).

5.    Schedule for construction of final improvements, if any.

G.    Site Map and Grading Plan Addenda. If the following information could not be provided as part of the original site map and grading plan, it shall be submitted as site map and grading plan addenda prior to clearing and grading activities.

1.    Location and graphic representation of proposed excavations and fills, of on-site storage and/or stockpiling of soil and other earthen materials, and of on-site disposal.

2.    Location of dumpsters, concrete and cement wash areas, vehicle fueling and maintenance areas, and construction material (including but not limited to drywall, plaster, paint, solvents, adhesives, and other hazardous materials) storage and handling areas, if any.

3.    Outline of the methods to be used in clearing vegetation, and in storing and disposing of the cleared vegetative matter.

4.    Quantity of soil and other earth materials expressed in tons or cubic yards to be excavated, filled, stored, or otherwise used on site. If fill is to be removed from the site, the location where fill materials will be taken. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.030 Permit Fees.

A.    Applicability and Establishment.

1.    Fees are established by Council resolution. Applicable fees shall be paid at the time of application and at any other time additional fees are incurred.

2.    The permit fees may be based on the nature or size of the permitted area.

3.    The applicable fees shall be doubled if the construction activity is commenced prior to permit issuance, except where an emergency situation has been recognized by the City. Payment of the doubled fee shall not preclude the City from taking any other enforcement actions within its authority. The City may waive doubling of the fee if the applicant is shown to have acted in good faith.

4.    The fee necessary to resubmit an application for an expired permit shall be one-half of the otherwise applicable fee. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.040 Issuance and Implementation of Permits.

A.    Permit Issuance. The City shall issue a permit on approval of a site map and grading plan, an ESC plan, a work schedule, a soils report (if required), and on payment of applicable fees. The permit is subject to the following conditions:

1.    The permittee shall maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans and required reports on the work site and available for inspection during all working hours.

2.    The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with the approved site map and grading plan, and ESC plan. If site conditions require emergency measures and in-field changes, the permittee must notify the City and obtain amendments of the plans as necessary.

B.    Implementation of Permit – Permittee’s Duties.

1.    Holders of a permit shall comply with the permit requirements, including the site map and grading plan, ESC plan, work schedule, and incorporated BMPs appropriate to meet performance standards requirements (as described in BC 16.10.070 through 16.10.100).

2.    A permittee shall notify the City via email or in writing at least 48 hours before the beginning of land disturbing or filling activities, or soil storage when these activities are scheduled to occur in areas located in designated WOZ or ASI zones. The permittee shall also submit, based on a schedule agreed upon between the permittee and the City based on activity levels on the site, and at least quarterly, regular notifications on:

a.    The progress of, or delays in, land disturbing or filling activities or soil storage.

b.    Any other departures from the approved site map and grading plan that may affect implementation of the ESC plan, as scheduled.

c.    Possible delays in obtaining materials, machinery, services, or manpower necessary to the implementation of the ESC plan, as scheduled.

d.    The progress of, delays in or any other departures from implementation of the ESC plan.

3.    For any post-construction or long-term BMPs or stormwater facilities incorporated as part of the ESC plan, the permittee shall submit a copy of the instructions given by the permittee to the new owners of the improved property or their agent regarding the maintenance of the surface runoff, erosion and sediment control measures, and devices implemented under the ESC plan to the City.

4.    Maintenance. The owner of any private property on which clearing and grading or other work has been performed pursuant to an approved site map and grading plan, ESC plan, approved land use application, or approved building permit granted by the Community Development Department shall maintain and repair in perpetuity all graded surfaces and erosion prevention, sediment control, and pollution prevention devices, retaining walls, drainage structures, plantings and ground cover, or other means or devices deemed not to be the responsibility of the City or other public agency.

C.    Implementation of Permit – City’s Duties. The City shall review all reports submitted by the permittee. If the City finds delays in implementing or departures from the approved site map and grading plan or ESC plan, or any problems with or breakdowns in any technique provided for by the ESC plan, the City shall notify the permittee in writing of the requirement, and the permittee shall be required to comply with the order to modify within five working days or sooner should the City request based on potential threat from weather conditions.

The City may develop an inspection schedule to inspect work sites for compliance with this title, permits and plans.

D.    Suspension or Revocation of Permit. The City shall follow the procedures of this section before resorting to other enforcement activities.

1.    The City shall suspend any clearing, grading and erosion control permit and issue a stop work order, and the permittee shall cease all work on the work site, except work necessary to remedy the cause of the suspension, on notification of the suspension when:

a.    The permittee fails to act in compliance with subsection (B) of this section.

b.    The permittee fails to submit required reports in full on time.

c.    A City inspection reveals that the work or work site is not in compliance or conformance with:

i.    Subsection (A) of this section;

ii.    The site map and grading plan and/or the ESC plan;

iii.    Required reports (e.g., private inspection records, permit reports and copy of maintenance instructions); or

iv.    Orders authorized by this title.

2.    The City may revoke any permit and issue a stop work order, and the permittee shall cease work, when:

a.    The permittee fails or refuses to cease work after receiving a stop work order.

b.    Any failure to comply with this title, permit or order issued under this title, or plan or schedule approved under this title in the Riparian Corridor Sub Zone as described in BDC 2.7.620, or in a wellhead protection area.

3.    If a stop work order has been placed on a project due to violations of this title the City may require the applicant to provide the City with financial security in an amount designed to assure compliance with this title. If required, the financial security must be a bond or other financial security approved by the City Attorney. The financial security must be sufficient to restore the site to a stable and safe condition.

4.    The City may reinstate a suspended permit on the permittee’s correction of the cause of the suspension, but shall not reinstate a revoked permit. A permittee may appeal a permit revocation decision to the City Manager within 30 days of receipt of the revocation notice. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.050 Clearing, Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and Pollution Prevention Inspections.

A.    General Inspections.

1.    All clearing, grading, erosion and sediment control (ESC), and pollution prevention controls that require a permit shall be inspected by the City to ensure compliance with the permit:

a.    The permit holder shall request an inspection 48 hours prior to the desired inspection time and date.

b.    Whenever clearing and grading, ESC, and pollution prevention work requiring City inspection is concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the City may require that such work be exposed for inspection by the City.

B.    Inspection of Rough Grade.

1.    At the discretion of the City, a rough grade inspection may be required. All rough clearing and grading shall be completed in accordance with the permit.

2.    A copy of the soils report (if required) and certification of sub-base requirements shall be submitted to the City prior to any foundation inspections or prior to issuance of certificate of final clearing/grading approval.

C.    Final Clearing and Grading and Erosion and Sediment Control and Pollution Prevention Inspections.

1.    All required clearing and grading and ESC and pollution prevention control work shall be completed in accordance with the permit prior to final clearing and grading, ESC control and pollution prevention inspections by the City and issuance of final approvals.

2.    Where the conditions of a permit include the establishment of vegetation or other final site clearing and grading or ESC control work that extends beyond the expiration of the permit, the City shall make a post-clearing and grading or ESC and pollution prevention control inspection within six months of permit expiration or as required by the permit before final approval. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.060 Erosion and Sediment Control and Pollution Prevention Compliance.

A.    Applicability.

1.    Permittees are required to ensure compliance with this title during clearing, grading and construction activities. The permittee must designate a person to be responsible for compliance with this section. The person must be knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment controls; possess the skills to assess conditions at the construction site that could impact stormwater quality; be knowledgeable in the correct installation of the erosion and sediment controls and general construction site pollution prevention and good housekeeping practices; and be able to assess the effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control and pollution prevention measures selected to control the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction activity.

2.    The permit application form shall contain the name, address, telephone number and email of the person designated to be responsible for erosion and sediment control during clearing, grading and other construction activities.

3.    The following must be routinely inspected by the person designated to be responsible for ESC and pollution prevention compliance:

a.    All areas of the site disturbed by construction activity to ensure that BMPs are followed and are being effective.

b.    Discharge point(s) identified in the ESC plan for evidence of or the potential for the discharge of pollutants (including sediment and turbidity), and to ascertain whether ESC and pollution prevention measures are effective in preventing significant impacts to surface waters. Where discharge points are inaccessible, nearby downstream locations must be inspected to the extent that such inspections are practical.

c.    BMPs identified in the ESC plan or any revision thereto to assess whether they are functioning properly.

d.    Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.

e.    Areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation for evidence of spillage or other potential to contaminate stormwater runoff.

4.    The permittee is responsible to ensure BMPs are utilized, that inspections required by this section occur on a site-appropriate schedule and that BMPs are maintained, repaired and/or removed so that the performance standards continue to be met.

5.    The permittee must document all inspections conducted by permittee and retain records of inspections for at least three years after project completion. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.070 Clearing and Grading Performance Standards.

A.    General Performance Standards. The following performance standards shall be implemented prior to the start of and as part of clearing and grading of all lands requiring a permit per this title unless exempted in writing by the City:

1.    Site clearing and grading shall be in conformance with an approved subdivision/site plan or other development approval. Site clearing and grading shall protect water resource quality by:

a.    Limiting clearing or destruction of native vegetation and trees to those areas defined within the site development envelope as shown on the site map and grading plan required on the permit application form; and

b.    Keeping clearing and grading limited to the site development envelope as shown on the site map and grading plan.

2.    Establishment of the site development envelope shall consider preservation of natural land and water features, steep slopes, topography, vegetation such as per the tree preservation standards, drainage, geotechnical site assessments, areas that provide water quality or quantity benefits and/or are necessary to maintain riparian and aquatic biota, and other indigenous natural features of the site.

3.    Site clearing, except that necessary to establish erosion and sediment control devices, shall not begin until all erosion and sediment control devices have been installed by the permittee and have been inspected by the City.

4.    During site clearing or grading activity, no vehicles shall be driven over sensitive lands including river corridor areas of special interest (ASI) (as described in BDC 2.7.630) or upland areas of special interest (as described in BDC 2.7.700), or any areas on the site that are intended to remain as protected natural open space areas, as designated on the site map and grading plan and/or a tree protection plan, including all areas outside of the site development envelope.

5.    During site clearing or grading activity, no potential soil or earth compaction activities, including the operation of heavy construction equipment or vehicles, shall be allowed to the maximum extent practicable in areas that have been designated as stormwater infiltration facilities within the site development envelope or on a site map and grading plan and/or a tree protection plan. Any infiltration facility areas that do become compacted during construction must be fully mitigated so that they will infiltrate properly.

6.    Phasing of site clearing and grading shall be considered on all sites disturbing greater than five acres, with the size of each phase to be established prior to grading and as approved by the City.

7.    Site grading shall not result in landslides, accelerated soil creep, settlement, or any pollutant that crosses beyond the site development envelope boundary.

8.    All site clearing and grading activity within 100 feet of the Deschutes River or Tumalo Creek shall comply with all provisions of the Water Overlay Zone (WOZ; as described in BDC 2.7.600).

9.    During clearing and grading operations, all public right-of-way, sidewalks and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition at the end of each working day (i.e., free of loose soil, construction debris, and trash).

10.    During clearing and grading operations, no debris, fill, stockpiles, or equipment shall be stored within a public right-of-way, or in such a way that blocks an emergency access route(s).

11.    Construction site access ramps shall be constructed so that:

a.    Material used in construction of the ramp will not erode or deteriorate under adverse conditions;

b.    Sediment tracking onto adjacent roadways shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable and dry swept at the end of each working day; and

c.    Access ramp material shall not be placed in a manner that interferes with or blocks the passage of surface runoff in the public right-of-way.

12.    During clearing and grading operations, and until site re-vegetation and/or site stabilization has occurred, dust shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable through application of dust control measures approved by the City.

13.    All clearing and grading activities shall be performed in accordance with noise standards in BC Chapter 5.50.

14.    The transport of earth material, including but not limited to soil and vegetation to or from the site on public rights-of-way, shall be covered to eliminate any soil or other material being blown from the transport vehicle in accordance with Deschutes County Code.

15.    Slash and other cleared vegetative material that exceeds three cubic yards in volume shall be removed from cleared sites within three months from the completion of the site clearing operation.

16.    Any site for which a stop work order has been issued, or where work has stopped for any other reason, must be left in a condition that prevents erosion or sediment from leaving the site development envelope and prevents threats to public health and safety.

17.    When applicable, the permittee shall obtain and comply with a special use permit for temporary rock crushing outside the Surface Mining (SM) Zone.

18.    Any site for which grading and clearing stops prematurely for whatever reason must continue to meet the erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention performance standards (described in BC 16.10.080) and implement the provisions of the site ESC plan.

B.    Cut and Fill Performance Standards. The following performance standards shall be implemented prior to the start of, and as part of clearing and grading of all private and public lands requiring a permit as described in this title, unless specifically exempted by the City for minor clearing and grading operations not intended to support structures, or in instances where the literal interpretation of the underlying provisions would not serve the intent or purposes of this section. In all other instances, the following performance standards shall be followed to the maximum extent practicable:

1.    Cut slopes greater than five feet in height shall not exceed a slope of 2:1 except where approved retaining walls are engineered and installed, and where trenches are refilled with material from the excavation. Cut slopes in solid rock or cemented tuff shall not exceed a slope of 0.5:1.

2.    The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, nonapproved fill, topsoil, and other unsuitable earth material as determined by the City and, where the slopes are 5:1 or steeper, by the excavation of level steps into the slope on which fill is to be placed.

3.    Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes that are steeper than 2:1.

4.    Fill slopes exceeding five feet in depth shall be no steeper than 2:1, except where approved retaining walls are engineered and installed.

5.    The slopes of all fill surfaces shall be no steeper than 2:1 unless approved by the City.

6.    When the owner of any parcel alters the level or existing grade of a site by a fill or excavation, the owner shall at their own expense protect all adjoining property from encroachment by such fill, or from danger of collapse due to such excavation, either by the erection of an engineered retaining wall or by sloping the sides of such fill or excavation entirely within the confines of the site in a manner approved by the City.

7.    Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface and surface drainage as necessary to retain slope stability, to control erosion, and for public safety.

8.    The faces of all cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.075 Temporary Rock Crushing Outside of the SM Zone.

A.    Temporary on-site rock crushing for on-site construction and maintenance is permitted outright in any zone if the following standards are met:

1.    The subject property has received site plan, tentative plat or final plat approval for the construction or maintenance activity or is an approved public facility project.

2.    Rock crushing equipment has a valid Oregon Department of Environmental Quality air contaminant discharge permit.

3.    The crushing equipment is capable of providing material meeting “three-quarter-inch minus” specifications.

4.    No off-site materials are brought on site for crushing.

5.    Rock crushing equipment is removed from the site within 15 days of completing the crushing activity.

6.    Excavated crushed material not used for on-site construction or landscaping is removed to a City approved location within 15 days of completing the crushing activity.

7.    The rock crushing equipment is set up as far away as practicable from any property line or existing residence but in no case shall the setback be less than 150 feet.

8.    The duration of the temporary rock crushing activity is for no more than 60 consecutive days from the issuance of the permit, unless the applicant obtains an extension of time pursuant to the City of Bend Development Code.

9.    Rock crushing occurs Monday through Friday, between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and not on legal holidays.

10.    Water is available to provide dust control.

B.    Application Requirements. An application for a temporary permit for on-site rock crushing shall contain the following:

1.    A detailed explanation of the proposed construction and rock crushing activities, including:

a.    An approved grading/clearing plan.

b.    An estimate of the amount of material to be processed.

c.    The amount of material to be used on site and the amount to be removed if any.

d.    The duration and operating characteristics of the rock crushing activity.

2.    An explanation of how the proposal will reduce truck trips or otherwise benefit the community.

3.    A map drawn to scale showing:

a.    The location of property boundaries.

b.    The truck travel route for vehicles accessing the site and rock material being removed from site.

c.    The location site for material being removed.

d.    Setbacks to the rock crushing activity.

e.    Any topographic features in the immediate vicinity of the proposed rock crusher.

4.    Any additional information which will assist in the evaluation of the proposed rock crushing.

5.    The application shall be processed pursuant to the City of Bend Development Code.

C.    Revocation of a Temporary Permit for Noncompliance. Any permit for temporary permit for rock crushing granted in accordance with the terms of this section may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such permit are violated. [Ord. 1879 § 8, 2003]


16.10.080 Erosion and Sediment Control and Pollution Prevention Performance Standards.

Appropriate erosion and sediment control devices, and measures and devices to prevent and control other construction site pollutants, shall be in place prior to the start of and as part of construction activity on all private or public lands requiring a permit as part of this section, unless specifically exempted by the City, so that the performance standards of the erosion and sediment control chapter of the COSM and as follows are met.

A.    Additional ESC Performance Standards.

1.    Once permanent ESC have been effectively established and temporary ESC and pollution prevention measures are no longer needed, temporary measures and materials (e.g., silt fences, inlet protection devices, etc.) shall be removed and properly disposed of. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.090 Blasting Performance Standards.

A.    General Performance Standards. All persons conducting blasting activities shall comply with all Federal, State and local regulations applicable to blasting activities and maintain and provide upon request evidence of all necessary Federal, State and local licensing required to conduct blasting activities.

This section in no way replaces or negates the requirements pertaining to explosives as contained in ORS 480.010 through 480.290, or replacement of such.

B.    Notification.

1.    Notice of all blasting shall be provided to the City. Prior to blasting, the person responsible for the blast shall inform all building occupants within 100 feet of the blast site.

2.    The City may require additional notification for particular areas where sudden excessive noise would be especially disruptive such as medical districts, hospitals, schools, and properties engaged in farm use, veterinary or commercial day care/boarding involving animals.

3.    Signs shall be placed at street intersections adjacent to the blasting site on the day of the blasting or earlier if feasible. The sign shall state the approximate blasting times and the responsible party to contact. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.10.100 Tree Preservation Performance Standards.

A.    General Performance Standards.

1.    For clearing and/or grading activities on all undeveloped properties or properties without land use approval, including single-family residential lots greater than one acre in size, the following tree preservation performance standards shall be implemented:

a.    All trees 12 inches diameter at breast height (dbh) and larger shall be retained on site.

b.    Fifty percent of all trees between eight inches and 12 inches dbh shall be retained on site.

c.    The 50 percent retention of trees between eight inches and 12 inches dbh shall result in a tree coverage pattern that is dispersed throughout the site pursuant to on-site tree locations.

d.    All trees retained on site shall be protected during clearing and grading activities.

2.    Clearing and grading activities on sites with an approved development application are not subject to the standards of subsection (A)(1) of this section; however, trees shall be preserved as specified in the development approval. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


Chapter 16.15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS AND POST-CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE CONTROLS

Sections:

16.15.010    Applicability and Drainage Submittal Requirements.

16.15.020    Exemptions.

16.15.030    Drainage Submittal Review and Approval Process.

16.15.040    Post-Construction Performance Standards for Stormwater Management.

16.15.050    Stormwater System Maintenance Agreement.


16.15.010 Applicability and Drainage Submittal Requirements.

A.    Applicability. This section is applicable to all land development, including but not limited to applications for a clearing, grading and erosion control permit (permit), site plan applications, and land division applications unless exempt. These provisions apply to any new development or redevelopment site within the City that meets one or more of the following criteria:

1.    Projects adding 5,000 square feet or more of impervious area or disturbing one or more acres.

2.    Projects that propose a UIC facility.

3.    Manufactured and mobile home parks.

4.    Commercial building permits and site plans (including institutional and multifamily residential projects) prior to the issuance of the building or grading permits.

5.    Clearing, Grading and Erosion Control Permits (not in conjunction with building permits).

6.    Construction of new public or private road projects (not in conjunction with land use actions or permits).

7.    Projects proposing the installation, removal, or modification of drainage systems.

8.    Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if the activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the applicability criteria, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules.

B.    Drainage Submittal Requirements.

1.    Drainage submittals shall comply with City regulations, which include the COSM and the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

2.    All plans and calculations required in this section must be submitted to the City for review and acceptance as part of the permit or land use application.

3.    Residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial developments may apply stormwater management standards described in the COSM and in this title to common plan land development as a whole if the development is appropriately master planned, and has formal arrangements for stormwater drainage across multiple properties. Prior to final plat, individual residential lots in new subdivisions shall not be considered separate land development projects, but rather the entire subdivision shall be considered a single land development project.

4.    The responsibility for adhering to the standards in this title lies with the property owner.

5.    Low impact development (LID) techniques are encouraged by the City and shall be incorporated into the site and facility design when deemed appropriate by the applicant after consultation with appropriate City officials. All projects should incorporate LID techniques to the degree practicable, and a description of the techniques considered and used should be added to the drainage submittal.

6.    All projects shall meet the basic requirements for stormwater management as defined in the COSM. An applicant may use different methods to meet the basic requirements described in the COSM on a case-by-case basis subject to approval by the City. The applicability of the basic requirements depends on the type, size and location of the project as described in the COSM. On-site capture and containment systems can be deeper than those specified in the COSM as long as all ODEQ and Federal regulations are being met.

7.    All stormwater will be contained within designed facilities as appropriate. Stormwater facilities shall be designed to provide service for the National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) Type I 24-hour storm event, for a 25-year, 24-hour design storm, with a safe overflow path that:

a.    Has the capacity to convey the pre-development storm events per Oregon Drainage Law to an existing, historical, or natural drainage point as described in the COSM; or

b.    Maintains the 100-year design storm on site; or

c.    Provides for off-site safe passage of the 100-year, 24-hour design storm through formal agreements made with the City and any other affected land owners to safely provide and maintain off-site overflow routes.

Coordination with affected land owners to ensure safe passage is encouraged. Off-site drainage cannot be directed to irrigation district facilities without the district’s written approval.

8.    The drainage submittal should include appropriate field tests for verifying sizing and infiltration capability of stormwater facilities. All infiltration ponds and swales may be tested before and after initial fracturing and shall be tested after final construction. Testing shall be per Chapter 4.3.2 of the COSM and shall be performed under the direction of a professional engineer.

9.    The project shall meet the post-construction performance standards described in BC 16.15.040. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.15.020 Exemptions.

A.    Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the drainage submittal review and process provisions (BC 16.15.030) of this section:

1.    Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a land division or phased development project that is otherwise subject to this title.

2.    Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures.

3.    Remodeling permits or tenant improvements that do not add 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface.

4.    Maintenance and repair to any stormwater BMP deemed necessary by the City.

5.    Any emergency project that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources.

6.    Commercial agriculture practices involving working the land for production are generally exempt, except the construction of impervious surfaces as related to commercial agriculture.

7.    Forest practices regulated under the Oregon Forest Practices Act, except conversions from forest lands to other land uses.

8.    Actions by a public utility or any other governmental agency to remove or alleviate an emergency condition when the action does not alter the stormwater characteristics.

9.    Minor land disturbing activities that do not require a clearing, grading and erosion control permit (permit).

10.    Permits or applications for projects not physically disturbing the land.

11.    Public or private road and parking area preservation and/or maintenance projects such as:

a.    Pothole and square cut patching;

b.    Crack sealing;

c.    Resurfacing with in-kind material without expanding the area of coverage;

d.    Overlaying existing asphalt or concrete pavement without expanding the area of coverage;

e.    Shoulder grading;

f.    Maintaining existing drainage systems including reshaping or regrading drainage systems to original design;

g.    Vegetation maintenance; or

h.    Addition of bicycle lanes or ADA compliance work.

12.    Landscaping and maintenance on residential lots, including gardening, noncommercial agricultural activity, and limited clearing and grading.

13.    City of Bend public capital improvement projects, which must meet the equivalent standards as set forth in the City’s Standards and Specifications.

B.    Exceptions. An exception may be granted by the City to approve design elements that do not conform to or are not explicitly addressed by the COSM. The requirements of the COSM represent the minimum criteria for the design of stormwater management systems as required in the City of Bend. Designs that offer a superior alternative to standard measures, or creative means not yet specified in the standards, must be reviewed and approved by the City. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.15.030 Drainage Submittal Review and Approval Process.

A.    Submittal Process. The drainage submittal shall be submitted to the City as part of the clearing, grading and erosion control permit (permit) application required by BC Chapter 16.10. The City may charge a fee in an amount set by Council resolution for the permit. The plans shall be reviewed by the City for compliance with the COSM, the post-construction performance standards for stormwater management that are described in BC 16.15.040, and other applicable rules and standards prior to approval.

B.    Notification Required. The City shall be notified prior to the commencement of any development covered by a drainage submittal.

C.    Applicant’s Responsibilities.

1.    Any modifications to the drainage submittal shall be submitted to the City for approval. A new drainage submittal shall be submitted on request of the City.

2.    Stormwater systems shall be tested for approval after construction. Stormwater systems shall be inspected when deemed necessary by the City during and after construction to assure consistency with the approved drainage submittal, and for compliance with this title.

D.    Conditions of Approval. The following conditions apply to all approved drainage submittals:

1.    Approval of the drainage submittal does not relieve the owner or responsible party from the duty to ensure the systems and their safety measures function as designed.

2.    Approval may be suspended or revoked at any time if conditions are not as stated or shown in the approved application or implementation of the drainage submittal is not proceeding in the approved manner.

3.    Approval of a drainage submittal may be suspended if the project is not completed within a two-year period or development has ceased for a period of more than two years. However, a one-year extension may be granted upon a written request that provides the reason(s) for the delay or cessation of development and specifies a time frame for completion or commencement of development activities.

4.    If suspension or revocation of approval is necessary, the owner will receive notice of this decision and may appeal to the City Manager. A written request for appeal and hearing must be made within 10 days from the notice of suspension or revocation.

5.    If drainage submittal approval is suspended or revoked, the owner shall be required to submit a new plan for approval, with the requisite fee, prior to starting or continuing the planned project or development.

6.    Approval of any plans by the City shall not create a liability on the part of or cause of action against the City or City employee regarding the plan or its operation. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.15.040 Post-Construction Performance Standards for Stormwater Management.

A.    General Post-Construction Performance Standards. Post-construction stormwater BMPs shall adhere to the following performance standards.

1.    All stormwater BMPs shall be maintained in accordance with the approved stormwater system maintenance agreement as described in BC 16.15.050. The design of stormwater facilities shall incorporate maintenance accommodation and long-term maintenance reduction features in accordance with the latest version of the COSM.

2.    Overland flood routing paths shall be used to safely convey stormwater runoff to an adequate receiving area or stormwater BMP as defined under BC 16.15.010(B)(3), such that the runoff is contained within the drainage easement for the flood routing path and does not cause flooding of buildings or related structures. The peak water surface elevation along flood routing paths shall be at least one foot below the finished grade elevation at the structure. When designing the flood routing paths, the conveyance capacity of the site’s stormwater conveyance systems shall be taken into consideration.

3.    Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any surface waterbody outfall to provide nonerosive flow velocity from the structure to an adequate receiving stream or channel, so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions of the receiving stream or channel are maintained and protected.

4.    Stormwater drainage in excess of the predevelopment rates or volumes shall be retained on the lot of origin and not trespass onto the public right-of-way or private property except as provided below:

a.    If the City determines that retaining the design storm amount of stormwater on the site of origin would pose a threat to public safety or adjacent properties. If the developer chooses to direct all or part of the runoff off-site and there is enough capacity in the conveyance system, the runoff or a specified portion thereof shall be directed to an off-site drainage facility approved by the City.

b.    When runoff from non-City-owned property in excess of the predevelopment rates or volumes is directed to or allowed to flow to City-owned property or right-of-way, the owner(s) of the lot(s) of origin shall compensate the City for the costs it incurs for constructing, operating and maintaining the additional stormwater drainage and treatment capacity.

c.    Access to and maintenance and operation of all stormwater facilities on private property shall be as required by the most current version of the COSM.

d.    Residential, commercial, institutional or industrial developments may apply stormwater management standards described in this chapter to a common plan of land development as a whole if the development is appropriately master planned, and has formal arrangements for stormwater drainage across multiple properties. Prior to final plat approval, individual residential lots in new subdivisions shall not be considered separate land development projects, but rather the entire subdivision shall be considered a single land development project.

5.    The City may require drainage easements where stormwater discharges must cross an adjacent or off-site property before reaching an adequate conveyance.

6.    Stormwater facilities within residential subdivisions that serve multiple lots and/or a combination of lots and roadways shall be on a lot owned and maintained by an entity of common ownership, unless an alternative arrangement is approved by the City. Stormwater facilities located on individual lots shall be maintained by the lot owner or, at the discretion of the City, be placed within an easement and maintained by an entity of common ownership.

7.    Hydrologic parameters shall reflect the ultimate land development, shall be used in all engineering calculations, and shall follow required procedures outlined in the COSM. The stormwater design shall provide for treatment of runoff from the entire land development, to the extent practicable.

8.    If runoff in excess of the predevelopment rates or volumes from a land development will flow to a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or other publicly owned storm sewer system, then the applicant shall obtain authorization from the system’s owner to discharge into the system. The City may require the applicant to demonstrate that the system has adequate capacity for any increases in peak flow rates and volumes.

9.    All stormwater facilities and conveyance systems shall be designed in compliance with all applicable State and Federal laws and regulations, and all applicable erosion and sediment control and floodplain regulations.

10.    The design of stormwater BMPs shall consider public health, safety and general welfare. These considerations include, but are not limited to:

a.    Preventing flooding of structures and roadways;

b.    Preventing standing water in facilities, manholes, inlets and other structures in a manner that promotes breeding of mosquitoes;

c.    Preventing attractive nuisance conditions and dangerous conditions due to velocity or depth of water, and/or access to orifices and drops; and

d.    Preventing aesthetic nuisances due to excessive slopes, cuts and fills, vegetation mortality, and other conditions.

11.    All stormwater BMPs shall be designed to the standards of the most current version of the COSM, unless the City grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements.

12.    All new or refurbished stormwater inlets placed as part of a new development project shall be marked with a permanent “Do Not Dump” and/or “Protect Our Waters” or similar stamp or embossed image that has been approved by the City.

13.    All new development projects shall prepare and submit to the City as-builts for all site impervious surfaces and permanent stormwater facilities.

14.    All stormwater management designs shall preserve the natural hydrologic functions, stream channel characteristics, and groundwater recharge of the pre-developed site, to the extent practical. This shall be accomplished by:

a.    Treating runoff at the source;

b.    Disconnecting impervious surfaces;

c.    Preserving or enhancing natural flow paths and vegetative cover;

d.    Preserving or enhancing natural open spaces and riparian areas;

e.    Applying other measures that replicate pre-development hydrologic conditions.

The City may exercise discretion in the application of this standard, especially in cases of infill development, redevelopment, or other unique circumstances.

15.    If hydrologic, geologic, topographic, or land use conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City may impose additional requirements deemed reasonable and necessary to control the volume, timing, rate and/or quality of runoff in excess of the predevelopment rates or volumes. In these cases the City may restrict the use of certain stormwater BMPs, require pretreatment above the minimum standards in the COSM, and/or require a pollution source control plan. Example conditions that may warrant greater control include, but are not limited to:

a.    Stormwater generated within the drainage basins of problem flooding areas as noted on the City’s capital improvement project prioritization list;

b.    Stormwater discharges that are conveyed with nonstormwater discharges;

c.    Stormwater in areas underlaid by naturally impermeable layers;

d.    Stormwater discharged in important groundwater management areas such as wellhead protection areas; and

e.    Stormwater discharged to surface water outfalls or directly to waterbodies such as the Deschutes River or Tumalo Creek. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.15.050 Stormwater System Maintenance Agreement.

A.    Responsible Party. Owners are responsible for the operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities on their property.

B.    Requirement for Stormwater System Maintenance Agreement. If a project requiring a drainage submittal requires structural or nonstructural measures, the owner shall execute a stormwater system maintenance agreement prior to the City granting final approval of any development plan or other development for which a permit is required under this title. The stormwater system maintenance agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Deschutes County Clerk and shall run with the land.

C.    Required Elements for Stormwater System Maintenance Agreement. The stormwater system maintenance agreement shall be in a form approved by the City, and shall, at a minimum:

1.    Require the owner of the property, including successor owners, to maintain the stormwater system on the property so that the system continues to function as planned.

2.    Grant the City the right to enter the property at reasonable times with at least 24-hour notice except in instances of emergency to inspect the system and take corrective action.

D.    Maintenance Responsibility. Property owners shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs, and all necessary access routes and appurtenances (e.g., graded surfaces, walls, drains, check dams and structures, UICs, catch basins, pipes, vegetation adjacent to the inlets and within the facility, erosion and sedimentation controls, and other protective devices).

E.    Maintenance Records Required. The owner or other responsible party shall make at least annual inspections of the facilities and maintain records of such inspections. Stormwater BMP inspection, maintenance and repair records shall be retained by the owner or their designee for a period of five years, and shall be made available to the City upon request.

F.    Maintenance Inspection by Stormwater Authority. The City shall retain the right to conduct periodic inspections for all stormwater BMPs, which shall be documented in writing. The inspection shall document any maintenance and repair needs, and any discrepancies from the stormwater system maintenance agreement.

Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this title, or whenever the City has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition that may constitute a violation of the provisions of this title, City personnel may inspect buildings or premises at all reasonable times; provided, that:

1.    If the building or premises is occupied, City personnel shall first present proper credentials and request entry.

2.    If the building or premises is unoccupied, City personnel shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.

3.    The property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry but, in the event entry is refused, the City may seek a warrant to authorize entry and inspection.

Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this title, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, or similar factors.

G.    Failure to Provide Adequate Maintenance. In the event that the stormwater BMP has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the responsible party personally or by registered or certified mail. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the stormwater system maintenance agreement, and shall specify that the responsible party has 30 days or other time frame mutually agreed to between the City and the responsible party to complete the necessary measures to comply with the agreement. If such measures are not completed, then the City may pursue enforcement procedures.

If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of an inspection report or the stormwater system maintenance agreement, the City, after 30 days’ written notice (except, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. This necessary corrective or maintenance work shall be performed at the owner’s expense. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


Chapter 16.20 ILLICIT DISCHARGE CONTROLS

Sections:

16.20.010    General Requirements and Prohibitions.

16.20.020    Discharges from Specific Sites Covered.

16.20.030    Allowed Nonstormwater Uses of Storm Drains, Dry Wells and Drill Holes.

16.20.040    Discharge Pursuant to Bend’s Stormwater Quality Permits or Regulations.


16.20.010 General Requirements and Prohibitions.

A.    An illicit discharge is anything not entirely composed of stormwater that is allowed to enter a storm drainage system that discharges to surface water or groundwater. Dumping materials into or that may reach a storm drain facility, including but not limited to a storm drain inlet, a dry well or drill hole, or connecting a wastewater pipe into the storm drainage system, is prohibited under various State and local laws and results in illicit discharge (see City of Bend Illicit Discharge Minimization Best Management Practices Manual (Illicit Discharge Manual)). Any illicit discharge to any storm drain, dry well or drill hole, including the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), underground injection controls and private storm drainage systems, is a violation of this title unless exempted by BC 16.20.030.

B.    Any person engaged in activities that will or may result in pollutants entering a storm drain, dry well or drill hole shall undertake reasonable measures to reduce such pollutants.

C.    No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained any refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris, sediment, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, dry well or drill hole inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, parking area, or upon any public or private plot of land so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except where such pollutant is being temporarily stored in properly contained waste receptacles or is part of a well-defined compost system.

D.    No person shall cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into any street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, storm drain, dry well or drill hole inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land within Bend’s jurisdictional boundaries.

E.    The occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the City where there is located a paved sidewalk, drive, or parking area shall maintain said paved surface free of dirt or litter to the extent reasonable and practicable, and provide an adequate means for the disposal of refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other articles so as to prevent such matter from entering a storm drain facility. Sweepings from said paved areas shall be disposed of properly.

F.    No person shall throw or deposit any pollutant in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, creek or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City, except as otherwise permitted under local, State or Federal law.

G.    It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, commence or continue illicit drainage connections or discharges to the MS4 or any public or private storm drains, dry wells and drill holes. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.20.020 Discharges from Specific Sites Covered.

The prohibitions on illicit discharges in this chapter apply to all illicit discharges including but not limited to the following.

A.    Surface Cleaning, Parking Lots and Similar Structures. Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved private street or road, or similar structure or conducting routine building or surface wash downs shall clean and maintain those structures consistent with the City of Bend’s Illicit Discharge Manual, which shall serve as regulations implementing this title and may be amended by the City Manager. Compliance with the manual is required prior to any discharge to a storm drain, dry well or drill hole.

B.    Covered Parking Garages. All water from nonstormwater sources or incidental stormwater sources (i.e., blown in through openings and windows or transported on vehicles) that enters newly developed or significantly redeveloped covered parking garages is to be directed to the sanitary sewer disposal system unless that alternative is not reasonably feasible. Newly developed or significantly redeveloped covered permanent parking garages may drain into a storm drain when no feasible alternative is available, with the consent of the owner and operator, and with proper pretreatment and maintenance accessibility in accordance with this title and State and Federal regulations.

C.    Outdoor Storage Areas – Commercial and Industrial Facilities. In outdoor areas, no person shall store grease, oil or other hazardous substances in a manner that will or may result in such substances entering a storm drain facility. In outdoor areas, no person shall store motor vehicles, machine parts, or other objects in a manner that may leak grease, oil, or other hazardous substances to a storm drain facility. To prevent the discharge of hazardous substances to the public or private storm drainage systems, the City may require the installation of a spill containment system. Spill containment systems may consist of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.20.030 Allowed Nonstormwater Uses of Storm Drains, Dry Wells and Drill Holes.

A.    Allowed Discharges. Discharges authorized by (1) any Illicit Discharge Manual adopted by the City, or (2) the City’s MS4 NPDES permit or (3) water pollution control facility (WPCF) – underground injection control (UIC) permits are allowed unless they violate the provisions of either permit. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.20.040 Discharge Pursuant to Bend’s Stormwater Quality Permits or Regulations.

A.    Permit Compliance. The prohibition of discharges shall not apply to any discharge already regulated under an MS4 NPDES permit, total maximum daily load (TMDL), or WPCF-UIC permit issued and administered by the EPA or Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ); provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. Compliance with an applicable NPDES permit or TMDL governing discharges into the MS4 or with an applicable WPCF-UIC permit or rule authorization governing discharges into the UIC shall be considered compliance with this title.

B.    Violation of Stormwater Quality Permits or Regulations. Any discharge that would cause a violation of Bend’s NPDES permit, TMDL, or WPCF-UIC permit and any amendments, revisions or re-issuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and the City shall seek to have such persons defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement action against the permit holder relating to such discharge as provided by applicable rules of law.

C.    Owner Responsibility. All persons in charge of a facility are to comply with applicable State and Federal laws including facility personnel, training, training record maintenance, training records, maintenance of notification procedures, and implementation of notification requirements for spill response to assure containment, cleanup, and immediate notification to the owner and operator of the MS4 or UIC. Individuals responsible for spills are to comply with applicable State and Federal notification requirements to assure containment, cleanup, and immediate notification to the owner and operator of the MS4 or UIC. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


Chapter 16.25 WELL DRILLING

Sections:

16.25.010    Responsibility for Effect of Well Drilling.


16.25.010 Responsibility for Effect of Well Drilling.

If the drilling of a new groundwater well causes any existing UIC that has been registered with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality to be subject to this title or requires the registered UIC to become subject to additional State permitting or mitigation requirements, the owner of the well shall be responsible for all permitting, compliance and mitigation costs incurred by the UIC owner or operator above that amount that the UIC owner would otherwise be required to address if not in a wellhead protection area. If the well owner does not pay the permitting, compliance and mitigation costs, the UIC owner or operator who has incurred costs may bring an action in Circuit Court and recover reasonable attorney fees in addition to damages. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


Chapter 16.30 STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY

Sections:

16.30.010    Purpose.

16.30.020    Provision of Service.

16.30.030    Charges for Stormwater Service.

16.30.040    Stormwater Charges – Billing.

16.30.050    Stormwater Charges – When Delinquent.

16.30.060    Appeal and Credits.

16.30.070    Tampering with System – Prohibited Discharges.

16.30.080    Meeting Regulatory Requirements.

16.30.090    Responsibility for Private Stormwater Facilities.


16.30.010 Purpose.

Effective maintenance, operation, regulation, and control of stormwater drainage are needed to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the City. Natural and man-made stormwater facilities and conveyances together constitute a stormwater system. Effective regulation and control of stormwater can best be accomplished through formation, by the City, of a stormwater utility. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.020 Provision of Service.

The City provides stormwater services to all properties within the City that have impervious surfaces. Those services include the maintenance of stormwater facilities in rights-of-way that serve both rights-of-way and adjoining properties. The City also provides stormwater services by regulating stormwater as provided in this section, and by meeting State and Federal stormwater regulations. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.030 Charges for Stormwater Service.

A.    Unless another person responsible has agreed in writing to pay for stormwater service and a copy of that writing is filed with the City, the person receiving the City’s water or sewer bill shall pay the stormwater charges as set by City Council resolution. The fee shall be based on equivalent residential units (ERUs) with one ERU equal to 3,800 square feet of impervious surface area. If there is no City water or sewer service to the property, or if water service is discontinued and the property is an improved premises, the stormwater charges shall be paid by the person responsible for the property with the right to occupy the property. The person required to pay the charge is the “customer.”

B.    The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees and charges necessary to provide and operate the stormwater system and service. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.040 Stormwater Charges – Billing.

A.    The customer shall be responsible for all stormwater service fees and charges.

B.    All money collected through stormwater fees and charges shall be used for the improvement, maintenance, and repair of the City’s stormwater system. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.050 Stormwater Charges – When Delinquent.

A.    The City shall bill stormwater fees and charges in the same manner and at the same times as it bills for water and sewer service, and shall combine the stormwater bill with the water and/or sewer bill.

B.    A delinquent fee, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, shall be added to all delinquent accounts.

C.    The finance director is authorized to determine what constitutes a de minimis account balance and to waive the delinquent fee imposed by subsection (B) of this section. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.060 Appeal and Credits.

The City has established appeals and credit programs. Any customer aggrieved by any decision made with regard to the customer’s account or a decision on charge reduction or avoidance may appeal to the City Manager by filing a written request for review no later than 10 days after receiving the decision. The City Manager’s decision shall be subject to review by the City Council upon filing of an appeal within 15 days of the notice of decision. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.070 Tampering with System – Prohibited Discharges.

A.    No unauthorized person shall damage, destroy, uncover, alter, deface, or tamper with any facility that is part of the City stormwater system without the written permission from the City. No authorized person shall fill or divert any portion of the City stormwater drainage system except as authorized by the City.

B.    No person shall discharge any sewage, pollutants or hazardous materials into the stormwater system. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.080 Meeting Regulatory Requirements.

A.    In order to meet Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) and Federal stormwater-related requirements, the City retains the ability, at a minimum, to:

1.    Implement the ODEQ-approved stormwater permits, stormwater monitoring plan and underground injection system management plan and/or integrated stormwater management plan.

2.    Limit or terminate a nonstormwater discharge to an underground injection system, MS4, or surface water body.

3.    Prohibit discharge to an underground injection system from non-City-owned or managed properties or facilities that may cause a violation of the conditions of the City’s WPCF-UIC permit; and to prohibit discharge to an MS4 or surface water body from non-City-owned or managed properties or facilities that may cause a violation of the conditions of the City’s MS4 NPDES permit.

4.    Implement the highest and best practicable methods in accordance with OAR 340-040-0020 to protect groundwater quality by reducing or eliminating the movement of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff to groundwater via an underground injection system.

5.    Identify the legal and administrative procedures available to mandate compliance with the conditions of the City’s WPCF-UIC permit and in ordinances, permits, contracts or orders that involve the discharge of fluids to an underground injection system.

6.    Carry out all inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with the conditions of the City’s WPCF-UIC permit, MS4 NPDES permit, or TMDLs. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


16.30.090 Responsibility for Private Stormwater Facilities.

The owner of property where a private stormwater facility is located shall maintain the private stormwater facility in a properly functioning condition and shall operate the private stormwater facility to avoid flooding or erosion in excess of what would occur under natural conditions. An improperly maintained or operated private stormwater facility that results in flooding or erosion in excess of what would occur in natural conditions is a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this title. [Ord. NS-2176, 2012]


Title 1 INTRODUCTION Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20

Chapters:

1.0    How to Use the Development Code

1.1    General Administration

1.2    Definitions Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20

1.3    Enforcement


Chapter 1.0 HOW TO USE THE DEVELOPMENT CODE

Sections:

1.0.100    How to Use the Development Code.

This Development Code replaces BC Chapter 10.10. To simplify the chapter and sections of the Development Code, BC Chapter 10.10 shall hereby be incorporated by reference herein. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.0.100 How to Use the Development Code.

Welcome to the Bend Development Code. This is a comprehensive land use and development code that governs all of the land within the incorporated City limits of Bend. The titles of the code are used together to review land use applications and are organized as follows:

BDC Title 1 – In addition to this brief introduction, BDC Title 1 provides definitions for selected terms and information on the legal construct of the code. It also explains the City’s authority to enforce the Development Code.

BDC Title 2 – Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the City’s incorporated boundaries is also within a “land use district.” (Land use districts are shown on the City’s official Zoning Map.) BDC Title 2 identifies the land uses that are permitted within each district and the standards that apply to each type of land use (e.g., lot standards, setbacks, and use-specific design standards). As required by State law, the zones or “land use districts” conform to the Bend Comprehensive Plan. The districts reserve land for planned land uses, provide compatibility between different uses, and implement planned housing densities.

BDC Title 3 – The design standards contained in BDC Title 3 apply throughout the City. Design standards are used in preparing development plans and reviewing applications to ensure compliance with City standards for access and circulation, landscaping, parking, public facilities, surface water management, housing densities, and sensitive lands.

BDC Title 4 – BDC Title 4 provides all of the application requirements and procedures for obtaining permits required by this code. Four types of permit procedures are covered: Type I (nondiscretionary, “ministerial” decision); Type II (discretionary, “administrative” decision); Type III (discretionary, “quasi-judicial” decision with public hearing); and Type IV (“legislative” decision by City Council).

BDC Title 5 – BDC Title 5 provides standards and procedures for variances and nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or developments that do not comply with the code). This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The City has varied geography and complexities of land development require flexibility. BDC Title 5 provides such flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 1.1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

1.1.100    Severability.

1.1.200    Compliance and Scope.

1.1.300    Consistency with Plan and Laws.

1.1.400    Use of a Development.

1.1.500    Preexisting Approvals.

1.1.600    Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy.

1.1.700    Official Action.

1.1.800    Fees Required.

1.1.900    Miscellaneous Provisions.


1.1.100 Severability.

The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.200 Compliance and Scope.

A.    Compliance with the Provisions in the Development Code. Land and structures may be used, developed by construction, reconstruction, alteration, occupancy, and use, or otherwise, only as this Development Code (“code”) or any amendment thereto permits. No plat shall be recorded or no permit shall be issued without compliance with the provisions of this code.

B.    Obligation by Successor. The requirements of this code apply to the owner(s) of record, persons undertaking the development or the use of land, and to those persons’ successors in interest.

C.    Most Restrictive Regulations Apply. Where this code contains conflicting standards, or imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.

D.    Variances. Variances shall be governed by the provisions of BDC Chapter 5.1.

E.    Transfer of Development Standards Prohibited. No lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this code for one use shall be a required lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area for another use, except as otherwise specifically allowed by this code. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.300 Consistency with Plan and Laws.

Each development and use application and other procedure initiated under this code shall be consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Bend as implemented by this code, all applicable local ordinances, State and Federal laws and regulations. All provisions of this code shall be construed in conformity with the adopted Bend Comprehensive Plan.

This code is intended to promote health, safety, welfare and economy by coordinating the complex relationships between people, land, resources and facilities to meet the future needs of the citizens and to protect the livability of the community. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.400 Use of a Development.

A development shall be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is permitted by this code, including nonconforming uses subject to BDC Chapter 5.2, and is not prohibited by law. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.500 Preexisting Approvals.

A.    Legality of Preexisting Approvals. Developments, including subdivisions, projects requiring development review or site design review approval, or other development applications for which applications were filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code, and which have not legally expired, may occur pursuant to such approvals; except that modifications to development approvals shall comply with BDC 4.1.1325, Modification of Approval. All conditions of preexisting approvals shall apply.

B.    Subsequent Development Applications. All development proposals and applications received by the Development Services Director after the adoption of this code shall be subject to review for conformance with the standards under this code or as otherwise provided by State law.

C.    Duration of Exemption from Subsequently Adopted Land Use Ordinance. For the purposes of ORS 92.040(2) and (3), after September 9, 1995, construction within an approved subdivision shall be subject to the land use laws that were in effect on the date of the subdivision application and shall not be subject to subsequently adopted land use laws. This exemption from subsequently adopted local land use laws shall terminate three years from the date the local land use decision becomes final unless the subdivision was approved as a Master Planned Development with adopted lot development standards. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.600 Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy.

A.    Building Permit. A building permit shall not be issued until a development permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of BDC 4.1.900, or the Development Services Director has otherwise found that a development permit is not required.

B.    Certificate of Occupancy Required. To ensure completion of a development or use in the manner approved, a development shall not be occupied and a use shall not begin until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy following completion of the work in substantial conformance to the applicable land use and building permits.

C.    Prior to Final Completion. Prior to the final completion of all work, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of the structure conditioned upon further work being completed by a date certain. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.700 Official Action.

A.    Official Action. All officials, departments, and employees including contractor-officials of the City vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals shall adhere to and require conformance with this code, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development or use, which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this code.

B.    Severability. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be void.

C.    Notice. The failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post a notice shall not invalidate any actions pursuant to this code. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.800 Fees Required.

The City’s fees are established by the City Council in the adopted Fees Resolution. Fees shall be required for all applications, appeals and services. Payment of fees shall be made at the time of filing by cash, check, money order, credit card, or other acceptable methods as identified in the adopted Fees Resolution, except that local governmental agencies may supply a purchase order at the time of filing. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.1.900 Miscellaneous Provisions.

A.    Intergovernmental Agreements. Outside the City limits where authorized by an intergovernmental agreement, the functions of the Development Services Director and City Review Authority identified herein will be defined in accordance with the respective intergovernmental agreements.

B.    Purpose statements for each chapter are descriptive of the chapter’s characteristics and intent and are drawn from the Bend Comprehensive Plan and/or the Bend Development Code. Purpose statements are informational and not standards or approval criteria. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 1.2 DEFINITIONS Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20


A

Abutting means adjoining with a common boundary line, except that where two or more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners, they shall not be considered as abutting unless the common property line between the two parcels measures eight feet or more in a single direction.

Access means a way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle or motor vehicular entrances or exits to a property or street.

Access corridor means a separate travel way for pedestrians and bicyclists to minimize travel distances within and between subdivisions, planned unit developments, residential areas and commercial centers, major employment areas, transit stops, or within and between nearby neighborhood activity centers such as schools, parks, and convenience shopping. The following are typical types of access corridors:

1.    Multi-use path means a paved way (typically 10 to 12 feet wide) that is physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic; typically shared with pedestrians, skaters, and other nonmotorized users. See also: “Connector multi-use path,” “Primary multi-use path.”

2.    Bike lane means a portion of the roadway (typically four to six feet wide) that has been designated by permanent striping and pavement markings or signage for the exclusive use of bicycles.

3.    Shoulder bikeway means the paved shoulder of a roadway that is four feet or wider; typically shared with pedestrians in areas without curbs and sidewalks.

4.    Shared roadway means a travel lane that is shared by bicyclists and motor vehicles.

5.    Multi-use trail means an unpaved path that accommodates all-terrain bicycles; typically shared with pedestrians.

Accessible means approachable and usable by people with disabilities; compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act.

Accessible parking means a parking site that meets all Federal, State and local requirements, whichever is the more strict.

Accessible parking space means a space designed to provide parking area for a motor vehicle, owned by a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability that limits one or more major life activities as specified in Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Americans with Disabilities Act, and State law, and whose vehicle displays a current State-issued disabled person license plate or disabled person parking permit. Also referred to as a “handicapped parking space.”

Accessory dwelling unit means a small, secondary dwelling unit on a lot or parcel with a single-family dwelling unit as a primary use.

Accessory Use/Accessory Structure. Accessory uses and structures are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot.

ADAAG means Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines.

Adjacent means abutting or located directly across a street right-of-way.

Affected person means any person adversely affected or aggrieved by a decision relating to the development actions covered by the City of Bend Development Code.

Affordable housing means housing with a sales price or rental amount that is within the means of a household that may occupy moderate- and low-income housing. Unless otherwise specified, affordable housing must meet one of the thresholds defined below in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.

1.    In the case of dwelling units for sale, “affordable” means housing in which the mortgage, amortized interest, taxes, insurance, and condominium or association fees, if any, constitute no more than 30 percent of such gross annual household income for a family at 80 percent of the area median income, based upon most recent HUD Income Limits for the Bend Metropolitan Statistical Area (Bend MSA).

2.    In the case of dwelling units for rent, “affordable” means housing for which the rent and utilities constitute no more than 30 percent of such gross annual household income for a family at 60 percent of the area median income, based upon most recent HUD Income Limits for the Bend MSA.

Agent means any person who represents or acts for any other person in disposing of interests in a land development.

Agricultural building or equine facility means buildings and structures that are exempt from the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code as agricultural buildings and equine facilities as described in ORS 455.315. A structural building permit is not required for agricultural buildings or equine facilities located on the same lot or parcel receiving special assessment for farm use.

Agriculture. See “Farming or farm use.”

Airport or aircraft landing facility means any landing area, runway, landing pad, or other facility designed, used or intended to be used by aircraft, including helicopters, and including all necessary taxi-ways, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.

Alley means a public or private narrow way serving more than one lot or parcel primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties.

Annexation means the process by which a municipality, upon meeting certain requirements, expands its corporate limits.

Annexation agreement means a written agreement between the City and owners of land requesting annexation that states the terms, conditions and obligations of the parties to extend public facilities and public services and mitigate public facility and public service impacts to the City associated with the annexation and future development of the property. The agreement may be used to ensure annexation is consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan, area plans and/or master plans.

Annexation contract means a contract between a city and a landowner containing the landowner’s consent to eventual annexation of the landowner’s property in return for extraterritorial services. The contract will be recorded and will be binding on all successors with an interest in that property.

Apartment. See “Multifamily residential.”

Appeal means to make a formal challenge to an official decision.

Applicant means a person submitting an application; the owner of affected property, or the owner’s duly authorized representative. The Development Services Director may require proof of the sufficiency of the representative’s authorization by the owner to act as applicant on the owner’s behalf.

Application means all materials and information submitted for action authorized under this code and on related administrative forms and checklists.

Arcade means (1) a range of arches carried on piers or columns, either freestanding or blind, i.e., attached to a wall; (2) a covered passage with shops on one or both sides; (3) an exterior covered passageway along a building facade open to the street frontage.

Architrave means the lintel extending from one column or pier to another or the lowest of the three main parts of an entablature.

Area of special flood hazard means the land within a community that is in a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Flood hazard designations on FEMA maps always include the letters A or V. Same as “base flood.”

Area plan means a plan adopted by the City Council for a specific geographic area, including, but not limited to, certain designated UGB expansion areas and opportunity areas, that implements the applicable goals and policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan, coordinates development, and provides flexibility to tailor land use regulations, and transportation and infrastructure plans to serve the land uses within the plan area.

Area plan, framework level means a conceptual plan that includes major transportation, sanitary sewer and water network layout and general land use arrangements consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

Argument means assertions and analysis by a party regarding the satisfaction or violation of legal standards or policy believed to be relevant to the decision. “Argument” does not include facts.

Arterial. See “Street or road.”



Articulate/articulation means the jointing and interrelating of building spaces through offsets, projections, overhangs, extensions and similar features.

Attached is used in the BDC with different meanings.

Attic means the unfinished space between the ceiling assembly and the roof assembly. 

Automobile-dependent use means automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are served by the use and the use would not exist without them, such as vehicle repair, gas station, car wash or auto and truck sales.

Automobile-oriented use means automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use, such as drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities.

Automobile wrecking means the dismantling or disassembling of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles, or their parts. More than two dismantled, obsolete or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof on one lot constitutes a wrecking yard.

Awning means a roof-like cover extending over or in front of a place (as over the deck or in front of a door or window) as a shelter.


B

Bank-full stage means the elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of a stream, river, or lake and begins to inundate the upland. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year reoccurrence interval flow elevation may be used to approximate bank-full stage.

Base flood means the flood designated by FEMA as having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on FEMA maps always includes the letter A or V. Same as “area of special flood hazard.”

Basement means any livable space of a building not including a crawlspace that is wholly or partly below average finished grade when the vertical distance from average finished grade to floor is greater than the vertical distance from average finished grade to ceiling measured at a minimum of three points on all sides as shown on the following figures. A basement is not counted as a story.
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Bath, full bath means a bathroom that contains a toilet, sink, and shower and/or bathtub and/or steam shower. 

Bath, half bath means a bathroom that contains a toilet and a sink. Half baths with floor area greater than 45 square feet that could accommodate a bathtub and/or shower and/or steam shower are considered as having a “rough-in” for a full bath. 

Bay window means a windowed enclosure that projects from an exterior wall and is at least 18 inches above the adjoining finished floor as measured to the lowest horizontal plane of the projection. A wall projection that provides additional floor or seating area or storage is considered a cantilever as defined in this section.
[IMAGE]


Bed and breakfast inn means accommodations plus breakfast on a daily or weekly basis in an operator- or owner-occupied home that is primarily used for this purpose. This use operates as a commercial enterprise, encourages direct bookings from the public, and is intended to provide a major source of income to the proprietors.

Bee means any stage of development of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera species.

Beekeeper means a person owning, possessing or controlling one or more colonies of bees.

Berm means a small rise or hill in a landscape that is intended to buffer or visually screen certain developments, such as parking areas.

Bicycle facility means a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all bikeways.

Bicycle parking means a space designated and reserved for the parking of one or more bicycles.

Bikeway means any road, path or way that is in some manner open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are shared with other transportation modes.

Block means a parcel of land or group of lots bounded by intersecting streets.

Block length means the distance along a street between the centerline of two intersecting through streets from lot line to lot line.

Block perimeter means the distance to travel once completely around the block, ending at the starting point as measured from the centerline of the street.

Bollard means a post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians and/or bicycles). Bollards can be decorative, and may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

Boulevard means a street with broad open space areas, typically with planted medians.

Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 

Building footprint means the outline of a building (excluding exterior materials and wall sheathing), including cantilevered areas.

Building height means the average maximum vertical height of an enclosed building or structure measured at a minimum of three equidistant points as shown on the following figure along each building elevation from finished grade to the highest point on the building or structure. The “highest point” means peak of roof for a building with a sloping roof or the top of the roof coping for a flat roof. Architectural elements that do not add floor area to an enclosed building or structure, such as parapet walls, chimneys, flag poles, bell towers, steeples, and vents, and roof equipment (including minimum screening necessary to conceal mechanical roof equipment including elevator shafts and staircases for rooftop access), and unenclosed decks and porches are not considered part of the height of a building or structure. For property located in the Water Overlay Zone (WOZ), see BDC 2.7.650(E)(4). 
[IMAGE]


Building line means a line parallel to the front lot line and passing through the most forward point or plane of a building.

Building mass means the aggregate size of a building, or the total height, width, and depth of all its parts.

Building Official means the Building Official of the City of Bend, Oregon.

Building pad means a vacant building site on a lot with other building sites. A pad may also be a separate lot within a development.


C 

Cannabinoid concentrate means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

1.    A mechanical extraction process; or

2.    A chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol.

Cannabinoid edible means food or potable liquid into which a cannabinoid concentrate, cannabinoid extract or dried marijuana leaves or flowers have been incorporated.

Cannabinoid extract means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

1.    A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane; 

2.    A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses heat or pressure; or

3.    Any other process identified by the Commission, in consultation with the Authority, by rule.

Cannabinoid product means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers.

Cantilever means a projecting portion of a building without a foundation which provides additional floor or seating area or storage within the interior of a building. A cantilever is distinct from a bay window, which does not provide additional floor or seating area or storage.
[IMAGE]




Capacity means the maximum holding or service ability, as applied to transportation, utilities, parks and other public facilities.

Cargo containers means standardized reusable vessels that were originally designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement, or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities, and are capable of being mounted or moved by rail, truck or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device.

Carport means a permanent structure consisting of a roof with its supports and not more than one wall, or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, and used for sheltering motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or boats.

Cementitious siding means the combination of Portland cement, ground sand, and cellulose (wood) fiber that when mixed with water allows for the creation of planks, panels, and shingles (exterior cladding) that is resistant to burning and rotting.

Centerline radius means the radius of a centerline of a street or road right-of-way.

Change of use means a change in the essential character or nature of the activity conducted on a lot, as evidenced by:

1.    A change from one use to another permitted or conditional use; or

2.    A change in proportion of space devoted to uses within a property; or

3.    An increase in the parking demand, traffic generation, water demand or wastewater demand as calculated pursuant to existing City regulations.

Cherry stem annexation means the bulk of the annexed property (the “cherry”) is contiguous to the City by a narrow “stem” which is usually, but not necessarily, a right-of-way.

Child care facility means any facilities that provide care to 17 or more children, including a day nursery, nursery school, and child care center or similar unit operating under any name.

City means the City of Bend, Oregon.

City Council means the City Council of the City of Bend, Oregon.

City Engineer means the City Engineer of the City of Bend, Oregon, or his or her designee.

City Manager means the City Manager of the City.

City Recorder means the City Recorder of the City of Bend, Oregon.

Clear and objective means decision-making criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application.

Clear vision area means a triangular area located at the intersection of two streets, an alley and a street, a driveway and a street or a street and a railroad right-of-way to ensure that obstructions do not infringe on the sight lines needed by motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and others approaching potential conflict points at intersections. See BDC 3.1.500, Clear Vision Areas.



Clerestory or clearstory window means a high section of wall that contains windows above eye level.

Clinic means a place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients.

Club means an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.

Collector. See “Street or road.”

Colony means a bee hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including one queen, bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.

Color guide means the paint examples maintained by the City which show acceptable colors for use on buildings, structures and signs including examples of prohibited and restricted colors.

Commercial-ready space provides a ground floor that is designed to accommodate commercial uses, with a minimum floor-to-ceiling height and other features that comply with applicable design and building code standards. Commercial-ready space provides the flexibility of occupying a space with residential uses in accordance with market demand and allowing the use in such space to change to commercial uses. See BDC 2.7.3245.

Commission means the City Planning Commission as duly designated and appointed by the City Council.

Common area means land commonly owned, to include open space, landscaping or recreation facilities, and available for public use or use by all property owners association members and guests.

Common ownership means ownership of two or more properties by the same owner or the same combination of owners.

Comprehensive Plan means the duly adopted and acknowledged Bend Comprehensive Plan including appendices adopted and acknowledged as part of the Comprehensive Plan.

Comprehensive Sign Plan means a sign plan for one or more properties in a commercial center or business complex showing all locations of proposed signage for business tenants, retail stores, services, offices and other establishments that perform services on the premises.

Concurrency means that the necessary public facilities and services to accommodate the impacts of a proposed development are available at the time the development occurs or at the time of need.

Conditional use means a use that requires a Conditional Use Permit. See BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits.

Condominium means a type of ownership of units, and common ownership of open space and other facilities, and which is regulated, in part, by State law.

Conduit means any tunnel, canal, pipeline, aqueduct, flume, ditch, or similar manmade structure used to convey water or electrical service.

Connector multi-use path means a multi-use path for pedestrians and bicyclists that minimizes travel distances within and between residential areas and commercial centers, major employment areas, transit stops, or within and between nearby neighborhood activity centers such as schools and parks.

Conservation easement means an easement that protects identified conservation values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees, floodplains, wildlife habitat, and similar resources.

Constructed means the date of issuance of a building permit for structural construction or alteration of a building.

Construction plans means the plans, profiles, cross-sections and drawings or reproductions thereof, prepared by a registered professional engineer, which show the details of the work to be done on improvements.

Contiguous means having a common boundary, including a boundary that only touches a common point. For purposes of annexation, “contiguous” also means a property or group of adjacent properties, including public right-of-way to be annexed, that touch the City limits at any point along any exterior boundary of the territory to be annexed or that is separated from the City limits only by a public right-of-way or body of water.

Corner radius means the radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement.

Cornice means, in classical architecture, the top, projecting section of an architrave; also any projecting ornamental molding along the top of a building, wall, arch, etc., finishing or crowning it; the projecting horizontal element that tops a wall or flat roof.

Corporate headquarters means a building or portion of a building in which persons are employed in the management or direction of a business consisting of one or more companies, or divisions or groups of companies. A corporate headquarters shall be directly associated with a permitted or conditional use on the same site, or may stand alone provided the site area is 10 acres or more, and the facility is sized for at least 100 employees.

Cottage means a detached single-family dwelling in a cottage housing development. See BDC 4.5.500, Cottage Housing Development.

Cottage cluster relates to the configuration of cottages. A cluster is a grouping of four to 12 cottage dwellings arranged on a development site around or abutting usable open space. A cottage housing development may contain more than one cluster. See BDC 4.5.500, Cottage Housing Development.

Cottage housing development means a type of site development or subdivision where individual lots are created, both built in conjunction with shared open space and other common tracts of land that are intended to serve small-scale single-family dwellings that interact together as a small community. See BDC 4.5.500, Cottage Housing Development.

Courtyard means an open, unoccupied space other than a required exterior yard, court or enclosure adjacent to a building, which usually provides amenities such as gardens, planters, seating, or art.

Courtyard housing means detached “zero lot line” dwellings on individual lots subject to the same standards as single-family detached dwellings, except that a three-foot minimum side yard setback is required on one side of a typical lot. This type of housing allows development on smaller (i.e., narrower) lots and provides usable outdoor living area in side-oriented courtyards. See BDC 3.6.200(A), Courtyard Housing.



Critical facility means, for the purpose of flood standards, a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

Cross access means a service drive providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system.

Cross-section means a profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the centerline of a street, stream or valley bottom.

Cul-de-sac. See “Street or road.”

Cultivation or cultivate means: (1) all phases of growth of marijuana from seed to harvest; or (2) preparing, packaging, or repackaging, labeling, or relabeling of marijuana prior to consumption, or incorporation into a recreational marijuana-infused product.

Cupola means a dome, especially a small one on a circular or polygonal base crowning a roof or turret.

Curb cut means a driveway opening where a curb is provided along a street.

Curb line means the line dividing the roadway from the planting strip or sidewalk that is the inside (street side) of the curb.

Curtain wall means a non-load-bearing wall which can be applied in front of a framed structure to keep out the weather; a continuous curtain wall of steel and glass separating “structure” from “cladding.”


D

Dam means any manmade structure which is or may be used to impound water.

Day Care Facility. See “Child care facility” and “Preschool.”

Day care facility (adult) means community-based group programs designed to meet the needs of adults with functional and cognitive impairments through individual plans of care that are structured, comprehensive and provide a variety of health, social and related support services in protective settings during part of the day but provide less than 24-hour care.

De novo review means a hearing by the review body as if the action had not previously been heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence and other material from the record of the previous consideration will be considered a part of the record on review.

Deciduous means a tree or shrub that sheds its leaves seasonally.

Dedication means the transfer of land by its owner to the public. Dedication does not include reservations or easements.

Density means a measurement of the number of dwelling units in relationship to a specified amount of land. As used in this code, density calculation measures gross density and is a measurement used generally for residential uses.

Deschutes River Corridor means all property within 100 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River.

Design standards means standards consisting of objective design-oriented elements that help to ensure that the proposed development conserves and enhances the recognized value of the site or building. The design standards provide additional guidance to items such as pedestrian connections, building materials, ground-floor and upper-level treatments, and the like.

Designated wetlands means areas designated as significant wetlands on the wetland inventory maps adopted by the City of Bend.

Developable means buildable land, as identified by the Bend Comprehensive Plan. Includes both vacant land and land likely to be redeveloped.

Developer means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity who creates or proposes to create a land development; includes any agent of a developer.

Development means all improvements on a site, including buildings, placement or replacement of manufactured or other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, grading, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or landscapes. Development includes a partition and subdivision. For the purpose of flood standards, “development” shall also mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

Development application, Type I means a development application that is reviewed administratively without public notice or an opportunity for parties to comment, unless elevated to a Type II application by the Development Services Director when there is a need to interpret or exercise policy or legal judgment, or to apply discretionary land use standards. Type I applications are identified in Table 4.1.1600. A Type I decision includes any authorization or determination that the City of Bend Community Development Department is requested to issue, give or make that:

1.    Is made under land use standards that do not require interpretation or the exercise of policy or legal judgment; or

2.    Approves or denies a building permit issued under clear and objective land use standards; or

3.    Determines final engineering design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair or preservation of a transportation facility that is otherwise authorized by and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations.

Development application, Type II means a development application that is reviewed following public notice and an opportunity for parties to comment but without a public hearing, unless elevated to a Type III application by the Development Services Director. Type II applications are identified in Table 4.1.1600.

Development application, Type III means a development application where the final decision is made by the Planning Commission or Hearings Officer after a public hearing following the quasi-judicial procedures required and described in BDC 4.1.800. The City Council is the final decision maker in Type III development applications that require the adoption of an ordinance. Type III applications are identified in Table 4.1.1600 and generally meet the factors for Type III quasi-judicial decisions in BDC 4.1.426.

Development application, Type IV means a legislative decision where the final decision is made by the City Council after a public hearing following the legislative procedures required and described in BDC 4.1.500. Type IV applications are identified in Table 4.1.1600. Such applications generally involve broad public policy or discretionary decisions that apply to other than an individual property or small number of properties, and do not meet the factors for Type III quasi-judicial decisions in BDC 4.1.426.

Development Services Director means the Director of the City of Bend Community Development Department or his or her designee. For the purposes of this code, the terms “Development Services Director” and “Planning Director” shall be interchangeable.

Development standards means land use regulations that guide how sites and buildings can be developed. These standards deal with allowed uses, building heights, densities, parking, building setbacks, etc.

Discretionary means a permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment.

Diversion means any manmade structure that is or may be used to deflect or divert water from a river or stream into a conduit or impoundment.

Drip-line means an imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread.

Drive-through facility means a facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through facilities also include facilities designed for the rapid servicing of vehicles, where the drivers may or may not remain in their vehicles, but where the drivers usually either perform the service for themselves, or wait on the site for the service to be rendered. Drive-through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses. Examples are drive-up windows for food service and banks; gas pump islands; and car wash facilities. Also see “Auto-oriented uses” in this section and BDC Chapters 2.2 and 2.3.

Driveway means an area that provides vehicular access to a site, except for public and private streets and alleys. A driveway begins at the property line and extends into the site. Driveways do not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking lots, or parking spaces.

Driveway apron/approach means the edge of a driveway where it abuts a public way, usually constructed of concrete.
[IMAGE]


Duplex means two dwelling units on one lot or parcel. For permitting purposes, units may be attached vertically or horizontally or detached.

Dwelling, Multifamily. See “Multifamily residential.”

Dwelling, single-family attached townhome means single-family dwellings on their own lots or parcels, sharing a common side wall at the property line.



Dwelling, single-family detached means a single-family dwelling on its own lot or parcel that does not share a wall with any other building.

Dwelling, Single-Family Detached Zero Lot Line House. See “Courtyard housing.”

Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking (limited to one kitchen only) and sanitation (full bathroom).


E

Easement means a right of usage of real property granted by an owner to the public or to specific persons, firms, or corporations.

Eave means a projecting overhang four feet or less at the lower border of a roof and extending from a primary wall or support.

Effective lot area means the gross ground surface area of a lot minus any portion of the lot encumbered by a recorded driveway or roadway easement.

Elector means an individual qualified to vote under Section 2, Article II, of the Oregon Constitution.

Elevated building means, for flood insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.

Elevation means a building face, or scaled drawing of the same, from natural grade to the highest point on the structure.

Environmentally Sensitive Areas. See “Sensitive lands.”

Evidence means facts, documents, data or other information offered by a party to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with the standards believed to be relevant to the decision.

Exempt vegetation means a tree or other plant that is shown by the sun chart accompanying a solar access permit application to cast existing shade on a protected area.

Existing means present at the time of application for land use or development approval.

Expansion area means areas within the UGB, but outside of City limits, designated as expansion areas in the Bend Comprehensive Plan in Figure 11-4.

Exterior alteration means a change in the exterior structure of a building that alters the appearance of a building.

Extraterritorial connection of service means the connection of water or sanitary sewer service to developed property located outside the City limits and within the UGB.

Extraterritorial extension of a facility means the extension of a water or sanitary sewer line outside the City limits to serve an area within the UGB.

Extraterritorial service/facility contract means a contract between the owner of property outside the City limits proposed to be served with water and/or sewer service and the City specifying and identifying service provisions, obligations of the City and cost obligations of the owner of the property.


F

Family Day Care. See “Registered or certified family child care home” and “Child care facility.”

Farming or farm use means the utilization of land, including buildings customarily provided in conjunction with a farm use, for the purpose of generating income by raising, harvesting or selling crops, or for the feeding, breeding, management and sale of, or the product of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, or honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products, or for any other agricultural or horticultural use, animal husbandry, growing Christmas trees, timber agricultural or any combination thereof, including the preparation or processing and storage of products raised on such land for human and animal use, and disposal by marketing or otherwise. It does not include the construction and use of dwellings, or marijuana businesses.

Farm stands means a structure designed and used for the sale of farm crops or livestock grown on the farm, or grown on the farm and other farm operations in Oregon, including the sale of retail incidental items and fee-based activity to promote the sale of farm crops or livestock sold at the farm stand if the annual sale of incidental items and fees from promotional activity do not make up more than 25 percent of the total annual sales of the farm stand. “Farm stand” does not include structures designed for occupancy as a residence or for activity other than the sale of farm crops or livestock and does not include structures for banquets, public gatherings or public entertainment.

Fire apparatus access road means a road that provides fire apparatus access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway.

Fire lane means a road or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.

Fire break means a break in the ground cover fuels as specified by the fire protection agency involved.

Fish passage device means any manmade structure that is or may be used to enable fish to pass over a dam to move upstream.

Fish protection device means any manmade structure, such as a fish screen, which is or may be used to prevent fish from entering into or passing through conduits, penstocks, and other water-conducting structures or devices connected to a hydroelectric facility.

Flag lot means a lot or parcel that has access to a road or street by means of a narrow strip of lot that does not meet the typical minimum lot frontage standard.

Flood/flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1.    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

2.    The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood hazard area means the relatively flat area of lowlands adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or reservoir.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as designated on FIRM.

Floor area means the area measured in feet of horizontal decked space intended to be a floored surface contained within the a building or portion thereof, measured to the external face of the external walls, exclusive of vent shafts, and courts and basements. When calculating floor area, stairs are counted twice. 

Floor area ratio (FAR) means a measurement of building density calculated by dividing the gross enclosed floor area of a building measured to the external face of the external walls by the land area of the development.

Floor, lowest habitable means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest habitable floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this code.

Food and beverage services means restaurants, cafes, and similar types of land uses that prepare and serve edible goods for consumption by the customer including beverage service.

Forest management plan means an operation plan to reach landowner objectives and assures public benefits as they relate to producing timber and other values as determined by the Deschutes County Assessor. It shall include a cover map, basic forest stand description data, treatment opportunities, landowner objectives and a schedule for implementing the forest management plan pursuant to ORS 526.455.

Frontage means that portion of a parcel or lot of property that abuts a dedicated public street or highway or an approved private street or shared court private access drive.

Frontage Street or Road. See “Street or road.”

Functional classification means the classification given to streets (e.g., “local, collector, or arterial”) by the City’s Transportation System Plan (TSP), City of Bend Standards Manual, by adopted County plans, and the Oregon Department of Transportation.


G

Garage, private means an accessory building or portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of vehicles owned or used by occupants of the main building.

Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface. Existing grade means the existing condition of the elevation of the ground surface or the natural grade prior to grading, placement of fill, or the excavation or removal of earth from the site. Rough grade means the stage at which the grade substantially conforms, in an unfinished state, to an approved clearing and grading plan. Finished grade means the final grade of the site after all clearing and grading has been completed that conforms to an approved clearing and grading plan. 

Ground cover means a plant material or nonplant organic material (e.g., mulch, bark chips/dust) that is used to cover bare ground.


H

Hardscape means nonplant landscape materials, including pathways, decorative pavers, benches, drinking fountains, arbors, pergolas, playgrounds, plazas, and similar amenities.

Hearing, initial means a quasi-judicial public hearing authorized and conducted by the Hearings Body to determine if a Type III land use permit request shall be granted or denied.

Hearings body means the Hearings Officer, Planning Commission, or City Council of the City of Bend.

Hearings Officer means a planning and zoning hearings officer appointed or designated by the City Council or, in the absence of such appointed hearings officer, the Planning Commission.

Highest shade producing point means the highest shade producing point of a structure two hours before the solar zenith on December 21.

Hive means any Langstroth type structure with movable frames intended for the housing of a bee colony. A hive typically consists of a cover, honey supers, brood chambers and a bottom board.

Home business means a small revenue-producing use owned and/or operated by a resident of the home business site. A home business is operated within a primary dwelling unit or in an approved accessory structure or accessory dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for dwelling purposes and which complies with the conditions of BDC Chapters 2.1, Residential Districts (UAR, RL, RS, RM-10, RM, RH), and 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

Hospital means any institution, place, building, or agency which maintains and operates organized facilities for two or more persons for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness, including convalescence and care during and after pregnancy, or which maintains and operates organized facilities for any such purpose, and to which persons may be admitted for overnight stay or for a longer period.

Hostel means a shared-room (“dormitory”) accommodation that accepts individual travelers or groups for short-term stays, and that provides common areas and communal facilities. Travelers independently book individual beds in a shared room as opposed to booking entire rooms; however, some hostels may provide private rooms as well.

Human-scale design/development means site and building design elements that are dimensionally related to pedestrians, such as: small building spaces with individual entrances (e.g., as is typical of commercial and main street developments); larger buildings that have articulation and detailing to break up large masses; narrower streets with tree canopies; smaller parking areas or parking areas broken up into small components with landscaping; and pedestrian amenities, such as sidewalks, plazas, outdoor seating, lighting, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), and similar features. These features are all generally smaller in scale than those that are primarily intended to accommodate automobile traffic.

Hydroelectric facility means all aspects of any project or development necessary for or related to the generation of hydroelectric energy, including, but not limited to, conduits, dams, diversions, fish ladders and screens, generators, impoundments, penstocks, turbines, transmission facilities, and related buildings, structures, storage areas, access roads, parking areas, and surrounding and adjacent lands which are necessary for or related to the facility.


I

Immediate family means a spouse, registered domestic partner, parents, children, children of the spouse/registered domestic partner, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, parents of the spouse/registered domestic partner, and other close relatives who reside in the owner’s household.

Impervious surface means an improvement that does not allow for water infiltration into the ground (e.g., structures, pavement, roofs, etc.).

Impoundment means any human-made structure that is or may be used to confine or accumulate water.

Incidental and subordinate to means a use or portion of a development that is secondary to, and less apparent than, the primary use or other portion of the development.

Infill development means the development of vacant, bypassed lands located in an area that is mainly developed.

Infill, residential means:

1.    The development of up to three dwellings on land that is designated for residential use where at least 75 percent of the abutting properties have a structure but not counting any abutting property that is large enough that it can be divided into four or more lots or is currently developed with multifamily residential.

2.    A situation in which a single-family dwelling is removed to make way for up to three new dwellings (e.g., a single-family dwelling, duplex, or triplex).

3.    “Residential infill” does not apply to land that is large enough that it can be divided into four or more lots consistent with the minimum lot size of the zoning district.

Institution means a building or group of buildings or structures that are under common or related ownership that provide services including but not limited to public, educational, correctional and medical.

Institution of higher education means public or private vocational and trade schools, academies, colleges, and universities.


J

Junk means waste materials such as old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicles or appliances, or motor vehicle parts, iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material, metal or nonmetal materials.

Junkyard means any property or establishment where a person(s) is engaged in recycling, breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying or selling scrap or waste materials, or any establishment or place of business where there is accumulated on the premises eight or more motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of junk that is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling of junk, and the term includes automobile graveyards, wrecking yards, garbage dumps and scrap metal processing facilities.


K

Kennel means any premises where four or more dogs, cats, or other small domestic animals are kept commercially or primarily for profit, except licensed animal breeding facilities, veterinary clinics and animal hospitals.

Kitchen means any area designed or used for preparation or cooking of food, and including any of the following: a sink larger than 18 inches by 18 inches; a 220-volt electrical outlet; a gas or propane service line; a dishwashing machine; a range hood, exhaust vent, or similar equipment; or a stove, range, or oven.


L 

Land division means the process of dividing land to create parcels or lots.

Land use district is the same as a zoning district.

Landing means a level part of a staircase, as at the end of a flight of stairs.

Landscaping means any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Landscaping also includes irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil, and re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of existing trees.

Livable space means the gross space of a dwelling unit(s) utilized for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

Live/work dwelling unit means a structure or portion of a structure that combines a nonresidential use that is allowed in the zone with a residential livable space. A live/work dwelling unit is allowed instead of, or in addition to, a home business as defined by this code.

Lodging, hotel/motel means a building or portion thereof designed for and/or used for occupancy of transient individuals who are lodged with or without meals.

Lot means a unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.


[IMAGE]


Lot area means the total surface area (measured in square feet of horizontal area) within the boundary lines of a lot.

Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets, other than alleys, at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees within the lot line.

Lot coverage means all areas of a lot or parcel covered by buildings (as defined by building footprints) and other structures with surfaces greater than 18 inches above the finished grade, excluding unenclosed covered or uncovered porches, patios, decks, balconies or stoops up to five percent of the total lot area. Eaves are not included in lot coverage.

Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot or parcel lines. In the case of a corner lot the depth shall be the length of the longest front lot or parcel line.

Lot, interior means a lot or parcel of land other than a corner lot.

Lot line means any property line bounding a lot or parcel as herein defined.

Lot line, front means the property line abutting a street. Corner lots or parcels and through lots or parcels may have two or more front lot lines.

Lot line, rear means a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular-shaped lot, an assumed lot line 10 feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. There may be two or more rear yards for one lot.

Lot line, side means any lot or parcel line that is not a front or rear lot line.

Lot of record means a unit of land held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the Deschutes County Clerk, which conforms to all zoning and subdivision/partition requirements in effect on the date the unit of land was created.

Lot, through/double frontage means an interior lot having a frontage on two streets and/or highways, not including an alley.

Lot width means the average distance between the side property lines (the two property lines most perpendicular to the front property line). In the case of corner lots that include two or more front property lines, “lot width” shall mean the average distance between the longest front property line and the farthest opposite property line. In the case of irregularly shaped lots or parcels having four or more sides, “average lot width” is the sum of the shortest and longest property lines divided by two.


M

Maintain means to cause or allow or continue in existence. When the context indicates, the word shall mean to preserve and care for a structure, improvement, condition or area to such an extent that it remains attractive, safe and presentable and carries out the purpose for which it was installed, constructed or required.

Major intersection means an intersection where at least one intersecting road is classified as a collector or arterial.

Maneuvering area/aisle means a driving area where motor vehicles are able to turn around and/or access parking spaces.

Manufactured dwelling means:

•    Residential trailer means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed before January 1, 1962.

•    Mobile home means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

•    Manufactured home, except as provided in subsection (a) of this definition, means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction.

    For floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

a.    For purposes of implementing any contract pertaining to manufactured homes between the department and the federal government, manufactured home has the meaning given the term in the contract.

•    Manufactured dwelling does not include any building or structure constructed to conform to the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code or the Low-Rise Residential Dwelling Code or any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

Manufactured dwelling park means any place where four or more manufactured dwellings are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership. See BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards for Certain Uses, for standards related to manufactured dwelling parks.

Marijuana means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant of the Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. “Marijuana” does not include industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

Marijuana business means an establishment operated by any person or entity who is or will be appropriately licensed by the Oregon Health Authority or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission which sells, produces, cultivates, grows, wholesales, processes, researches, develops or tests medical marijuana or recreational adult use marijuana within the City of Bend. 

Marijuana grow sites means a specific location registered by the Oregon Health Authority and used by the grower to produce marijuana for medical use by a specific patient. Medical grow sites are regulated by State law as follows: 12 mature plants are allowed per grow site in residential zones; 48 mature plants per grow site in all other zones. If all grows at the site had registered with the State of Oregon by January 2, 2015, the grow site is limited to the number of plants at the grow site as of December 31, 2015, not to exceed 24 mature plants per grow site in residential zones and 96 mature plants per grow site in other zones. 

Marijuana items means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts. 

Marijuana processing means the preparing, compounding or conversion of marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, and cannabinoid extracts for medical or recreational purposes. 

Marijuana producing means the manufacturing, planting, cultivation, growing, or harvesting of marijuana as licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

Marijuana retailer means a person or entity licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to sell marijuana items to a consumer in this State.

Marijuana testing laboratory means a laboratory that tests marijuana items for producer, processor, wholesaler or retail licensees. 

Marijuana wholesaler means a person or entity that purchases marijuana items in this State for resale to a person other than a consumer.

Master plan means a development processed under BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, and includes both minor and major master plans.

Master plan, community means a master plan designed and intended primarily for residential uses.

Master plan, employment means a master plan designed and intended primarily for employment uses.

Master plan, institutional means a master plan designed and intended primarily for an institution, such as a medical campus or an institution of higher education.

Master plan, major means a master plan with deviations to development standards and/or zoning district requirements and/or includes amendments to the Bend Comprehensive Plan map designation(s) and/or zoning according to BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives.

Master plan, minor means a master plan with no deviations to development standards, zoning district requirements, Bend Comprehensive Plan map designations and zoning according to BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives.

Medical marijuana dispensary means a medical marijuana facility or entity registered with the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475.300 et seq.

Mitigation means measures undertaken to rectify, repair, or compensate for negative impacts that result from other actions (e.g., street infrastructure may be required to mitigate for transportation impacts resulting from development).

Mixed-use buildings or developments means a mix of residential and commercial uses that are mixed “vertically,” meaning that a residential use is developed above the commercial use, or mixed “horizontally,” meaning commercial and residential uses both occupy ground-floor space.

Modes of travel means vehicular, walking, biking and transit.

Modification of application means the applicant’s submittal of new information after an application has been deemed complete and prior to the close of the record on a pending application that would modify a development proposal by changing one or more of the following described components: proposed uses, operating characteristics, intensity, scale, site layout (including but not limited to changes in setbacks, access points, building design, size or orientation, parking, traffic or pedestrian circulation plans), or landscaping in a manner that requires the application of new criteria to the proposal or that would require the findings of fact to be changed. It does not mean an applicant’s submission of new evidence that merely clarifies or supports the pending application.

Multifamily residential means housing that provides four or more dwellings on an individual lot or parcel (e.g., multi-plexes, apartments, condominiums, etc.). See BDC 2.1.1000, Multifamily Residential Districts (RM, RH).

Multi-modal means a transportation system or right-of-way that plans for and provides for different transportation modes such as driving, walking, biking, and bus service.

Multi-Use Pathway. See “Access corridor.”

Municipal water supply system means a water supply source and distribution system owned and operated by a city or county or special district or other public corporation which has independent tax levying powers to support the system and which supplies water to a total of 1,000 or more households.

MUTCD means the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, published by the Federal Highway Administration.


N

Native plants means vegetation commonly found growing in Central Oregon.

Needed housing means all housing on land zoned for residential use or mixed residential and commercial use.

Neighborhood means a geographic district or area usually having distinguishing character or boundaries, not necessarily coinciding with the acknowledged neighborhood association boundaries.

Neighborhood association means an organization that has been formally recognized by Council resolution which offers an opportunity for citizens to participate in decision-making for their neighborhood.

Neighborhood commercial means certain types of small-scale neighborhood commercial uses identified in BDC Table 2.1.200, Permitted and Conditional Uses, that serve the neighborhood.

Nonconforming use/nonconforming development means a land use/structure that would not be permitted by the current code regulations, but was lawful at the time it was established. See BDC Chapter 5.2.

Nonnative plants means plants not typically growing in Central Oregon and those plants listed on the current Oregon State University Extension Service Bulletin list for Deschutes County.

Nonresident employee means an employee, business partner, co-owner, or other person affiliated with a home business, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home business.

Northern property line means the northerly edge of the lot or parcel on which an applicant’s structure is located, unless directly north of the lot or parcel is an unbuildable area, in which case “northern lot line” means the northerly edge of the unbuildable area.

North-south lot dimension means the length of a line beginning at the midpoint of the northern property line and extending a southerly direction perpendicular to the northern property line until it reaches a property boundary.

Nursing/convalescent homes (also see “Residential care facility”) means a residence, institution, or place other than a hospital or assisted living facility that operates and maintains facilities providing 24-hour convalescent or chronic care, or both, for two or more ill or infirm patients not related to the nursing home administrator or owner by blood or marriage. Convalescent and chronic care may include, but need not be limited to, the procedures commonly employed in nursing and caring for the sick. Note: For adult day care, see “Day care facility (adult).”




O

Open space (common, active or passive) means any property or area of land or water set aside, designed or reserved for the public or private use specifically for the purpose of providing places for recreation, conservation or other open space uses.

Opportunity area means locations within the City, as shown in the Bend Comprehensive Plan in Figure 11-1, that are appropriate to focus new growth due to their location, zoning (existing or planned), amount of vacant or underdeveloped land, and/or proximity to urban services.

Ordinary high water mark (OHWM) means the elevation of bank-full stage.

Oregon Scenic Waterway means the designated areas along the south and north portions of the Deschutes River within Bend that are designated and managed by the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department to protect State Planning Goal 5 scenic resources.

Orientation means to face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., “a building oriented to the street”).

Owner means the owner(s) of the title to real property on the most recent deed recorded with the County Clerk or the authorized agent who has written notarized authorization, or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the last available complete tax assessment roll or County Clerk’s records. “Owner” does not include an interest created for security purposes. For purposes of annexation, “owner” means a legal owner of record or, where a recorded land sale contract is in force, a purchaser under the land sale contract.

Owner-occupied short-term rental means an owner resides in a dwelling unit and rents up to two rooms to overnight guests for a period fewer than 30 consecutive days. The owner occupies the dwelling unit during the overnight rental period. Only part of the dwelling unit is used for rental purposes. The room(s) for rent cannot include rooms within a detached or attached accessory dwelling unit.


P 

Parcel means a unit of land created by a partitioning of land.

Park means an active or passive recreation facility owned and operated by the State of Oregon or Bend Park and Recreation District which provides for the recreational needs of the citizens of Bend. The types of BPRD facilities include neighborhood, community and regional parks. See also “Recreation facilities, public.”

Parking area, public means an open area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers.

Parking lane means one or more lanes of a street or roadway, usually on the outside edge, designated for the standing or parking of motor vehicles, whether or not delineated with striping on the pavement.

Parking, off-street means areas designed, used, required or intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles, which is not in a street right-of-way.

Parking, on-street means parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays.

Parking space means an area designed for the purpose of storing one motor vehicle.

Partition means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. Partition land does not include divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; lien-foreclosures; division of land resulting from foreclosures of recorded contracts for the sale of real property; and divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including but not limited to court order proceedings involving testate or intestate succession. Partition land does not include a “property line adjustment” or the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision even though the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or property by a single owner.

Party means one who takes part or participates in a Type II, III, or IV application or a legislative action. A party includes any person who has standing. A person can become a party by appearing on the record at a hearing (including appeals) or presenting written evidence in conjunction with an administrative action or hearing, or by being a property owner whose property would be burdened by a solar access permit. The City may designate a representative for persons whose participation consists only of signing a petition.

Pedestrian facilities means a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage walking, including sidewalks, pathways, walkways, access ways, crosswalks, ramps, paths, and trails.

Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, company, trustee, or any other legal entity.

Personal and professional service uses means businesses such as coffee shops/delis, dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, copy centers, banks, and financial institutions and similar uses and child care and similar uses. Personal and professional service uses does not include retail.

Phased tentative plan means a subdivision plan designed to be platted and constructed in more than one phase.

Place of worship means a place for people to gather for religious practice. Examples include churches, synagogues and mosques and accessory uses including bible study schools and day care.

Planning Commission means the Planning Commission of the City of Bend, Oregon. See BC 1.20.030, Planning Commission.

Planning Director, as used in this code, shall refer to the Development Services Director of the City of Bend or his or her designee.

Planning Manager means the City of Bend Community Development Department Planning Manager.

Plant nursery means retail and/or wholesale sales of shrubs, trees, ornamental bedding plants, and products associated with gardening.

Planter strip means an area for street trees and other plantings within the public right-of-way, usually between the street and sidewalk.

Plat includes a final subdivision plat, replat, or partition plat.

Plaza means a space for special events, outdoor seating, sidewalk sales, and similar pedestrian activity (e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, outdoor dining area, or landscape area with seating).

Preschool. See “Registered or certified family child care home,” “Day care,” and “Child care facility.”

Primary frontage means that portion of a parcel of property that abuts a dedicated public street, highway or an approved private street, and is the frontage with the primary public or customer entrance.

Primary, main building entrance means the main entrance closest to the public street by which pedestrians can access a building, structure or activity. Generally, smaller buildings have one main entrance. Main entrances may also be the widest of entrances provided for use by pedestrians. In multi-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into the building’s lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multi-tenant building does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant’s outside entrance is a main entrance. Buildings may also have main entrances opening directly into a reception or sales areas, a courtyard, or plaza.

Primary multi-use path means a multi-use path that is part of the more significant City-wide trail system that is illustrated on the Bend Urban Area Bicycle and Pedestrian System Plan.

Principal building means the largest building or buildings within a commercial center or business complex. Typically, this is the anchor tenant or tenants.

Proceeding means the review of a land use action either administratively by the Development Services Director or through the public hearing process by the Hearings Body.

Production office means an office use that employs large numbers of persons that are performing similar functions in shifts such as a call center or an insurance claims center.

Property line means the division line between two units of land.

Property line adjustment means a relocation or elimination of all or a portion of the common property line between abutting properties that does not create an additional lot or parcel.

Property Owner. See “Owner.”

PROWAG means Public Right-Of-Way Accessibility Guidelines.

Public facilities means infrastructure improvements including but not limited to water lines, sewer lines, streets, curbs, sidewalks, trails and related facilities that are owned and maintained by the City of Bend.

Public services mean those services that are inherent necessities to support development within the urban growth boundary. These include but are not limited to schools, parks, libraries, and emergency services.


Q

Qualified professional/individual means, for the purpose of preparing vegetation restoration or tree protection plans, assessing the health of trees or other similar activities, an individual approved by the City who through related training, or on-the-job experience, or both, possesses knowledge in one or more of the following subject areas: (1) arboriculture, (2) natural resources, including water resources and riparian restoration, and (3) urban interface fire protection.


R

Receiving property means a property to which density and housing mixes are transferred pursuant to the provisions of a major master plan.

Recreational facilities, public means a publicly owned facility, land, or improvements designated for leisure and recreational activities, open to the general public, with or without payment of fees.

Recreational facility, private means a recreation facility under private ownership and operated by a for-profit or nonprofit organization, open to members, and providing one or more of the following types of recreation activity, fitness center, indoor gymnasium, spa or health center including: tennis, handball, golf, squash, volleyball, racquetball, badminton, skate park and swimming.

Recreational marijuana means any marijuana intended for recreational use which meets all requirements for recreational marijuana contained in this chapter, Oregon State law, and any other applicable law. 

Recreational marijuana business means (1) any person or entity that cultivates, produces, distributes, possesses, transports, or makes available more than six marijuana plants or one ounce of marijuana, (2) any person that sells any amount of marijuana, or (3) any person who possesses marijuana openly or publicly. The term “recreational marijuana business or retail” shall not include the private cultivation, possession, production, or use within a person’s residence of no more than (1) six plants in an enclosed, locked space, (2) one ounce of marijuana, or (3) the marijuana produced by no more than six plants on the premises where the plants were grown if the plants were grown in an enclosed, locked space. 

Recreational vehicle means a vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes and as further defined, by rule, by the Director of the Department of Consumer and Business Services.

Recreational vehicle means, for floodplain management purposes, a vehicle which is:

1.    Built on a single chassis;

2.    Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.    Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Redemption center means an indoor retail facility approved by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission facilitating the return of empty beverage containers and serving dealers of beverages, where any person may return empty beverage containers and receive payment of the refund value of such beverage containers.

Refinement Plan means a more detailed plan than a Comprehensive Plan and applies to a specific geographic area. Refinement Plans are located in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

Regional corporate office means a building or portion of a building in which persons are employed in the management or direction of a business consisting of one or more divisions or groups of companies. Commerce with the general public is not a normal function of a regional corporate office.

Registered or certified family child care home means a location where child care is offered in the home of the provider to not more than 16 children, including children of the provider, regardless of full-time or part-time status. Registered or certified family child care homes shall be considered a permitted residential use of the property for zoning purposes.

Replat means the act of platting lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.

Residence. See “Dwelling unit.”

Residential care facility means a facility that provides, for six or more socially dependent individuals or individuals with physical disabilities, residential care in one or more buildings on contiguous properties.

Residential care home, also defined in ORS as “residential facility,” means a residential treatment or training home, a residential facility or an adult foster home that provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment, training or both for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements are not counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home. “Residential care home” also includes any group home for persons with a disability, regardless of the number of residents, protected from zoning discrimination under the Fair Housing Act.

Residential caretaker unit means a dwelling unit for caretakers living on site.

Retaining wall means a vertical, or near vertical, structure, that holds back soil or rock, and prevents movement of material down slope or erosion on a site.
[IMAGE]


Review Authority means the Development Services Director, Planning Commission, Hearings Officer, or City Council of the City of Bend.

Right-of-way means land that is owned by the public for transportation and utility facilities.

Riparian area means an area of land where annual and intermittent water, a high water table and wet soils influence vegetation and microclimate.

Riparian corridor means the area within and adjacent to the Deschutes River and Tumalo Creek that includes water areas, fish and wildlife habitat, wetlands, and riparian vegetation and other State Planning Goal 5 resources to be conserved and protected.

Roadway means that portion of a street or road developed for vehicular traffic.

Roof pitch means the slope of a roof, usually described as a ratio (e.g., one foot of rise per two feet of horizontal distance).


S

Safety issue means one or more fatalities or severe injury crashes, one or more reported crashes per 1,000,000 entering vehicles, or if any location within the study area is included within published safety studies, such as the Oregon Department of Transportation Safety Priority Index System lists, ODOT Safety Action Plan, or the City’s Arterial and Collector Multimodal Safety Study.

Sale/lease means the disposition or transfer of land in a land division or an interest or estate therein, by a developer or their agents. Includes the offering of land as a prize or gift when a monetary charge or consideration for whatever purpose is required by the developer, or their agents.

School means a public or private facility that provides teaching or learning. Typical uses include elementary, junior and senior high schools and related uses, except as otherwise specifically defined in this code. “School” does not include a child care facility, preschool, day care, or an institution of higher education as defined in this chapter.

Sensitive lands means wetlands, significant trees, steep slopes, floodplains and other natural resource areas designated for protection or conservation by the Bend Comprehensive Plan or the State of Oregon.

Setback means the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a property line, to the nearest vertical wall, building footprint or other element of a building or structure as defined herein. Note: Where a public access easement abuts the street or alley in lieu of right-of-way, the interior easement line becomes an assumed property boundary for the purposes of setbacks.

Shade means a shadow, except a shadow caused by a narrow object, including but not limited to a utility pole, an antenna, a wire, or flag pole.

Shaded, substantially means less than 80 percent of the available solar insolation is available during winter solar heating hours to either the south roof and/or wall of an existing or potential structure.

Shared court means an infill development with dwelling units on separate lots that may front onto a courtyard-like private access drive designed to accommodate – within the same circulation space – access for pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties.



Shared driveway means when land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway for ingress and egress.

Shared parking means required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land, which is satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that their needs for parking facilities do not materially overlap (e.g., daytime versus nighttime primary uses). See BDC Chapter 3.3.

Shopping street means a public or private street or drive designed with the elements of a pedestrian-oriented public street: such as buildings with close orientation to the street, on-street parking, wide sidewalks, street trees, and pedestrian-scale lighting. See BDC Chapter 2.2, Commercial Zoning Districts (CB, CC, CL, CG).

Short-term rental means the use of a dwelling unit by any person or group of persons entitled to occupy for rent for a period of less than 30 consecutive days. Short-term rentals also include vacation home rentals approved under the regulations in effect through April 15, 2015, and owner-occupied short-term rentals, but does not include bed and breakfast inns, hotels and motels.

Short-term rental permit means a Type I or Type II development application authorizing a short-term rental or short-term room rental. Type I short-term rental permits are decisions that are made under land use standards that do not require interpretation or the exercise of policy or legal judgment under ORS 197.015(10)(b)(A). Type II short-term rental permits are limited land use decisions.

Sidewalk means a paved space usually within the street right-of-way designed and approved by the City, and designated for the movement of pedestrians, and meeting the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act.

Significant trees/significant vegetation means individual trees with a specific trunk diameter (as indicated below) as measured four feet above the ground (known as DBH, for “diameter at breast height”).

1.    Deciduous trees: six inches or greater.

2.    Coniferous trees: 10 inches or greater.

Site means a property (or group of adjacent parcels or lots under the same ownership) that is subject to a permit application under this code.

Slope. The amount of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed as a percentage or by degrees.

Small hydroelectric facility means a hydroelectric facility that produces up to 40 megawatts, and which qualifies for a FERC exemption for City of Bend municipal use.

Small scale alternative energy system means those energy systems that provide a limited amount of energy directly to the user from renewable sources such as solar, wind and water (hydro systems). Typically, a small scale system would have a capacity of no more than 10 kW for solar or wind and 100 kW for hydro. For small hydroelectric facilities for City of Bend municipal use see BDC 3.6.300(Q), Small Hydroelectric Facilities.

Solar access means protection from shade for a specific area during specific hours and dates, but not including protection from shade cast by exempt vegetation.

Solar access permit means the instrument issued by the City which limits the size of nonexempt vegetation on certain lots in the vicinity of a recorded solar collector.

Solar heating hours means the hours and dates during which solar access is provided.

Solar height restriction means the allowable height of buildings, structures, and nonexempt vegetation on a property burdened by the solar access of another property.

Special planned districts means detailed plans. Special planned districts are located in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

Step-back means a portion of a building’s facade in which the upper story(ies) are set further from the property line(s) than the lower story(ies), forming a flat shelf or step between them.

Stormwater facility means a detention and/or retention pond, swale, drywell, or other surface water feature that provides storage during high-rainfall events and/or water quality treatment.

Story means that part of a building intended for occupancy located between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor above, or if there is no floor above, then the finished ceiling directly above. A basement is not counted as a story. (See illustration for “story” following the definition for “basement” in this section.) Occupiable space located above a garage is not considered a second story if the ridge/peak or height of the roof above the garage is equal to or lower than the peak/ridge or height of the primary one-story dwelling unit.

Street access means safe and efficient passage for pedestrians and vehicles to circulate from private and public property through a connected street system. See BDC 3.1.400.

Street connectivity means street or road connections or intersection within a specific geographic area generally achieved through the use of a grid street pattern.

Street furniture/furnishings means benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mailboxes, kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities located within a street right-of-way.

Street grade means (1) a reference to the slope of a street, or (2) the reference point for measuring the height of a building in the CBD Zone.

Street or road means a public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley or shared court private access drive, which affords access to two or more parcels of abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare.

The eight types of streets are:

1.    Arterial means a restricted access street of substantial continuity which is primarily a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas, and so designated by the City of Bend. These include principal, major and minor arterials.

2.    Collector means a restricted access street supplementary to the arterial street system used or intended to be used principally for the movement of traffic, bicyclists, and pedestrians between arterials and local streets. These include major collectors.

3.    Cul-de-sac means a short street having one end open to traffic and terminated by a circular vehicle turnaround. Cul-de-sacs must include partial cul-de-sac bulbs or “eyebrows” designed and developed according to City standards.

4.    Expressway means a major highway with limited access that is designed for fast travel.

5.    Frontage road means a minor street parallel to a major arterial providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.

6.    Local means a street intended primarily for access to abutting properties.

7.    Mid-block lane means a narrow, limited use roadway facility usually used to access a limited number of dwelling units, similar to an alley in design. See BDC 4.3.700, Infill Development Options.

8.    T-courts means a private street less than or equal to 150 feet in length that has one end open to traffic and is terminated by a rectangular or “hammerhead” vehicle turnaround.

Street stub means a temporary street ending; i.e., where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as those properties develop. Not a permanent street-end, dead-end street or cul-de-sac.

Street tree means a tree planted in the right-of-way adjacent to the street.

Structure means anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming and wading pools, decks, and covered patios, but excepting ground-level outdoor areas such as paved areas, driveways or walks. “Building” and “structure” are not interchangeable terms. A building is one type of structure that shelters humans, animals and the like.

Subdivision means to divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year.

Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1.    Before the improvement or repair is started; or

2.    If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either:

1.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.    Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

Sun chart means a photograph or photographs, taken in accordance with the guidelines of the Development Services Director, which plots the position of the sun during each hour of the day and each month of the year relative to a protected area. The sun chart shall contain at a minimum:

1.    Solar altitude in 10-degree increments;

2.    Solar azimuth measured from true south in 15-degree increments;

3.    If the solar collector is more than 20 feet wide, the southern skyline as seen from the two end points and from the center point of the lower edge of the protected area; or

4.    A clear delineation of the existing objects which cast shadows on the protected area, including hills, structures, and deciduous and evergreen vegetation.

Supplementation of application means an applicant’s submittal of additional evidence or argument that merely clarifies or supports a pending application, but which does not constitute a “modification of application” as defined herein.

Swale means a type of stormwater facility. A broad, shallow depression used to provide a required volume of on-site storage for stormwater, typically planted with plants that filter and process contaminants.


T

Tandem parking means     the parking of a motor vehicle behind another, such that a vehicle needs to be moved in order to move the other vehicle.

Tasting room means a retail use or an ancillary use to a food and beverage processing and packaging use, that is associated with a brewery, winery, cidery or distillery, where guests sample and purchase products. No food for sale or full-size beverages are served on site.

Temporary housing means a permanent facility providing temporary shelter for individuals and/or families who are homeless or in transition. Services may be provided including, but not limited to, accommodations, meals, toilet/bathing facilities, clothing/laundry, case management services and information on or referral to other community resources.

Tentative plan means a map setting forth the proposed plan of a partition or subdivision in conformance with the provisions of this code and subject to review and modification; not a plat as defined herein.

Topographical constraint means where existing slopes, wetlands, water bodies, rock outcroppings, or other physical features of a site, which are not caused or created by the applicant or his or her agents, prevent conformance with a code standard.

Tract, private/public means a piece of land in an approved partition or subdivision that is set aside from the created lots or parcels for dedication to the public, a homeowners’ association, or other entity (e.g., for open space, future development, recreation facilities, sensitive lands, private streets or private alleys, shared court private access drives, or other similar purposes).

Traffic calming means a design or set of street design features, such as traffic circles, chicanes, curb bulb-outs, chokers, or neck-downs, used to slow traffic, reduce pedestrian crossing distances, define areas of pedestrian travel, and discourage nonlocal traffic.

Traffic control means any sign, signal, roundabout, median or other device placed, operated or erected under authority of a road authority, as defined by State law, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

Trails. See “Access corridor.”

Transit facility means public or private improvements at selected points along existing or future transit routes for passenger pick-up, drop off and waiting. Improvements may include pullouts, shelters, waiting areas, benches, information and directional signs or structures, and lighting.

Transit-oriented development means development at or within one-fourth mile walking distance of a transit center, transit stop, or station. Development or design of the site places a priority on facilitating safe and convenient pedestrian circulation and access, reducing automobile reliance and parking needs, and minimizing conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians.

Transit route means an existing or future route for public intra-city or intra-urban transit service in the local or regional transportation plan, not including temporary routes or routes which are planned to be replaced.

Transmission facility means the conductors, lines, poles, towers, structures, corridors, and construction staging and assembly areas necessary for or associated with the transmission of electricity from a generating facility for distribution.

Transportation corridor means a linear or curvilinear area of existing or planned right-of-way, defined by the outer edges of the existing or planned right-of-way, which contains or will contain improvements intended for one or more modes of transportation. Transportation corridors are generally composed of collector streets and those of higher classification, but may include portions of the local street system where traffic on the local streets influences the higher classification streets.

Transportation Demand Management (TDM) means the application of strategies and policies to reduce travel demand (specifically that of private vehicles), or to redistribute this demand in space or in time.

Transportation facilities and infrastructure means the physical improvements used to move people and goods from one place to another (i.e., streets, sidewalks, pathways, bike lanes, airports, transit stations and bus stops, etc.).

Transportation Mitigation Plan means an adopted plan for an area in the City that contains alternate transportation designs and functionality standards. A Transportation Mitigation Plan is typically adopted into this code as part of an Area Plan or Master Plan Development.

Transportation mode means the method of moving people or goods (e.g., automobile, bus, walking, bicycling, etc.).

Transportation System Plan (TSP) means an overall plan for all transportation modes in the urban area as required by the Transportation Planning Rule. Major policy issues in the TSP are discussed in the Transportation Systems chapter in the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

Travel lane means one or more lanes or a street or roadway designed and designated for the movement of motor vehicles, whether or not delineated with striping on the pavement.

Travel trailer means either a vacation or a self-propelled vehicle or structure equipped with wheels for street or highway use, intended for human occupancy, and being used for vacation and recreational purposes, but not for residential purposes, and equipped with plumbing, sink or toilets.

Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park or campground means a lot or parcel upon which two or more travel trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, tent trailers, tent sites, campers or similar vehicles or devices are located or permitted on an outright basis (except as used for storage purposes, or otherwise approved as a temporary use), regardless of whether a fee is charged for such accommodations.

Triplex means three dwelling units on one lot or parcel. For permitting purposes, units may be attached vertically or horizontally or detached.


U

Unbuildable area means an area in which a structure could not be built as a permitted or conditional use under the provisions of this code.

Unbundling parking means that parking is sold, leased, or rented separately from the building or main use of the lot or parcel.

Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) means the urban growth boundary as adopted by the City and County and acknowledged by the State, as set forth in the Bend Comprehensive Plan and as shown on the Bend Comprehensive Plan map.

Urbanizable Area (UA) District means the unincorporated area inside the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) but outside the City limits, except for the land withdrawn from the City of Bend by the County by City Resolution 2459.

Usable marijuana means the dried leaves and flowers of marijuana. “Usable marijuana” does not include: 

1.    The seeds, stalks and roots of marijuana; or 

2.    Waste material that is a by-product of producing or processing marijuana.

Use means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

Use, primary means an activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use. The primary use usually occupies more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of a building or consists of more than 50 percent of a development, but floor area percentage may not be determinative of primary use on its own. 

Use, secondary means any approved use of land or a structure that is incidental and subordinate to the primary use, and located in the same building or in the same development area as the primary use. Secondary uses do not occur or exist in the absence of at least one primary use. Secondary uses are not accessory uses, except as otherwise provided in this code. 

Utilities means water and sewer facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, and other services providing for energy or communication needs.


V

Variance means an administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this code. See BDC Chapter 5.1, Variances.

Vertical clearance means the distance between the lowest point of an overhanging structure and the pavement of a driveway or street.

Veterinary clinic means a facility rendering surgical and medical treatment to animals, which may include overnight accommodations for purposes of recovery or boarding. For the purpose of these regulations, small animals shall be deemed to be ordinary household pets, excluding horses, donkeys, or other such animals not normally housed or cared for entirely within the confines of a residence.


W

Water-dependent means a use or activity which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for water-borne transportation, recreation, energy production, or source of water.

Water-related means uses which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent land or waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in public loss of quality in the goods or services offered. Except as necessary for water-dependent or water-related uses or facilities, residences, parking lots, spoils and dump sites, roads and highways, restaurants, businesses, factories, and trailer parks are not generally considered dependent on or related to water location needs.

Wet bar means an area within a dwelling unit, other than a kitchen, that contains a sink with a maximum size of 18 inches by 18 inches. The maximum size of the trap arm and drain for the wet bar sink must not exceed one and one-half inches. The area is not a wet bar if any of the following is also present: a sink larger than 18 inches; a 220-volt electrical outlet; a gas or propane service line; a dishwashing machine; a range hood, exhaust vent, or similar equipment; or a stove, range, or oven. 


Y

Yard means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this code. In determining the required yard for properties abutting the Deschutes River, the edge of the river shall be considered the property line. The edge of the river shall be determined by the ordinary high water mark in conformance with BDC 2.7.600, Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ).

Yard, front means an open space extending the full width of the lot between the front facade of a building or the front of an unenclosed porch and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this code.

Yard, rear means an open space extending the full width of the lot between the rear facade of a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this code.

Yard, side means an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side facade of a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this code.


Z Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20

Zero lot line subdivision or partition means a type of residential subdivision or partition with no setback between dwelling units and providing for individual ownership of each lot.

Zoning district means an area defined by the City’s Zoning Map. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2293, 2017; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2265, 2016; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2263, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2137, 2009; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2107, 2008; Ord. NS-2082, 2007; Ord. NS-2072, 2007; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1914, 2004; Ord. NS-1877, 2003; Ord. NS-1625, 1994; Ord. NS-1584, 1993]


Chapter 1.3 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.3.100    Provisions of This Code Declared to Be Minimum Requirements.

1.3.200    Violation of Code Prohibited.

1.3.300    Violation of This Code as Civil Infraction.


1.3.100 Provisions of This Code Declared to Be Minimum Requirements.

A.    Minimum Requirements Intended. The provisions of this code are minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B.    Most Restrictive Requirements Apply. When the requirements of this code vary from or conflict with other applicable standards, the most restrictive or the highest standard shall govern. When requirements of this code vary from or conflict with other provisions of this code, the more specific provision shall prevail over a more general provision. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.3.200 Violation of Code Prohibited.

Construction, alteration, maintenance or use of any building or structure or land division or transfer in violation of this code is prohibited.

Except to the extent that this code provides decision-making authority to others, City planning staff shall administer this code and shall apply the standards and criteria in this code to all applications for approval required or authorized by this code. No building permits may be issued for any structure that lacks an approval required by this code. Any use of land in violation of this code is declared to be a nuisance. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


1.3.300 Violation of This Code as Civil Infraction.

A.    Violating any provision of this code is a Class A civil infraction. The City may seek injunctive relief to compel compliance and restoration of pre-violation status quo as part of the civil infraction proceedings. If a violation is ongoing, each day that a violation remains is a separate violation. The civil penalty for removal of a significant tree is shown in Table 1.3.1.

 

Table 1.3.1 

	Tree Size	Civil Penalty

	4 – 6 inches DBH	$1,000

	6 – 10 inches DBH	$1,500

	10 – 16 inches DBH	$3,000

	Greater than 16 inches DBH	$5,000

B.    Injunctive Relief and Abatement.

1.    The civil infraction process and civil penalties are in addition to any legal or equitable remedy available to the City.

C.    Mitigation for the Removal of Vegetation. The Review Authority may require the replacement of vegetation removed in violation of this code or in violation of a land use approval. The City may require a greater number of trees or shrubs than was removed in order to take into account total vegetation volume, but may also accept a lesser amount of vegetation replacement based on a fire mitigation plan submitted by a qualified professional and approved by the City. The amount of replacement trees, shrubs, and ground cover shall be determined by the volume of removed vegetation. The City may require the property owner to prepare and comply with a mitigation plan providing for planting and maintenance of replacement vegetation, with provisions for replacement of plants that die within three years of planting. The mitigation plan is subject to City approval. The City may refuse to accept any development permit application for a property for which a mitigation plan is required and has not been executed or complied with.

D.    Evidence. In a legal proceeding for noncompliance with this code, the owner or lessee at the time of the violation shall be presumed to be responsible for the violation. This presumption may be overcome by a preponderance of the evidence showing that the violation was committed by some person other than the owner and/or possessor and that the owner and/or possessor was not able to control or prevent the violation. Persons who are not owners and/or possessors are responsible for the violation if their action or failure to act causes the violation. The person responsible for property tax payment is considered the owner. Where commercial premises have a sign identifying the business on the property, that business is rebuttably presumed to be responsible for violation on the premises. Agents, managers or employees are also responsible for their acts or omissions that constitute violations. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Title 2 LAND USE DISTRICTS Revised 11/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20

Chapters: 

2.0    Land Use District Administration

2.1    Residential Districts (UAR, RL, RS, RM-10, RM, RH) Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20

2.2    Commercial Zoning Districts (CB, CC, CL, CG)

2.3    Mixed-Use Zoning Districts (ME, MR, PO, MU, and MN)

2.4    Industrial Zoning Districts (IG, IL)

2.5    Surface Mining Zoning District (SM)

2.6    Public Facilities Zoning District (PF)

2.7    Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans Revised 11/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20

2.8    Urbanizable Area District (UA)


Chapter 2.0 LAND USE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

2.0.100    Classification of Land Use Districts.

2.0.200    Land Use District Map.

2.0.300    Determination of Land Use District Boundaries.


2.0.100 Classification of Land Use Districts.

All areas within the urban growth boundary of the City of Bend are divided into land use districts. The use of each lot, parcel and tract of land is limited to the uses permitted by the applicable land use district. The applicable land use district is determined based on the Zoning Map, and the provisions of this chapter. The following table lists the land use districts within this code:

Table 2.0.100 – Classification of Land Use Districts  

	Land Use Districts

	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS, CHAPTER 2.1

	Area Reserve District (UAR)

	Low Density Residential (RL)

	Standard Density Residential (RS)

	Medium-10 Density Residential (RM-10)

	Medium Density Residential (RM)

	High Density Residential (RH)

	COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS, CHAPTER 2.2

	Convenience Commercial District (CC)

	Limited Commercial (CL)

	General Commercial District (CG)

	Central Business District (CBD)

	EMPLOYMENT, CHAPTER 2.3

	Mixed-Use Districts

	• Mixed Employment (ME)

	• Mixed-Use Riverfront (MR)

	• Professional Office (PO)

	GENERAL INDUSTRIAL, CHAPTER 2.4

	General Industrial District (IG)

	Light Industrial District (IL)

	SURFACE MINING, CHAPTER 2.5

	Surface Mining District (SM)

	PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICT, CHAPTER 2.6

	Public Facilities District (PF)

	SPECIAL PLANNED DISTRICTS, CHAPTER 2.7

	Lava Ridge Refinement Plan

	NorthWest Crossing Refinement Plan

	Dean Swift Refinement Plan

	Waterway Overlay Zone

	Upland Areas of Special Interest

	Medical District Overlay

	Farmington Reserve Master Planned Development

	Stone Creek Master Planned Development

	URBANIZABLE AREA DISTRICT, CHAPTER 2.8

	Urbanizable Area District (UA)

[Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2293, 2017; amended during 11/14 supplement; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.0.200 Land Use District Map.

A.    Consistency with Zoning Map. The boundaries of each of the land use districts contained within this chapter shall coincide with the land use district boundaries identified on the City’s official Zoning Map, retained by the Development Services Director or designee. Said map by this reference is made a part of this Development Code. A certified print of the adopted Zoning Map, and any map amendments, shall be maintained by the City. Refinement Plan maps are included in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

B.    Applicability of Zoning Requirements. Each lot, tract and parcel of land or portion thereof within the land use district boundaries as designated and marked on the Zoning Map is classified, zoned and limited to the uses as hereinafter specified and defined for the applicable district classification. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006] 


2.0.300 Determination of Land Use District Boundaries.

A.    Land Use District Map Amendments. All amendments to the City Land Use District (Zoning) Map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures.

1.    Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the ordinance or order adopting the map amendment, and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting documents, on file at the City; and

2.    The City shall make available for public inspection a current copy of the revised Zoning Map, so that it accurately portrays changes of zone boundaries or classification.

3.    Refinement Plans must go through the process described in BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures.

B.    Conflicts. Where due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the City Zoning District Map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of district boundary lines, the boundary lines shall be determined by the Planning Director or designee in accordance with the following:

1.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, railroad tracks or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines;

2.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundaries of a parcel, lot, or tract shall be construed as following such boundaries;

3.    If a zone boundary divides a lot into two or more zones, the boundary shall be determined by using the scale of the map and measuring the distance from the property line or distances specified on the map; 

4.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following a City boundary or the Urban Growth Boundary shall be construed as following said boundary;

5.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following river, stream and/or drainage channels or basins shall be construed as following river, stream and/or drainage channels or basins, as applicable; and

6.    Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall automatically be subject to the same land use district designation that is applicable to lands abutting the vacated area. In cases where the right-of-way formerly served as a land use district boundary, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall be allocated proportionately between the subject land use districts.

C.    Zoning of Annexed Areas. If a zoning reclassification for lands annexed to the City of Bend is necessary, said lands will be reclassified to a zone consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan automatically upon annexation. Any conditions, limitations or restrictions previously applied by the County to regulate a development of land annexed to the City will continue to apply until replaced by the City. Where appropriate, the City may continue any restrictions, limitations and/or conditions and enforce them pursuant to the effective codes and procedures. See also BDC Chapter 4.9, Annexations. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 2.1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20

(UAR, RL, RS, RM-10, RM, RH)

Sections:

2.1.100    Purpose, Applicability and Location. Revised 2/20

2.1.200    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.1.300    Setbacks.

2.1.400    Building Mass and Scale.

2.1.500    Lot Area and Dimensions. Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20

2.1.600    Residential Density. Revised 1/19

2.1.700    Maximum Lot Coverage.

2.1.800    Building Height.

2.1.900    Architectural Design Standards. Revised 1/19

2.1.1000    Multifamily Residential Districts (RM, RH).

2.1.1100    Other Design Standards.


2.1.100 Purpose, Applicability and Location. Revised 2/20

A.    Purpose. Residential Districts are intended to promote the livability, stability, safety and improvement of the City of Bend’s neighborhoods based on the following principles:

•    Make efficient use of land and public services, and implement the Comprehensive Plan, by providing minimum and maximum density standards for housing.

•    Accommodate a range of housing needs, including owner-occupied and rental housing.

•    Provide for compatible building and site design at an appropriate neighborhood scale which reflects the neighborhood character.

•    Reduce reliance on the automobile for neighborhood travel and provide options for walking and bicycling.

•    Provide direct and convenient access to schools, parks and neighborhood services.

B.    Applicability. This chapter applies to all development in the Urban Area Reserve District (UAR), Low Density Residential District (RL), Standard Density Residential District (RS), Medium-10 Density Residential District (RM-10), Medium Density Residential District (RM), and High Density Residential District (RH). These districts are identified on the City’s official Zoning Map. Properties designated within each district that contain additional standards must comply with the provisions of the applicable district, except as may be modified by this section. Properties within a designated Historic District must comply with the provisions of BC Chapter 10.20.

Table 2.1.100 

Zone District Characteristics  

	Zone District	Location and Characteristics

	Urban Area Reserve (UAR)	The Urban Area Reserve District is a holding zone for urban development. The maximum residential density for the district is 1 dwelling unit per 10 gross acres.

	Low Density Residential (RL)	The Low Density Residential District consists of large urban residential lots that are served with a community water system and DEQ permitted community sewer, private on-site septic systems, or municipal sewer systems. The residential density range in this district is 1.1 to 4.0 dwelling units per gross acre.

	Standard Density Residential (RS)	The Standard Density Residential District is intended to provide opportunities for a wide variety of residential housing types at the most common residential densities in places where community sewer and water services are available. The residential density range in this district is 4.0 to 7.3 dwelling units per gross acre.

	Medium-10 Density Residential (RM-10)	The Medium-10 Density Residential District is intended to provide opportunities for manufactured home park development and a variety of single- and multifamily residential housing types. The density range in this district is 6.0 to 10.0 dwelling units per gross acre.

	Medium Density Residential (RM)	The Medium Density Residential District is intended to provide primarily for the development of multifamily residential in areas where sewer and water service are available. The residential density range in the district is 7.3 to 21.7 units per gross acre and must provide a transitional use area between other Residential Districts and other less restrictive areas.

	High Density Residential (RH)	The High Density Residential District is intended to provide land for primarily high density multifamily residential in locations close to shopping and services, transportation and public open space. The density range of the district is 21.7 to 43.0 units per gross acre and must provide a transitional use area between other Residential Districts and other less restrictive areas.

[Ord. NS-2361, 2020; Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.200 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

A.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.1.200 are permitted in the Residential Districts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.1.200, land uses that are incidental and subordinate to a permitted use and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.1.200 may be permitted. The land uses identified with a “C” in Table 2.1.200 require conditional use permit approval prior to development, in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits.

B.    Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations must be made in conformance with the procedures in BDC 4.1.1400, Declaratory Ruling.

C.    Exceptions. Existing uses and buildings lawfully established under previously effective land use regulations are allowed to continue subject to BDC Chapter 5.2, except as otherwise specified in this section.

1.    Existing single-family detached housing, single-family courtyard housing, and manufactured home parks that were lawfully established in their current location prior to the adoption of this code are treated as permitted uses in the RH Zone unless originally approved through a conditional use permit, in which case they must remain subject to any applicable conditions of approval. Such uses are not subject to BDC Chapter 5.2 unless otherwise nonconforming.

 

Table 2.1.200 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	RL	RS	RM-10	RM	RH	UAR

	Residential	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Single-family detached housing	P	P	P	P	N	P

	*Single-family courtyard housing	C/P**	P	P	P	N	C

	*Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*Manufactured homes on individual lots	P	P	P	P	N	P

	*Manufactured home park	C	C	P	P	N	N

	*Attached single-family townhomes	N/P**	P	P	P	P	N

	*Two- and three-family housing	 	 	 	 	 	 

	• Duplex when located on a corner lot	P	P	P	P	P	N

	• Duplex on other lot or parcel	C/P**	P	P	P	P	N

	• Triplex	C/P**	P	P	P	P	N

	Residential care home (5 or fewer residents)	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Adult day care	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Residential care facility (6 or more residents)	N	N	C	P	P	N

	Family childcare home (16 or fewer children)	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*Multifamily residential (more than 3 units)	N/P**	N/P**	P	P	P	N

	*Home business (Class A/Class B/Class C)	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*Temporary housing	C	C	C	C	C	N

	*Accessory uses and structures	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*Public and Institutional	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Places of worship	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Clubs, lodges, similar uses	C	C	C	C	C	C

	*Government offices and facilities (administration, public safety, utilities, and similar uses)	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Libraries, museums, community centers, and similar uses	C	C	C	C	C	C

	*Utilities (above ground)	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Neighborhood parks	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Community parks	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Regional parks	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Recreational facilities (public)	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Schools	C/P**	C/P**	C/P**	C/P**	C/P**	C/P**

	Cemetery/mausoleum	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Child care facility (17 or more children)	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Hospital	C	C	C	C	C	C

	*Neighborhood Commercial (See 3.6.300(J))	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Child care facility (13 or more children)	C/N***	P/N***	P/N***	P	P	N

	*Food and beverage services less than 2,000 square feet (with or without alcohol)	C/N***	C/N***	C/N***	C/P***	P	N

	Laundromats and dry cleaners	C/N***	C/N***	P/N***	P	P	N

	Retail sales and services	C/N***	C/N***	P/N***	P	P	N

	Personal services (e.g., barber shops, salons, similar uses)	C/N***	P/N***	P/N***	P	P	N

	Repair services, conducted entirely within building; excluding vehicle repair, small engine repair and similar services	C/N***	C/N***	C/N***	C/P***	C/P***	N

	Offices and clinics	C/N***	C/N***	P/N***	P	P	N

	Mixed-use building	C/N***	C/N***	P/N***	P	P	N

	*Miscellaneous Uses	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Bed and breakfast inn	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Boarding kennel	N	N	N	N	N	C

	Destination resorts	N	N	N	N	N	C

	Diagnostic testing, counseling, administrative offices, meeting facilities for nonprofit and public community service programs for children and families.	C	C	C	C	C	N

	Farm use, agriculture	N	N	N	N	N	P

	Office uses lawfully existing prior to the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code	N	N	N	P	P	N

	*Plant nursery	 	 	 	 	 	 

	• Existing	P	P	P	P	P	P

	• New (limited to 1 acre)	C	C	C	C	N	C

	• New (larger than 1 acre)	N	N	N	N	N	C

	*Short-term rental	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*Small hydroelectric facility	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Veterinary clinic	 	 	 	 	 	 

	• Small animal (only)	C	N	N	N	N	N

	• Large animal	C	N	N	N	N	C

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	Key to Districts:	 

	UAR = Urban Area Reserve	RL = Low Density Residential

	RS = Standard Density Residential	RM = Medium Density Residential

	RM-10 = Medium-10 Density Residential	RH = High Density Residential

	 	 

	Key to Permitted Uses	 

	P = Permitted, subject to BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures

	N = Not Permitted

	C = Conditional Use, subject to permit standards in BDC Chapter 4.4.

*    Subject to special standards as described in BDC 2.1.900, Architectural Design Standards, and/or BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

**    Permitted as part of a master plan subject to BDC Chapter 4.5.

***    Neighborhood commercial sites adjacent to a commercial or mixed-use Comprehensive Plan map designation. See BDC 3.6.300(J), Neighborhood Commercial Sites.

Note: Existing Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Zoned properties will remain as mapped recognizing neighborhood commercial properties established prior to the adoption of this code. The development of these sites shall conform to the standards outlined in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses, for the uses described above.

[Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.300 Setbacks.

A.    Purpose. Setbacks provide private outdoor living space, building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, and sunlight and air circulation. The setback standards encourage placement of residences close to the street for public safety and neighborhood security.

B.    Setback Standards. The following setback standards apply to all structures, except as otherwise provided by this section or specified in this code.

C.    Front Setbacks.

1.    RL and UAR Districts. The minimum front setback is 20 feet.

    Exception. On corner lots within a platted subdivision, one front setback may be 10 feet; provided, that the garage and/or carport is set back a minimum of 20 feet.

2.    RS, RM-10, RM, and RH Districts. The minimum front setback is 10 feet. Garages and carports must be accessed from alleys where practical, otherwise garages and carports with street access must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line. In this instance, the term “practical” means that there is an existing or platted alley that could be used in its current condition or improved to provide access.

3.    Where streets with insufficient right-of-way abut the site, special setbacks apply in conformance with BDC 3.4.200(J), Special Setbacks.

D.    Rear Setbacks.

1.    RL and UAR Districts. The minimum rear setback is 20 feet.

    Exception. In the RL Zone on corner lots within a platted subdivision, the minimum rear setback is 10 feet.

2.    RS, RM-10, RM and RH Districts. The minimum rear setback is five feet. When multifamily residential or nonresidential uses abut a detached single-family dwelling unit in the RS District, the rear setback abutting the RS District must increase one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 20 feet.

E.    Side Setbacks.

1.    RL and UAR Districts. The minimum side setback is 10 feet.

2.    RS, RM-10, RM and RH Districts. The minimum side setback is five feet. When multifamily residential or nonresidential uses abut a detached single-family dwelling unit in the RS District, the side setback abutting the RS District must increase one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 20 feet.

    Exception: For development in conformance with the provisions of BDC 3.6.200(A) for courtyard housing, a three-foot minimum side setback is permitted.

Table 2.1.300 – Typical Residential District Setbacks  

	 	Front	Rear	Side

	UAR	10 ft./20 ft.	20 ft.	10 ft.

	RL	10 ft./20 ft.	10 ft./20 ft.	10 ft.

	RS	10 ft., except garages and/or carports must be set back 20 ft.	5 ft.**	3 ft.*/5 ft.**

	RM-10, RM and RH	10 ft., except garages and/or carports must be set back 20 ft.	5 ft.**	5 ft.**

*    Special setbacks for certain features as permitted in this section and BDC 3.6.200 (special standards for residential uses).

**    When multifamily residential or nonresidential uses abut a detached single-family dwelling unit in the RS District, the setback abutting the RS District must increase one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 20 feet. Where a fractional number results, the number may be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

F.    Setback Exceptions.

1.    Alley. Where an existing alley is less than 20 feet in width, the setback abutting the alley must be increased to provide a minimum of 24 feet for maneuvering and backing movements from garages, carports and/or parking areas.

2.    Attached Single-Family Townhomes. Interior side setbacks are zero feet.

3.    Clear Vision Areas. All structures must comply with this section, except as necessary to comply with BDC 3.1.500, Clear Vision Areas.

4.    Bridges. Bridges that form the driveway or pedestrian access from the abutting street or alley are permitted in the setbacks.

5.    Architectural Features. Except as prohibited in subsection (F)(6) of this section, the following architectural features are allowed to encroach into the front, side and rear setbacks by no more than two feet provided a minimum setback of three feet is provided from the property line: eaves, chimneys including fireplace enclosures and chimney chases, bay windows up to eight feet in width, window wells, and similar architectural features.

6.    Front Setbacks. The following may encroach into the front setback:

a.    RL and UAR. An unenclosed covered or uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches may be set back a minimum of 10 feet, as long as it does not encroach into a public utility easement. No portion of the structure can encroach closer than 10 feet including the architectural features in subsection (F)(5) of this section.

b.    RS, RM, RM-10 and RH.

i.    An unenclosed covered or uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches may be set back a minimum of six feet from the front property line, as long as it does not encroach into a public utility easement. No portion of the structure can encroach closer than six feet to the front property line including the architectural features in subsection (F)(5) of this section.

ii.    For garages on corner lots that are accessed from an alley, and garages where the side or rear wall of the garage faces the street, the front setback for the garage side or rear wall must be a minimum of 10 feet from the front property line. In this case, the garage must have a window(s) in the side or rear wall facing the street that is a minimum of six square feet. As shown in Figure 2.1.300, side entry garages that access a street must have a driveway with a minimum length of 20 feet from the front and side property lines.

Figure 2.1.300
[IMAGE]


c.    Stairs, ramps and landings that are not roofed or enclosed above or below the steps may be in the front setback when they follow the grade.

7.    Side and Rear Setbacks. The following may encroach into the side and rear setback in the UAR, RL, RS, RM, RM-10 and RH:

a.    An uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop located above finished grade with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches must be set back a minimum of 18 inches from the side and rear property lines, as long as it does not encroach into a public utility easement.

b.    Uncovered patios at finished grade are exempt from setbacks as long as it does not encroach into a public utility easement.

G.    Prohibited in Setbacks. The following are prohibited, unless stated otherwise, within the following setbacks:

1.    Front Setbacks. Satellite dishes greater than 18 inches in diameter, heat pumps and other similar objects.

2.    Side and Rear Setbacks. Satellite dishes greater than 18 inches in diameter, heat pumps and other similar objects, unless screened for visual and noise abatement by a solid enclosure two feet higher than the object/use being screened.

3.    Balconies.

H.    Residential Compatibility Standards.

1.    Purpose. The residential compatibility standards in this section are intended to provide transitional buffers between existing neighborhoods and new lots and new parcels.

2.    Applicability. The residential compatibility standards apply to new lots and new parcels, unless exempted, that were created by a land division application submitted after September 16, 2015, that are zoned RS and abut existing residential properties zoned RS or RL which are 20,000 square feet or greater (“protected property”). For purposes of these standards only, the term “abut” also includes new lots and new parcels that are separated from a protected property by a lot or parcel, right-of-way, easement or open space that is less than the required minimum setback width. In such cases, the required minimum setback is measured from the protected property line across the intervening lot or parcel, right-of-way, easement or open space area.

3.    Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to the new lots and new parcels that abut the protected property described in subsection (H)(2) of this section:

a.    Lot Area and Setbacks.

i.    Minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet to 5,999 square feet with a minimum 35-foot setback abutting the protected property; or

ii.    Minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet or greater with a minimum 30-foot setback abutting the protected property.

b.    The following are exceptions to the setback requirements:

i.    Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, canopies, porches, and similar architectural features may encroach into the required setback by no more than two feet.

ii.    Uncovered decks and similar structures not exceeding 18 inches in height may encroach into the required setback by no more than 20 feet.

iii.    Accessory structures that do not require a building permit shall have a minimum setback of five feet.

iv.    Walls and fences may be placed on property lines subject to the standards in BDC 3.2.500, Fences and Retaining Walls.

v.    Existing structures located on the new lots or parcels. Additions to existing structures that occur after the new lot or parcel is platted are not exempt.

vi.    Development on the new lots or parcels that occurs at any time after the abutting protected property is divided into one or more lots or parcels of less than 20,000 square feet may use the zoning district setbacks.

4.     Exemptions. New lots or new parcels are exempt from the residential compatibility standards when one or more of the following conditions exist at the time the land division application is submitted:

a.    The existing primary dwelling unit on the abutting protected property is located more than 100 feet from the protected property line.

b.    When the abutting protected property is developed with a nonresidential use or the abutting residential use is a higher density than that of the proposed development. For example: a manufactured home park.

c.    When the abutting protected property is vacant. For the purpose of this code section, “vacant” shall mean a property without a dwelling unit.

d.    Where the abutting protected property has an active land division application or valid land division approval.

e.    When the abutting protected property was created by a land division application submitted after September 16, 2015. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2082, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.400 Building Mass and Scale.

A.    Applicability. Floor area ratio applies to the following: 

1.    All new single-family residential construction including building additions on lots 6,000 square feet or less in size located in a subdivision platted prior to December 1998; 

2.    Existing homes on lots subject to a partition or lot line adjustment that will result in a lot size of 6,000 square feet or less;

3.    The perimeter lots of all new single-family residential subdivisions that are less than 6,000 square feet in size and abut a subdivision platted prior to December 1998 where any abutting lot is 6,000 square feet of less. 

B.    Floor Area Ratio. The FAR as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions, must not exceed 0.60 for all buildings on site, cumulatively. 

C.    Exceptions to FAR. 

1.    Attached single-family townhomes without an accessory dwelling unit.

2.    For single-family detached dwellings with an accessory dwelling unit and attached single-family townhomes with an accessory dwelling unit, see BDC 3.6.200(B), Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU), for FAR. 

3.    Accessory structures less than 10 feet in height and 200 square feet in area. 

4.    Lots and parcels subject to BDC 2.1.300(H), Residential Compatibility Standards. [Ord. NS- 2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2082, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.500 Lot Area and Dimensions. Revised 1/19 Revised 2/20

Lot areas and lot dimension standards for residential uses are listed in Table 2.1.500. For other residential uses listed in Table 2.1.200, the lot area and dimensions are subject to the type of residential structure being occupied. Lot development must be in conformance with BDC 2.1.600, Residential Density. Lot area and dimensions exceptions for affordable housing, see BDC 3.6.200(C).

Table 2.1.500 

Lot Areas and Dimensions in the Residential Districts by Housing Type and Zone  

	Residential Use	Zone	Lot Area	Lot Width/Depth	Exceptions

	Single-Family Detached Housing; Manufactured Homes on Lots (See BDC 3.6.200(E)); Residential Care Homes and Facilities (See BDC 3.6.200(J))	UAR	Minimum area: 10 acres 	Minimum width: 300 ft. min. average lot width with a min. street frontage of 150 ft.	No exceptions permitted

	RL	Minimum area: 10,000 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 50 ft.

Minimum lot depth: 100 ft.	Bulb of a cul-de-sac minimum width: 30 ft. min. at the front property line

Flag lot or parcel minimum width: 15 ft. min. at front property line. See BDC 4.3.700, Infill Development Options

Zero lot line minimum width: 20 ft., see BDC 3.6.200(A), Courtyard Housing

Mid-block development, see BDC 4.3.700, Infill Development Options

Shared courts, see BDC 4.3.700

Corner lots or parcels must be at least five feet more in width than the minimum lot width required in the zone

	RS	Minimum area: 4,000 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 40 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM-10	Minimum area: 4,000 sq. ft.

	RM	Minimum area: 2,500 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 30 ft. at the front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RH	Not applicable	Not applicable

	Two- and Three-Family Housing (duplex/triplex)

See BDC 3.6.200(H)	UAR	Not applicable	Not applicable	Bulb of a cul-de-sac minimum width: 30 ft. min. at the front property line except for townhomes

Flag lot or parcel minimum width: 15 ft. min. at front property line. See BDC 4.3.700, Infill Development Options

Mid-block development, see BDC 4.3.700, Infill Development Options

Corner lots or parcels must be at least five feet more in width than the minimum lot width required in the zone

Shared courts, see BDC 4.3.700

	RL	Minimum area: 20,000 sq. ft.	Minimum lot width: 50 ft.

Minimum lot depth: 100 ft.

	RS	Minimum area – duplex: 6,000 sq. ft.

Minimum area – triplex: 9,000 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 40 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM-10	Minimum area – duplex: 6,000 sq. ft.

Minimum area – triplex: 9,000 sq. ft.

	RM	None	Minimum width: 30 ft. at the front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RH	None

	Single-Family Attached Housing (townhomes)

See BDC 3.6.200(D)	UAR	Not applicable	Not applicable

	RL*, RS, RM-10	Minimum area: 2,000 sq. ft. for each unit	Minimum width: 20 ft. at front property line for interior townhome lots and 25 ft. at front property line for exterior townhome lots

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM	Minimum area: 1,600 sq. ft. for each unit

	RH	Minimum area: 1,200 sq. ft. for each unit

	Multifamily Housing (more than 3 units)	UAR	Not applicable	Not applicable

	RL*, RS*, RM-10	Minimum area: 4,000 sq. ft. for each unit	Minimum width: 30 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM, RH	None

*    When permitted as part of a master plan subject to BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives.

[Ord. NS-2361, 2020; Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2113, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.600 Residential Density. Revised 1/19

A.    Residential Density Standard. The following density standards apply to all new development in all of the Residential Districts, except as specified in subsection (B) of this section. The density standards shown in Table 2.1.600 are intended to ensure efficient use of buildable lands and provide for a range of needed housing, in conformance with the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

1.    The density standards may be averaged over more than one development phase (i.e., as in a subdivision or Master Planned Development). For new subdivision applications, the gross density must not exceed the maximum units per acre for the respective zoning district.

Table 2.1.600 

Residential Densities  

	Residential Zone	Density Range

	Urban Area Reserve (UAR10)	1 unit/10 gross acres

	Low Density Residential (RL)	1.1 – 4.0 units/gross acre

	Standard Density Residential (RS)	4.0 – 7.3 units/gross acre

	Medium Density Residential (RM-10)	6.0 – 10.0 units/gross acre

	Medium Density Residential (RM)	7.3 – 21.7 units/gross acre

	High Density Residential (RH)	21.7 – 43 units/gross acre

B.    Exemptions. The following are exempt from the density standards in subsection (A) of this section:

1.    Residential care homes/facilities.

2.    Accessory dwelling units (ADUs).

3.    Bed and breakfast inns.

4.    Nonresidential uses, including neighborhood commercial uses, public and institutional uses, and miscellaneous uses that do not include a dwelling unit.

5.    Buildings that are listed in the Inventory of Historic Sites within the Bend Area Comprehensive Plan Exhibit “A” or buildings designated on the Historic National Landmarks Register.

6.    Manufactured home parks within the RS Zone are exempt from the maximum density standards of the zone; provided, that the standards of BDC 3.6.200(G) are met.

7.    Replacement, renovation, or expansion of existing dwelling unit(s) in any zone provided the number of dwelling units does not change.

8.    Development on a vacant lot or parcel consistent with an approved land division, except tracts identified for future phases.

9.    Residential infill, as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, is exempt from minimum density standards.

10.    Partitions on properties that are large enough to be divided into four or more lots are exempt from minimum density standards; provided, that the size of the resulting parcels and siting of dwellings allow future development on these parcels at minimum densities.

11.    Duplexes and triplexes are exempt from the maximum density standards in the areas designated RS in the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map, except when lots are created as part of a new subdivision application.

C.    Density Calculation.

1.    Maximum housing densities are calculated as follows:

a.    The area subject to maximum housing density is the total site area excluding any land to be developed with or dedicated for neighborhood commercial uses, public and institutional uses, and miscellaneous uses that do not include a dwelling unit.

b.    The area for future streets is included in the area subject to maximum housing density.

c.    Where no new streets will be created, the area of up to 30 feet of the abutting right-of-way width multiplied by the site frontage shall be added to the area subject to maximum housing density.

d.    Sensitive lands, fire breaks, and canals and their associated easements on the site are included in the area subject to maximum housing density.

e.    For purposes of calculating maximum density, fractional units are rounded down to the next whole unit.

f.    As an illustrative example, if the total site area is five acres, of which a half-acre is sensitive lands, and another acre will be developed with neighborhood commercial uses, and new streets will be created, the area subject to maximum housing density is four acres (total site area minus one acre of neighborhood commercial uses, but including the sensitive lands). If the maximum allowable density is 7.3 dwelling units per acre, then a maximum number of 29 units is allowed on the site.

2.    Minimum housing densities are calculated as follows:

a.    The area subject to minimum housing density is the total site area excluding any land to be developed with or dedicated for neighborhood commercial uses, public and institutional uses, and miscellaneous uses that do not include a dwelling unit; sensitive lands; fire breaks; and canals and their associated easements.

b.    The area for future streets is included in the area subject to minimum housing density.

c.    For purposes of calculating minimum density, fractional units are rounded up to the next whole unit.

d.    As an illustrative example, if the total site area is five acres, of which a half-acre is sensitive lands, and another acre will be developed with neighborhood commercial uses, and new streets will be created, the area subject to minimum housing density is three and one-half acres (total site area minus one acre of neighborhood commercial uses, minus a half-acre of sensitive lands). If the minimum density is 4.0 dwelling units per acre, then a minimum number of 14 units is required on the site.

3.    Where a property is within multiple zoning districts, the minimum and maximum number of units is calculated based on the acreage in each Residential Zone that is subject to the density standard as specified above multiplied by the applicable minimum and maximum density standards. Areas with nonresidential zones are excluded from the density calculation.

D.    Density Bonus for Affordable Housing. See BDC 3.6.200(C). [Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.700 Maximum Lot Coverage.

A.    Maximum Lot Coverage. The following maximum lot coverage standards apply to all development within the Residential Districts as follows:

Table 2.1.700 

Residential Lot Coverage  

	Residential Zone	Lot Coverage

	Low Density Residential (RL)	35%

	Standard Density Residential (RS), Medium-10 Density Residential (RM-10), and Medium Density Residential (RM)	50% for lots or parcels with single-story dwelling unit(s) and single-story accessory structures.

45% for all other lots or parcels.

Exception. 60% for lots or parcels with attached single-family townhomes, duplexes, triplexes and multifamily in the RM District.

	High Density Residential (RH)	None

B.    Lot Coverage Exception for Affordable Housing. See BDC 3.6.200(C). [Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.800 Building Height.

The following building height standards are intended to promote land use compatibility and support the principle of neighborhood-scaled design:

A.    Standard. The following building heights apply to all development within the Residential District:

1.    Buildings within the UAR, RL, RS, RM-10 and RM Districts may be no more than 30 feet in height.

2.    Buildings within the RM Zone on lots and parcels created after December 1998 may be no more than 35 feet in height.

3.    Buildings within the RH Districts may be no more than 45 feet in height.

B.    Exceptions to Maximum Building Height Standard for Affordable Housing. See BDC 3.6.200(C). [Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2082, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.900 Architectural Design Standards. Revised 1/19

A.    Purpose. The architectural standards are intended to provide detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles for certain types of residential development.

B.    Applicability. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings:

1.    Multifamily residential;

2.    Public and institutional buildings in Residential Zones;

3.    All other types of permitted/conditional nonresidential use buildings listed in Table 2.1.200 when built in a Residential Zone.

a.    Exemption. Neighborhood commercial uses listed in Table 2.1.200.

C.    Standards. All buildings that are subject to this section shall comply with all of the following standards. The graphics provided with each standard are intended to show examples of how to comply. Other building styles and designs can be used to comply, so long as they are consistent with the text of this section. An architectural feature (i.e., as shown in the graphics) may be used to comply with more than one standard.

1.    Building Form. All buildings shall incorporate design features such as offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements to preclude large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces, as shown in the figure below. Along the vertical face of a structure, such features shall occur at a minimum of every 40 feet, on each floor, and shall contain at least two of the following features:

a.    Recess (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance or similar feature) that has a minimum depth of six feet;

b.    Extension (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance, or similar feature) that projects a minimum of two feet and runs horizontally for a minimum length of four feet; and/or

c.    Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet or greater in height.

Figure 2.1.900.A

Building Form (Multifamily Housing Example)
[IMAGE]


2.    Building Orientation. All building elevations adjacent to a street right-of-way shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows. A minimum of 40 percent of front (i.e., street-facing) elevations, and a minimum of 30 percent of side and rear building elevations, shall meet this standard. Percent of elevation is measured as the horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. The standard applies to each full and partial building story.

Exceptions:

a.    A multifamily building may have its entrance oriented to a side yard when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the building entrance and the street in accordance with the standards in BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation. In this case, at least one entrance shall be provided not more than 30 feet from the closest sidewalk or street.

b.    A multifamily building may be oriented to a common use courtyard.

3.    Detailed Design. All buildings shall provide detailed design along all elevations which are visible from the street(s) adjacent to the property (i.e., front, rear and sides). There are two options for complying with this requirement.

a.    Menu Option (Type I). Detailed design shall be provided by using at least six of the following 12 architectural features on all applicable elevations, as appropriate for the proposed building type and style (may vary features on rear/side/front elevations).

These features shall be reviewed by a Type I application as per BDC 4.1.300:

	Dormers	 	Gables

	Recessed entries	 	Covered porch entries

	Cupolas	 	Pillars or posts

	Eaves (minimum 12-inch projection)	 	Window trim (minimum four inches wide)

	Bay windows	 	Balconies

	Offsets in the building face or roof by a minimum of 18 inches	 	Decorative patterns on the exterior finish using shingles, wainscoting, board and batt.

Figure 2.1.900.B

Examples of Architectural Details
[IMAGE]


b.    Design Review Option (Type II). Detailed design shall be provided by showing compliance with the following design criteria through a Type II application and review per BDC 4.1.400, Type II and Type III Applications.

i.    The general size, shape, and scale of the structure(s) are architecturally compatible with the site and with the surrounding neighborhood, unless such compatibility with existing structures does not reflect the long-term purpose or intent of the underlying zoning of the subject site.

ii.    If the project includes a large structure or structures (greater than 20,000 square feet), the design shall incorporate changes in direction and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes by breaking up building sections, or by the use of such elements as variable planes, projections, bays, dormers, setbacks, canopies, awnings, parapets, changes in the roofline, materials, color, or textures.

iii.    Exterior finish on vertical surfaces shall be primarily of materials such as masonry/wood siding, shingles, or stucco. The use of sheet metal or plywood shall not exceed 50 percent of the wall area. No smooth-faced cinder block construction shall be permitted on front facades. Cinder block construction for side and rear facades shall be permitted by approval as part of this review process. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.1000 Multifamily Residential Districts (RM, RH).

A.    Purpose/Intent Statement. The Medium and High Density Residential Districts are intended to provide land for a mix of attached and multifamily housing types in locations that are convenient to service commercial uses and future transit opportunities.

B.    Development Standards for Multifamily Developments in the RM and RH Districts. In addition to the site development standards in BDC Chapter 4.2, the following standards apply to multifamily developments of four units or more, unless otherwise stated:

1.    Common Open Space. In addition to the required setback yards, a minimum of 10 percent of the site area must be designated and permanently reserved as usable common open space in all large-scale (20 units or more) multiple-family developments, unless a credit in subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section is approved. The site area is defined as the lot or parcel on which the development is planned, after subtracting any required dedication of street right-of-way and other land for public purposes (e.g., public park or school grounds, etc.). Sensitive lands and historic buildings or landmarks open to the public and designated by the Bend Comprehensive Plan may be counted toward meeting the common open space requirements.

a.    Credit for Proximity to a Park. A common open space credit of 50 percent may be granted when the development is located within one-quarter mile walking distance of a public park; and there is a direct, accessible, and maintained trail or sidewalk between the development and the park that does not cross an arterial or collector street.

2.    Private Open Space. Private open space areas are required for ground-floor and upper-floor housing units through compliance with all of the following standards:

a.    Ground-floor housing units must have patios or decks at least four feet deep and measuring at least 48 square feet. Ground-floor housing means the housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within five feet of the finished ground elevation, after grading and landscaping;

b.    A minimum of 50 percent of all upper-floor housing units must have balconies or porches at least four feet deep and measuring at least 48 square feet. Upper-floor housing means housing units that are more than five feet above the finished grade, after grading and landscaping; and

c.    Ground-floor private open space areas must not be located within 12 feet of trash receptacles.

3.    Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles must not be located within setbacks for property lines shared with single-family residences and must be screened on at least three sides with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height. Receptacles must be located for easy access by trash pick-up vehicles.

C.    Housing Mix Standards in the RM District. In order to ensure a mix of housing types that meets the City’s overall housing needs, in addition to minimum and maximum density standards in BDC 2.1.600, at least 50 percent of the total housing units in residential developments on any property or combination of properties between three acres and 20 acres in the RM District must be two- and three-family housing, attached single-family townhomes, and/or multifamily residential housing units. The standards of BDC 4.5.200(E) apply to properties of 20 acres in size and greater.

Figure 2.1.1000.A

Multifamily Housing (typical site layout)
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.1.1100 Other Design Standards.

A.    On-site surface water drainage, including roof drainage, must be retained on the lot or parcel of origin and not flow onto the public right-of-way or other private property.

B.    Development must comply with BDC 3.5.200, Outdoor Lighting Standards, and 3.5.400, Solar Standards.

C.    Garages and carports must be accessed from alleys where practical. In this instance, the term “practical” means that there is an existing or platted alley that could be used in its current condition or improved to provide access. [Ord. NS-2314, 2018]


Chapter 2.2 COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS (CB, CC, CL, CG)

Sections:

2.2.100    Purpose and Applicability.

2.2.200    Zoning District Locations and Characteristics.

2.2.300    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.2.400    Development Standards.

2.2.500    Site Layout and Building Orientation.

2.2.600    Commercial Design Review Standards.

2.2.700    Pedestrian Amenities.

2.2.800    Development and Design Standards for the Central Business Zoning District.


2.2.100 Purpose and Applicability.

This chapter applies to all development in the Central Business District (CB), Convenience Commercial District (CC), Limited Commercial District (CL) and the General Commercial District (CG). Collectively, these districts are the City’s Commercial Zoning Districts. The purpose of these zoning districts is to:

•    Allow a mixture of complementary land uses that may include housing, retail, offices, commercial services, and civic uses, to create economic and social vitality and to reduce vehicle miles traveled;

•    Develop commercial and mixed-use areas that are safe, comfortable and attractive to pedestrians;

•    Provide flexibility in the location and design of new developments and redevelopment to anticipate changes in the market;

•    Reinforce streets as public places that encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel;

•    Provide roadway and pedestrian connections to residential areas;

•    Provide transitions between high traffic streets and neighborhoods;

•    Encourage efficient land use by facilitating compact, high density development and minimizing the amount of land that is needed for surface parking;

•    Facilitate development (land use mix, density and design) that supports public transit, where applicable;

•    Provide appropriate locations and design standards for automobile- and truck-dependent uses;

•    Provide both formal and informal community gathering places;

•    Maintain a distinct storefront character that identifies the Central Business District;

•    Connect the Convenience Commercial District to neighborhoods and other employment areas; and

•    Provide visitor accommodations and tourism amenities. [Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.2.200 Zoning District Locations and Characteristics.

 

Zone District Locations and Characteristics  

	Zone District	Location and Characteristics

	Central Business District (CB)	The Central Business District encompasses the historic downtown and central business district that has commercial and/or mixed-use development with a storefront character.

	Convenience Commercial District (CC)	The Convenience Commercial District is adjacent and connected to the Residential District(s) it is intended to serve. Convenience Commercial uses are larger in scale and area than neighborhood commercial uses and provide for frequent shopping and service needs of nearby residents. The zone is intended to provide locations for a wide range of small and medium sized businesses and services as a convenience to the neighboring residential areas. New convenience commercial nodes shall develop as commercial centers rather than a commercial strip and be limited in size up to 5 acres.

	Limited Commercial District (CL)	The Limited Commercial District provides for a wide range of retail, service, and tourist commercial uses in the community along highways or in new commercial centers.

	General Commercial District (CG)	The General Commercial District provides a broad mix of commercial uses that have large site requirements, are oriented to the higher classification roadways and provide services to the entire City and surrounding area.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.2.300 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

The land uses listed in Table 2.2.300 are allowed in the Commercial Districts, subject to the provisions of this code. Uses that are listed in Table 2.2.300 and land uses that are similar are permitted or conditionally allowed. The land uses identified with a “C” in Table 2.2.300 require Conditional Use Permit approval prior to development, in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.4.

Table 2.2.300 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	CB	*CC	CL	CG

	Residential

	Existing Residential Use	P	P	P	P

	*New residential use as part of a mixed-use development	P	P	P	P

	*Temporary housing	C	N	C	C

	Commercial

	Retail Sales and Service (non-automobile dependent/oriented)	 	 	 	 

	– building footprint less than 50,000 square feet	P	P	P	P

	– building footprint greater than 50,000 square feet	P	C	P	P

	Retail Sales and Service (*automobile dependent)	N	C	P	P

	Retail Sales and Service (*automobile oriented)	C	C	P	P

	Restaurants/Food and Beverage Services	 	 	 	 

	– with *drive-through	C	C	P	P

	Restaurants/Food and Beverage Services	 	 	 	 

	– without drive-through	P	P	P	P

	Offices and Clinics	P	P	P	P

	Production Office	N	N	C	P

	Convention Center/Meeting Rooms	C	N	P	P

	Lodging (e.g., hotels, motels, *bed and breakfast inns, *short-term rentals, hostels)	P	P	P	P

	Hospitals	N	N	P	P

	Commercial and Public Parking	P	P	P	P

	Commercial Storage	 	 	 	 

	– enclosed in building and on an upper story	C	P	P	P

	– not enclosed in building	N	N	P	P

	– enclosed in building on ground floor (i.e., mini-storage)	N	N	C	P

	Entertainment and Recreation	 	 	 	 

	– enclosed in building (e.g., theater, fitness facility)	P	P	P	P

	– not enclosed (e.g., amusement, outdoor arena)	N	N	C	P

	Day Care	P	P	P	P

	Redemption Center	N	N	P	P

	Trailer Park/Campground	N	N	C	C

	Mortuary	N	N	P	P

	Wholesale Sales (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	N	N	P	P

	Veterinary Clinic (small animal)	C	P	P	P

	*Mixed-use (residential with commercial/civic/industrial)

Mixed-use developments shall be subject to the use limitations prescribed for the respective individual uses	P	P	P	P

	*Medical Marijuana Dispensary and Marijuana Retailer	 	 	 	 

	– building footprint 50,000 square feet or less	P	P	P	P

	– building footprint greater than 50,000 square feet	P	C	P	P

	*Marijuana Wholesale (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	N	N	P	P

	*Marijuana Testing, Research and Development Facilities	P	P	P	P

	Public and Institutional

	Government – point of service intended to serve the entire City (e.g., City Hall, main library, main post office, main Department of Motor Vehicles service center)	P	N	P	P

	Government – branch service intended to serve a portion of the City	P	P	P	P

	Parks and Open Space	P	P	P	P

	Schools	P	P	P	P

	Institution of Higher Education	P	N	P	P

	*Clubs and Places of Worship	P	C	P	P

	*Utilities (above ground)	P	P	P	P

	Industrial

	*Manufacturing and Production	 	 	 	 

	– greater than 5,000 sq. ft.	N	N	C	N

	– less than 5,000 sq. ft. with retail outlet	P	P	P	P

	Warehouse	N	N	P	P

	Transportation, Freight and Distribution	N	N	C	P

	Industrial Service (e.g., cleaning, repair)	N	N	P	P

	Manufactured Home Sales	N	N	C	P

	Lumber/Building Supplies	N	N	C	P

	*Hydroelectric Facilities	C	N	C	C

	*Marijuana Processing of Cannabinoid Concentrates and Cannabinoid Products Not Including Processing of Cannabinoid Extracts	 	 	 	 

	– greater than 5,000 sq. ft.	N	N	C	N

	– 5,000 sq. ft. or less with retail outlet	P	P	P	P

	Miscellaneous Uses

	*Small Hydroelectric Facility	P	P	P	P

	Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	Key to Permitted Uses	 	 

	P = Permitted	N = Not Permitted	C = Conditional Use

*    Special standards for certain uses subject to BDC Chapter 3.6.

[Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2265, 2016; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2155, 2011; Ord. NS-2107, 2008; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.2.400 Development Standards.

The following table provides the general numerical development standards within the Commercial Districts. Additional standards are contained in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section.

Table 2.2.400 

Commercial Zoning District Development Standards  

	STANDARD	CB	CC	CL	CG

	Minimum Front Yard Setback, see note (1) below	None	None	10 feet	10 feet

	Maximum Front Yard Setback, see note (1) below and subsection (C) of this section	 	 	 	 

	– From street with on-street parking	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	– From street without on-street parking	10 feet	80 feet	80 feet	80 feet

	Minimum Rear Yard Setbacks	None	None	None	None

	Minimum Side Yard Setbacks	None	None	None	None

	Maximum Lot Coverage	None	None	None	None

	Maximum Building Height	35 to 70 feet

Subject to the provisions of BDC 2.2.800	35 feet, except within 100 feet of the Deschutes River where height may be further limited subject to WOZ Review	55 feet, except within 100 feet of the Deschutes River where height may be further limited subject to WOZ Review	55 feet, except within 100 feet of the Deschutes River where height may be further limited subject to WOZ Review

	Minimum Floor Area Ratio	Floor Area Ratio of 2:1	None	None	None

	Maximum Building Footprint, see note (2) below	None	50,000 sq. ft.	None	None

(1)    Subject to the special setback standards of BDC Chapter 3.4 and the site layout and building orientation standards of BDC 2.2.500.

(2)    See subsection (C) of this section.

A.    Setbacks. In some of the Commercial Districts, buildings are placed close to the street to create a vibrant pedestrian environment, to slow traffic, provide a storefront character to the street, support future transit service, and encourage walking. The setback standards are flexible to encourage public spaces between sidewalks and building entrances (e.g., extra-wide sidewalks, plazas, squares, outdoor dining areas, and pocket parks). The standards also encourage the formation of solid blocks of commercial and mixed-use buildings for walkable Commercial Districts.

1.    Applicability. Except as modified by this section and BDC 2.2.500, Site Layout and Building Orientation, the setback standards contained in Table 2.2.400 apply to all new construction and expansion of existing buildings within the Commercial Districts.

2.    Maximum Setback Calculation. Where more than one building is proposed on a site, conformance with the maximum setback standard is achieved when no less than 40 percent of the site’s frontage on a public or private street is occupied by one or more buildings that conform with the building setback and orientation standards of this chapter. The maximum setback standard may be increased as necessary when an approved usable public space with pedestrian amenities (e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, plaza, pocket park, outdoor dining area or a public square with seating) is provided between the building and front property line. (See also BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review Standards, and 2.2.700, Pedestrian Amenities, for related building entrance standards.)

3.    Front Yard Setbacks.

a.    General Standards. See Table 2.2.400, Commercial Zoning District Development Standards.

b.    Multiple Frontage and Corner Lots. For buildings on sites with more than one street frontage or through lots, the minimum front yard setback standards in Table 2.2.400 shall be applied to all street frontages. However, the maximum setback standard shall be applied to only one of the frontages. Where the abutting streets are of different classifications, the maximum setback standard shall be applied to the higher classification of street.

c.    Exception to Front Yard Setbacks. This exception applies to all Commercial Zones except the CB Zone.

i.    In the CL, CC and CG Zones, when the street fronting the development does not allow on-street parking, the maximum front yard setback of 80 feet shall apply.

ii.    Where streets with insufficient right-of-way abut the site, special setbacks may apply in conformance with BDC 3.4.200(J), Special Setbacks.

4.    Rear Yard Setbacks.

a.    There is no minimum rear yard setback, except that buildings shall conform to the clear vision standards in BDC 3.1.500.

b.    Building transition standards in conformance with this subsection apply when abutting a Residential Zone.

c.    The applicable fire and building codes for attached structures, firewalls, and related requirements apply.

5.    Side Yard Setbacks.

a.    There is no minimum side yard setback, except that buildings shall conform to the clear vision standards in BDC 3.1.500.

b.    Building transition standards in conformance with this subsection apply when abutting a Residential Zone.

c.    The applicable fire and building codes for attached structures, firewalls, and related requirements apply.

6.    Transition Standards.

a.    Nonresidential buildings abutting a Residential Zone shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the Residential Zone. The minimum setback distance for any portion of a commercial, mixed-use, or nonresidential building exceeding 25 feet in height shall increase one foot for each additional foot of building height over 25 feet.

b.    A landscape buffer of no less than five feet is required along the abutting Residential Zone. The landscape buffer, to the extent practical, shall provide both a visual and auditory buffer that includes trees, shrubs and ground cover.

c.    When uses other than a building (i.e., parking, driveway, storage, loading) are built to the edge of the required minimum setback, buffering in addition to the minimum landscaping (i.e., fencing or wall) may be required as a condition of Site Plan Review approval to mitigate the impacts on the abutting Residential Zone.

B.    Height. All buildings in the Commercial Districts shall comply with the height standards contained in Table 2.2.400 unless excepted below or in compliance with a variance approval.

1.    Residential Exception. The maximum height may be increased by 10 feet above the maximum allowed height when residential uses are provided above the ground floor (“vertical mixed use”), except for buildings along the west side of Brooks Street where the maximum building height is 35 feet regardless of use. The building height increase for residential uses applies only if the top floor is residential and does not apply to buildings that have variance approval to exceed the permitted height.

Figure 2.2.400 – Building Height Diagram (Residential Exception)
[IMAGE]


C.    Convenience Commercial Development Standards. The purpose of this subsection is to provide special development standards for the development of new uses within the CC Zone. The zone is intended to provide locations for a wide range of small and medium sized businesses and services as a convenience to surrounding residents. The CC Zone has the following limitation on uses:

1.    Maximum Building Size. The maximum building size is 50,000 square feet per building, unless a larger area is approved through a conditional use permit. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.2.500 Site Layout and Building Orientation.

A.    Purpose. These site layout and building orientation standards are intended to promote a walkable, storefront character in certain areas of the City, and to facilitate walking, bicycling, and transit use in the Commercial Districts, by forming short blocks.

B.    Applicability. This section applies to new land divisions and developments that are subject to site plan review in any of the Commercial Districts, Mixed Employment District and Professional Office District.

C.    Exterior Site Layout. In addition to meeting the access, circulation and lot design standards of BDC Chapter 3.1, new commercial developments shall comply with the following standards:

1.    Usable pedestrian space shall be provided. Usable pedestrian space means a plaza or extra-wide pathway/sidewalk near one or more building entrances. Each development shall provide street trees or planters, space for outdoor seating, canopies or awnings, and on-street parking (in selected areas) to improve the pedestrian environment along internal streets or drives.

2.    Where multiple-building development is contemplated on parcels or lots 10 acres or greater in size, at least one private or public street shall be designed to meet the specifications of a local street and be designed as a “shopping street.” A “shopping street” shall include the following elements:

•    Buildings placed at the sidewalk along the shopping street;

•    Wide sidewalks (e.g., eight to 15 feet wide);

•    On-street parking;

•    Street trees in tree wells;

•    Pedestrian-scale lighting;

•    Weather protection and similar pedestrian amenities.

Figure 2.2.500.A – “Shopping Street” (Typical)
[IMAGE]


D.    Building Orientation Standards. Developments within all Commercial Districts shall be oriented to a street where practical. The building orientation standard is met when all of the following standards are met:

1.    Buildings shall have an entrance(s) visible or oriented to (facing) a street. Building entrances may include entrances to individual units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces). Alternatively, a building may have an entrance facing a side yard when a convenient and direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the building entrance and the street right-of-way.

2.    Exceptions. Developments in conformance with subsection (C)(2) of this section as illustrated in Figure 2.2.500.A, “Shopping Street” layout, do not need to comply with the building orientation standards.

Figure 2.2.500.B – Building Orientation (Typical)
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 2.2.600]


2.2.600 Commercial Design Review Standards.

A.    Purpose. The Commercial Design Review standards are intended to provide detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of architectural building styles. These design standards are in addition to the standards related to commercial development in BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, and BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

B.    Applicability. BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review, contains the procedural requirements that pertain to this section.

C.    Standards. For developments subject to site plan or design review, the following standards shall be met. A design feature used to comply with one standard may be used to comply with another standard.

1.    Residential Building Design Review. All residential buildings subject to site plan or design review shall comply with the Residential District design guidelines, as listed in BDC 2.1.900, Architectural Design Standards, and not the commercial design review standards of this section.

2.    Commercial Design Review. The following standards apply to all commercial and mixed-use buildings:

a.    Buildings with exterior walls greater than 50 feet in horizontal length shall be constructed using the installation of a combination of architectural features and a variety of building materials. Landscaping should be planted adjacent to the walls. Walls that can be viewed from public streets shall be designed with windows totaling a minimum of 10 percent of the wall area and using architectural features and landscaping (abutting the building) for at least 50 percent of the wall length. Other walls shall incorporate architectural features and landscaping for at least 30 percent of the wall length.

b.    Architectural features include, but are not limited to, the following: recesses, projections, wall insets, arcades, window display areas, awnings, balconies, window projections, landscape structures or other features that complement the design intent of the structure and are acceptable to the Review Authority.

c.    In addition, a portion of the on-site landscaping shall be planted adjacent to the walls of a building so that the vegetation combined with the architectural features significantly reduces the visual impact of the building mass as viewed from the street. Additional landscaping requirements are in BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

d.    The predominant building materials should be characteristic of Central Oregon such as brick, wood, native stone and tinted/textured concrete masonry units and/or glass products. Other materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, undecorated tilt-up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels should only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of the structure. Metal roofs may be allowed if compatible with the overall architectural design of the building.

e.    Roofs should be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a building, add visual interest and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. Variations within one architectural style are highly encouraged. Visible rooflines and roofs that project over the exterior wall of a building enough to cast a shadow on the ground are highly encouraged. Architectural methods shall be used to conceal flat rooftops; however, a maximum of 30 percent of the building elevations visible from the adjacent right-of-way may include flat roof components. Overhanging eaves, sloped roofs, parapet walls that have variations vertically and horizontally with decorative features, and multiple roof elements are highly encouraged. Mansard style roofs are discouraged.

f.    Clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances using features such as canopies, porticos, arcades, arches, wing walls, and/or integral planters are required.

g.    Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, art work or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches or other features located in areas accessible to the public are encouraged and may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirements of BDC Chapter 3.2.

h.    Exterior colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors such as black, neon, metallic or fluorescent for the facade and/or roof of the building is prohibited except as approved for building trim. The City of Bend color guide provides samples of acceptable and unacceptable colors. The use of trademark colors requires City approval.

i.    Exterior lighting shall comply with the outdoor lighting provisions of BDC 3.5.200. Light poles and/or fixtures and flag poles shall not exceed 25 feet in height.

j.    Outdoor and rooftop mechanical equipment as well as trash cans/dumpsters shall be architecturally screened from view. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning units shall have a noise attenuating barrier to protect adjacent Residential Districts from mechanical noise.

3.    Large-Scale Buildings and Developments. For the purpose of this section, “large-scale buildings and developments” are defined as:

a.    Individual buildings with more than 20,000 square feet of enclosed ground-floor space. Multi-tenant buildings shall be counted as the sum of all tenant spaces within the same building shell; and

b.    Multiple-building developments with a combined enclosed ground-floor space more than 40,000 square feet (e.g., shopping centers, public/institutional campuses, and similar developments).

4.    Design Standards for Large-Scale Buildings and Developments. All large-scale buildings and developments, as defined above, shall provide human-scale design by conforming to all of the following standards:

a.    Incorporate changes in building wall direction and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes, as shown in Figure 2.2.600. Such changes may include building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction; sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; windows; screening trees; small-scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting, or up-lighting as described in BDC 3.5.200 (Outdoor Lighting Standards)); and similar features.

Figure 2.2.600

Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate examples of these building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required design style.

5.    Exceptions to Commercial Design Review Standards. An exception to the design standards of this section may be approved by the Planning Commission through a Type III Process if the Commission finds that the proposed development complies with the purpose and intent of the Commercial Design Review standards. The applicant shall pay a fee specified by the City for Planning Commission review. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 2.2.800]


2.2.700 Pedestrian Amenities.

A.    Pedestrian Amenity Standards.

1.    Commercial developments with one or more buildings totaling more than 10,000 square feet and subject to Commercial Design Review shall provide at least one of the “pedestrian amenities” listed below. Pedestrian amenities may be provided on private property or within a public right-of-way (i.e., on the sidewalk, curb, or street pavement) when approved by the City (for City streets), Deschutes County (for County roads), or the Oregon Department of Transportation (“ODOT”) (for State highways):

a.    A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum width of eight feet); or

b.    Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges) between the building entrance and sidewalk, with a minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width; or

c.    Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of four feet over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space); or

d.    Public art (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.).

Figure 2.2.700 – Pedestrian Amenities (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate examples of pedestrian amenities. Other types of amenities and designs may be used.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 2.2.900]


2.2.800 Development and Design Standards for the Central Business Zoning District.

A.    Purpose. The development and design standards contained in this section have been adopted to regulate development in the Central Business Zoning District to protect and enhance the downtown core area of Bend.

B.    Applicability. The development and design standards of this section apply to all areas within the CB Zone. The standards of this section are in addition to the site plan review regulations of BDC Chapter 4.2. The standards of this section are in lieu of the commercial design standards of BDC 2.2.600.

Major advantages of the development and design standards include:

•    Ensuring that future development is consistent with the CB Zone’s existing pedestrian-oriented scale of buildings.

•    Strengthening the downtown area as the heart of the community, and as a place for people and business.

•    Improving and expanding downtown’s economic base to meet future opportunities.

•    Enhancing the physical appearance of downtown through high-quality design.

•    Preserving and enhancing downtown through refined design standards.

C.    Exempt Development. No development approval is required for exempt development. Exempt development includes:

1.    Landscaping or landscape alterations.

2.    Repair or maintenance of public or private buildings, structures, landscaping, roads and/or utilities that present a risk to public safety. Maintenance of the exterior of an existing structure such as window and door replacement, re-painting, re-roofing, or re-siding where similar materials and colors are used is also exempt.

3.    Construction of a structure that does not require a building permit.

4.    Interior remodeling.

5.    Temporary structures and uses which are for relief of victims of disaster or an emergency.

D.    Nonexempt Development. Any development in the CB Zone that does not qualify as exempt development shall meet the development standards in this chapter in addition to the site development and design standards in this section.

E.    Application Process. The City will review compliance with the development and design standards of this section. Approval shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit for all nonexempt development. Nonexempt development in the CB Zone must follow one of the two tracks for obtaining Design Review approval:

1.    Track 1 – Administrative Review of Compliance with Design Standards. Track 1 requires applicants to meet objective development and design standards. Design standards are quantifiable and measurable. These applications are reviewed through the Type II process, which reduces the amount of time that it takes to get the project reviewed. Track 1 provides an efficient time saving alternative to Track 2.

2.    Track 2 – CB Zone Design Review of Compliance with Design Guidelines. Track 2 similarly requires applicants to meet objective development standards, but does not require some or all of the design standards. In the Track 2 process, applications are reviewed through the Type III process before the Planning Commission. During their review, the Planning Commission will determine whether an application meets the design guidelines. Unlike design standards, design guidelines are discretionary. In Track 2, the intent statements serve as the criteria for determining if the “intent” of the design standard is being met. In Track 2, applicants are required to identify how their proposed site/building plan meets the intent statements of the design standards, and why specific objective standards cannot be met.

F.    Application Requirements. If the development is “nonexempt,” the applicant shall file an application for CB Zone Design Review with the City. The application may be filed in conjunction with other permits when the property is subject to other development approvals. The application shall be accompanied by pertinent materials containing information as specified by the City.

G.    Approval Process. The development standards of subsection H of this section shall be applied to CB Zone Design Review applications either by staff for Track 1 applications or by the Planning Commission for Track 2 applications.

H.    Development Standards. The development standards for the CB Zone ensure that new projects in the CB Zone will be compatible with the desired scale and character of downtown Bend. For all development subject to design review, the following standards apply:

1.    Minimum Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The minimum FAR is 2:1.

2.    Maximum Building Height. No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed the height regulations listed below.

The maximum allowable building height limits in the CB Zone are as follows:

a.    On CB Zone properties between Franklin Blvd. and Newport Ave. on the west side of Brooks Street and Brooks Alley, the maximum allowable building height limit is 35 feet. A Class B variance to exceed the height limit by no more than five feet may be allowed in this area if approved by the Planning Commission through a Type III process.

b.    On CB Zone properties east of Brooks Street and west of the alley between Wall and Bond Streets, the maximum allowable building height limit is 45 feet.

c.    On CB Zone properties east of the alley between Wall and Bond Streets and west of Bond Street, the maximum building height limit is 55 feet. Where portions of a building are higher than 45 feet, 60 percent of the street-facing facades higher than 45 feet must be set back one foot from the street-facing property line for every one foot that the building exceeds 45 feet in height, with a minimum setback of five feet and a maximum setback of 20 feet. The required setback may be reduced by one foot for each foot below the 45-foot height level that the setback begins, e.g., for a building that begins its setback at the 35-foot height level (10 feet below what is required) the required setback can be reduced by 10 feet.

d.    On CB Zone properties east of Bond Street and west of the alley between Bond Street and Lava Road, the maximum building height limit is 60 feet. Where portions of a building are higher than 45 feet, 60 percent of the street-facing facades higher than 45 feet must be set back one foot from the street-facing property line for every one foot that the building exceeds 45 feet in height, with a minimum setback of five feet and a maximum setback of 20 feet. The required setback may be reduced by one foot for each foot below the 45-foot height level that the setback begins, e.g., for a building that begins its setback at the 35-foot height level (10 feet below what is required) the required setback can be reduced by 10 feet.

e.    On CB Zone properties east of the alley between Bond Street and Lava Road, the maximum allowable building height is 70 feet.

3.    Minimum Building Setback. There is no minimum building setback from the property line facing the street.

4.    Maximum Building Setback. The maximum building setback of the ground floor from the property line facing the street is 10 feet. At least 50 percent of the length of the ground level, street-facing facade of buildings must be on the property line. If the site has two or more street frontages, this standard applies to all frontages. Buildings that set back from the property line and face a Residential Zone can choose to develop the setback with low shrubs and/or ground cover. Buildings that set back from the property line and face a Commercial Zone must incorporate a hardscape and meet accessibility requirements. Plantings in the commercial-fronting setback must be in planters. All plantings must be drought tolerant and not be classified as a nuisance plant.

5.    Ground-Floor Windows. Ground-floor windows must be installed for at least 50 percent of the building length and have an area equal to 60 percent of the street-facing ground-floor wall area. Ground-floor wall area includes all wall areas up to 10 feet above finished grade. If the site has two or more frontages, the ground-floor window standard is only required on the primary facade – the facade that fronts the street with the higher classification. The other facade has a minimum ground-floor window requirement of 50 percent of the length and 25 percent of the ground-floor wall area. Windows are required to be transparent to foster both a physical and visual connection between activities in the building and pedestrian activities on the street.

6.    Main Entrance. The main entrance to a building shall face the street or be on the corner.

7.    Accessibility Guidelines. All public areas must comply with applicable accessibility standards.

I.    Design Standards. The design standards for the CB Zone help guide the development and redevelopment of properties within the CB Zone. They are intended to implement the community goals and objectives in the Bend Comprehensive Plan by providing a framework for how Downtown Bend should ultimately look, function, and feel.

1.    Existing Edge Conditions.

Intent: Encourage the development of a cohesive, exciting and vibrant street life.

Approach: All street-facing elevations must have front doors that face the street and meet at least one of the following options:

•    Courtyard/Plaza Option. Embellish the pedestrian zone by creating accessible courtyards/plazas as extension of the sidewalk (the public realm). Incorporate pedestrian amenities such as street trees, outdoor seating, display areas, public art, human-scale lighting and decorative pavers.

•    Street Edge Option. Orient the primary entrance to the building along the street-facing property line, fostering a continuous and cohesive edge and defining inside from outside.

•    Recessed Entry Option. Create/enhance semi-public transition areas between the sidewalk (public realm) and the recessed entry door (private realm). Define this area with lighting that draws attention to ground-floor window displays, signage and the building’s architectural details. Supplement the lighting with special paving treatments that emphasize the entry (tile, etched concrete and/or brick). Asphalt is prohibited.

•    Arcade Option. Design an arcade that meets the following requirements:

–    The columns and piers (that support the building above) are six to 10 feet deep between the front property line and the parallel building wall.

–    The columns and piers consist of openings that are a minimum of six feet wide.

–    The columns and piers are a minimum of 18 inches from the property line (measured to the center of the column or pier).

–    The columns and piers are equally spaced and extend the entire length of the opening.

–    The building facade directly behind the arcade meets the ground-floor window development standard.

–    The arcade elevation facing the street is a minimum of 10 feet in height and covered by the building.

Spacing between columns and/or posts along building elevations less than 30 feet in length shall not exceed 10 feet. Spacing between columns and/or posts along building elevations greater than 50 feet in length shall not exceed spacing of 20 feet.

The arcade option meets the ground-floor window standard; provided, that the ground-floor building facade behind the arcade meets the 50 percent length and 60 percent wall glazing requirement.

Buildings with two or more frontages are only required to meet the arcade option along one street facade. However, if the arcade is proposed on both street frontages, the minimum spacing for openings is required along the entire opening.

2.    Human Scale.

Intent: Building facades must be designed in a manner that is aesthetically appealing, comfortable to pedestrians, and compatible with the character of the surrounding built environment as a way of emphasizing human scale.

Approach: Provide visual interest for pedestrians by incorporating building details at the ground floor that relate to the surrounding built environment, and are at a human scale. This is to be accomplished by meeting two or more of the following options:

•    Incorporating building lighting between 10 and 15 feet from the sidewalk to the bottom of the light fixture.

•    Incorporating suspended signs (blade signs) between eight and 12 feet from the sidewalk to the bottom of the suspended sign.

•    Incorporating horizontal and vertical elements at the ground floor/the base of the building that are familiar to pedestrians and are at human scale: sign frieze, storefront cornice, window mullions, piers that frame storefronts, engaged columns, arcades, brick coursings, awnings, and well-lit transoms.

•    Incorporating a rhythm of awnings and/or canopies.

Pedestrian-oriented lighting is required between structural bays; lighting must follow a consistent spacing pattern.

3.    Physical, Visual and Experiential Connections.

Intent: Incorporating interesting features into a building/site to emphasize the role that physical, visual and experiential connections give to creating meaningful places.

Approach: Embellish the buildings with two or more of the following elements:

•    A variety of building materials (stone, brick, concrete, wood, metal, and glass).

Use of colors that are contextual to Bend and the larger Pacific Northwest landscape serve to embellish the building and the public realm.

Traditional Central Business Zones, like Bend’s CB Zone, often consist of tri-part buildings where the base, middle and top of the building are defined by color, texture and materials.

•    Architectural elements such as cornices, arcades, porticos, and transom windows.

•    Tri-part building facades that emphasize a clear base, middle and top.

Traditional style storefront buildings typically include an uninterrupted band commonly referred to as a bulkhead, kickplate (doors), window base or a base panel, around the base of the building. This band is approximately 16 inches above the sidewalk and serves to “anchor” the building to the site. This band is most often constructed of wood, concrete, brick, stone or metal. Using tape or paint for the bulkhead is prohibited.

Display windows in traditional storefront buildings are typically terminated in the base band or bulkhead. The bulkhead, window frame and windowsill hold the window and help to further accentuate relief in the building facade. The top of the storefront is architecturally capped by horizontal elements, including sign bands, storefront cornices and transoms. These features serve as a transition device from the base of the building to the middle of the building.

4.    Cohesive Elements.

Intent: Incorporate cohesive and repetitive elements into the building as a means of enhancing the pedestrian realm and giving meaning to the building.

Approach: Incorporate three or more of the following repetitive building elements:

•    Building lighting.

•    Columns, engaged columns/pilasters and arcades.

•    Suspended signs (blade signs).

•    Canopies and/or awnings.

•    Transoms.

•    Balconies.

Architects and designers are encouraged to think creatively above and beyond the ground-floor window requirements specified in the design standards. Besides implementing cohesive elements, architects and designers should consider the interplay of shadows and light, and vertical and horizontal “architectural features” on neighboring buildings.

5.    Integrate Building Parapets and Rooftops.

Intent: Treat the top of the building, the point where the edifice meets the sky, as part of the larger facade composition and, where possible, accentuate the ornamentation found on existing traditional CB Zone buildings. Fully screen all rooftop mechanical equipment from the adjacent sidewalk.

Approach: Create visual interest at the top of the building by incorporating one of the following options:

•    Integrating elements at the roofline such as detailed eaves, projected cornices and articulated parapets.

•    Incorporating rooftop forms, other than flat roofs, that add visual interest to the facade.

Sloped roof heights from eave to peak should not exceed the height from grade to the eave (the roof should not be taller than the building wall supporting the roof).

•    Designing rooftop gardens for the purpose of managing stormwater runoff into Bend’s rivers and streams and/or as a place for people to gather.

Screening for rooftop mechanical equipment is to be opaque. Rooftop equipment is required to be set back from the parapet or building edge a minimum of 10 feet. Screened mechanical equipment is exempt from the height requirement.

6.    Weather Protection Projections.

Intent: Weather protection shall be provided along buildings adjacent to pedestrian walkways.

Approach: Provide weather protection for pedestrians along 50 percent of the ground-floor facade that is required to be on the property line and at all street-facing entrances.

Awnings, marquees, balconies, overhangs, umbrellas, fabric tensile structures, building appendages, or other weather protection projections are required to extend five feet over the sidewalk.

7.    Reinforce the Corner.

Intent: Create dynamic public gathering spaces where streets intersect by embellishing the corner of the building.

Approach: Incorporate one or more of the following elements:

•    Place the highest and/or the most visible part of the building within 25 feet of the corner. Use architectural features such as cupolas, turrets, and hipped or pitched roofs to add prominence to the corner location.

•    Locate the main/primary entry to the building within 25 feet of the corner or at the corner itself.

•    Emphasize the corners of the building as a gathering place by extending paving materials that front the building to the property line.

The following elements typically define the corner entry: round or chamfered corners with double doors, doors with large amounts of glass, awnings/canopies and more defined vertical elements (columns).

8.    Pedestrian-Oriented Ground Floor.

Intent: Ensure that the ground floor of the primary street facade is distinguished from the upper floors and that there is the sense of interaction between activities in the building and activities on the sidewalk. Create storefronts and entries that are visible (transparent) and easily accessible from the street.

Approach: Emphasize the importance of the ground floor, especially the primary street-facing entry, by incorporating three or more of the following elements:

•    Extra-height entry lobby space.

•    Continuous well-lit transom windows.

•    Enhanced distinctive doorway treatments.

•    Decorative lighting.

•    Projecting or recessing the entry bays.

•    Incorporating artwork into the facade that is visible to pedestrians on the sidewalk.

•    Incorporating unified paving materials, textures, and color.

Paving material in recessed entries/vestibules should help emphasize the transition from the sidewalk to the building.

9.    Alley Facade Treatment.

Intent: Design alley facades that share a corner with street-facing facades to be inviting and safe for pedestrians.

Approach: Incorporate the following facade elements:

•    Wrap the required street facing fenestration into the alley a minimum of 10 feet.

•    Add exterior lighting along the entire length of the alley-facing facade to enhance visibility and safety.

Windows facing the alley must be transparent to ensure that the alley is monitored by people inside the building (“eyes on the street”).

10.    Urban Materials.

Intent: Ensure that building materials are compatible with well-designed surrounding buildings and, where possible, embrace the natural features (geology) of the region.

Approach: Incorporate one or more of the following elements:

•    At the ground floor, use materials that give the base of the building a sense of permanence with the use of: brick, metal, terra cotta, stone, concrete, block, or stucco.

•    Clearly distinguish the ground floor from the upper floors by implementing strong horizontal elements such as a frieze or a cornice, and/or changing materials and/or arranging the upper windows, which are different in size than the storefront windows, in a consistent and rhythmic pattern.

•    Ensure that the design of the upper floors is cohesive with that of the ground floor through the extension of actual guidelines (brick, expansion joints, and downspouts) and implied guidelines (cornices, transoms, balconies, and window mullions).

•    Do not use materials that appear synthetic and are not compatible with materials (materials that are indigenous to the region) found on many of Bend’s existing buildings. Undesirable materials and treatments include: mirrored glass, vinyl siding, cementitious siding, false-brick veneer and synthetic stucco.

J.    General Provisions.

1.    Floor Area Ratios. Floor area ratios (FARs) regulate the amount of use (the intensity) allowed on a site. FARs also work with the height, setback, and building coverage standards to control the overall bulk of development. FARs are calculated by dividing the building floor area by the size of the development area.

2.    Ground-Floor Windows. In the CB Zone, ground-floor street-facing windows are intended to:

•    Provide a pleasant, rich, and diverse pedestrian experience by connecting activities occurring within a structure to adjacent sidewalk areas.

•    Encourage continuity of retail and service uses.

•    Create an exciting pedestrian environment.

•    Create a visual dialogue between activities in the building and activities on the sidewalk.

Windows must be at least 50 percent of the length and 60 percent of the ground level wall area. Ground level wall areas include all exterior wall areas up to 10 feet above the finished grade.

3.    Height. Height limits are intended to control the overall scale of buildings. The maximum building height within the CB Zone emphasizes pedestrians and a mix of uses. Exceptions to maximum height:

•    Projection Allowed. Projections and architectural elements that do not add habitable interior floor area to a building, such as chimneys, spires, steeples, clock towers, skylights, atriums, elevator shaft housings, stair enclosures, trellises, railings, flag poles, signs, mechanical equipment and screens, antennas and other similar items not used for human occupancy, shall be allowed to exceed the maximum allowable building height limit by 10 feet.

4.    Landscaped Areas. Landscaping is not required in the CB Zone, except for the five-foot buffer next to Residential Zones. Landscaping is intended to soften the effects of built and paved areas. It also helps reduce stormwater runoff by providing a surface into which stormwater can percolate.

5.    Main Entrance. Fronting the main entrance of a building to the street enhances pedestrian access between the use inside the building and activities on the sidewalk. This orientation also enables building occupants to see what is happening in the street, such as arriving transit service.

K.    Pedestrian Standards. The pedestrian standards encourage a safe, attractive, and usable pedestrian circulation system in all developments. They ensure a direct pedestrian connection between the street and buildings on the site, and between buildings and other activities within the site. In addition, they provide for connections between adjacent sites, where feasible. A sidewalk circulation system must be hard-surfaced, and be at least six feet wide. Where the system crosses driveways, parking areas, and loading areas, the system must be clearly identifiable, through the use of elevation changes, speed bumps, a different paving material, or other similar methods. The on-site pedestrian circulation system must be illuminated to a level where employees, residents, and customers can use the system at night. Land between a building and the street property line must be landscaped and/or hard-surfaced for use by pedestrians.

L.    Setbacks. Setbacks promote streetscapes that are consistent with the desired character of the zones. The CB Zone promotes buildings close to the sidewalk to reinforce a pedestrian orientation and built-up streetscape. The setback requirements for areas that abut Residential Zones promote commercial development that will maintain light, air, and privacy in Residential Zones. The following items are allowed to encroach into setbacks:

•    Canopies, marquees, and awnings.

•    Uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps that lead to the street-facing facade.

•    Uncovered decks and stairways that are no more than two and one-half feet above ground.

•    Mechanical structures such as heat pumps, air conditioners, and emergency generators are not allowed. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2206, 2013; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 2.2.1000]


Chapter 2.3 MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS (ME, MR, PO, MU, and MN)

Sections:

2.3.100    Purpose and Applicability.

2.3.200    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.3.300    Development Standards.

2.3.400    Site Layout and Building Orientation.

2.3.500    Architectural Standards.

2.3.600    Special Development Standards for the MR Zone.


2.3.100 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    The Mixed-Use Districts are intended to provide a balanced mix of residential and employment opportunities to create focal points of activity in the form of mixed-use centers, nodes, or corridors. The Mixed-Use Districts support service commercial, employment, and housing needs of a growing community. The Mixed-Use District standards are based on the following principles:

•    Ensure efficient use of land and public services.

•    Create a mix of housing and employment opportunities.

•    Provide transportation options for employees and customers and reduce reliance on the automobile.

•    Provide business services close to major employment centers.

•    Ensure compatibility of mixed-use developments with the surrounding area and minimize off-site impacts associated with development.

•    Create economically successful mixed-use centers and transit corridors.

The Mixed-Use Districts, Mixed Employment (ME), Mixed-Use Riverfront (MR), Professional Office (PO), Mixed-Use Urban (MU), and Mixed-Use Neighborhood (MN), are identified on the City’s official Zoning Map. The districts serve distinctly different purposes as described below.

	Zone District	Location and Characteristics

	Mixed Employment District (ME)	The Mixed Employment Zone is intended to provide a broad mix of uses that offer a variety of employment opportunities. Where Mixed Employment Districts occur on the edge of the City, their function is more transitional in nature providing service commercial businesses and supporting residential uses in an aesthetic mixed environment. In this instance, when residential units are provided, the units shall be within easy walking distance to the commercial and employment uses.

	Mixed-Use Riverfront District (MR)	The Mixed-Use Riverfront District is intended to implement the Comprehensive Plan policies for the creative redevelopment of mill site properties adjacent to the Deschutes River. It is intended to allow for a mix of uses that:

	•	Provide a variety of employment opportunities and housing types;

	•	Foster pedestrian and other non-motor vehicle activity;

	•	Ensure functionally coordinated, aesthetically pleasing and cohesive site planning and design;

	•	Ensure compatibility of mixed-use development with the surrounding area and minimize off-site impacts associated with the development; and

	•	Encourage access to, and enjoyment of, the Deschutes River.

	Professional Office District (PO)	The Professional Office Zone is intended to provide for professional offices in locations near arterial or collector streets and to provide a transition of uses between residential areas and other more intensive zones. Through design standards, the Professional Office Zone is intended to create a mix of high density residential housing, office and service commercial developments that are pedestrian-oriented and provide a positive contribution to the streetscape.

	Mixed-Use Urban (MU)	The Mixed-Use Urban Zone is intended to provide opportunities for vibrant mixed-use centers and districts in areas with high-quality connectivity to and within the area. It is intended to allow for a denser level of development of a variety of commercial and residential uses than in surrounding areas with an emphasis on retail and entertainment uses at the street level. It is intended to provide for development that is supportive of transit by encouraging a pedestrian-friendly environment.

	Mixed-Use Neighborhood (MN)	The Mixed-Use Neighborhood Zone is intended to provide neighborhood-scaled, pedestrian-oriented mixed-use centers and corridors with a range of residential, retail, service, and office uses that are compatible with adjacent development.

B.    Applicability. The standards of this chapter apply to all development in the Mixed-Use Zoning Districts. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.3.200 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

A.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.3.200 are allowed in the Mixed-Use Districts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are listed in Table 2.3.200 and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.3.200 may be permitted or conditionally allowed. The land uses identified with a “C” in Table 2.3.200 require Conditional Use Permit approval prior to development, in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.4.

B.    Exceptions. Existing uses and buildings lawfully established under previously effective land use regulations are allowed to continue subject to BDC Chapter 5.2, except as otherwise specified in this section.

1.    Existing lawfully established residential uses are permitted in all Mixed-Use Zones and are not subject to BDC Chapter 5.2 unless otherwise nonconforming.

2.    Uses in the MU and MN Zones that are not in conformance with the provisions in this section but that were lawfully established in their current location prior to the adoption of this code shall be treated as permitted uses. Expansion or enlargement 25 percent or less of the above-referenced uses or structures that are nonresidential shall be subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review. For expansion or enlargement greater than 25 percent, the conditional use criteria, standards and conditions within BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits, shall also apply. Conditions of prior approvals shall continue to apply unless modified in conformance with BDC 4.1.1325, Modification of Approval.

Table 2.3.200 

Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	ME	MR	PO	MU	MN

	Residential

	Single-family detached dwelling	N	P	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	N	N

	Attached single-family townhomes*	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	P

	Two- and three-family housing*	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	P

	Multifamily residential*	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	P

	Temporary housing*	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	N	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	C

	Accessory dwelling units (ADU)*	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	L [see subsection (C)(1) of this section]	P	P

	Commercial

	Retail sales and service	L [see subsection (C)(2) of this section]	L [see subsection (C)(2) of this section]	N	P	L [see subsection (C)(2) of this section]

	Retail sales and service (auto dependent*)	C	N	N	N	N

	Retail sales and service (auto oriented*)	P	N	N	N	N

	Restaurants/food and beverage services	 	 	 	 	 

	– with drive-through*	C	N	N	N	N

	– without drive-through	P	P	P	P	P

	Offices and clinics	P	P	P	P	P

	Lodging (e.g., *bed and breakfast inns, hostels, timeshare)	P	P	N	P	P

	*Short-term rentals	P	P	N	P	P

	Hotel/motels	P	P	N	P	C

	– with conference center	P	P	N	P	N

	Commercial and public parking as primary use	P	P	C	P/C [see subsection (C)(3) of this section]	C

	Commercial storage	 	 	 	 	 

	– enclosed in building and on an upper story	P	P	N	L [see subsection (C)(4) of this section]	L [see subsection (C)(4) of this section]

	– not enclosed in building	N	N	N	N	N

	– enclosed in building on ground floor (i.e., mini-storage)	P	P	N	N	N

	Entertainment and recreation	 	 	 	 	 

	– enclosed in building (e.g., theater)	P	P	C	P	L/C [see subsection (C)(5) of this section]

	– not enclosed (e.g., amusement)	P	C	C	C	N

	Wholesale sales (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	P	P	N	N	N

	Broadcasting studios and facilities	P	P	N	P	N

	Hospital	P	C	C	C	N

	Day care	P	P	P	P	P

	Production offices	P	P	P	P	N

	*Medical marijuana dispensary and marijuana recreational retailer	L [see subsection (C)(2) of this section]	L [see subsection (C)(2) of this section]	N	P	L [see subsection (C)(2) of this section]

	*Marijuana wholesale (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	P	P	N	N	N

	*Marijuana testing, research and development facilities	P	P	N	P	C

	Public and Institutional

	Government – point of service intended to serve the entire City (e.g., City Hall, main library, main post office, main Department of Motor Vehicles service center)	P	P	C	P	C

	Government – branch service intended to serve a portion of the City	P	P	P	P	P

	Government – limited point of service (e.g., public works yards, vehicle storage, etc.)	N	N	N	N	N

	Parks and open space	P	P	P	P	P

	Schools	P	P	C	L/C [see subsection (C)(6) of this section]	L/C [see subsection (C)(6) of this section]

	Institution of higher education	P	P	P	P	C

	Clubs and places of worship	P	P	P	P	P

	*Utilities (above ground)	P	P	P	P	P

	Industrial

	Manufacturing and production	P	P	N	L [see subsection (C)(7) of this section]	L [see subsection (C)(7) of this section]

	*Marijuana processing of cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid products	P	P	N	L [see subsection (C)(7) of this section]	L [see subsection (C)(7) of this section]

	*Marijuana processing of cannabinoid extracts	P	N	N	N	N

	*Marijuana grow sites and marijuana producing	P	N	N	N	N

	Warehouse	P	P	N	N	N

	Transportation, freight and distribution	C	C	N	N	N

	Production businesses (e.g., IT support centers, biotechnology, software/hardware development, broadcast and production studios)	P	P	C	P	C

	Industrial service (e.g., cleaning, repair)	P	N	N	N	N

	Miscellaneous Uses

	*Small hydroelectric facility	P	P	P	P	P

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	Key to Districts	Key to Permitted Uses

	ME = Mixed Employment	P = Permitted

	MR = Mixed-Use Riverfront	N = Not Permitted

	PO = Professional Office	C = Conditional Use

	MU = Mixed-Use Urban	L = Limited as specified in subsection (C) of this section

	MN = Mixed-Use Neighborhood	 

*    Special standards for certain uses subject to BDC Chapter 3.6 and BDC 2.1.900.

C.    Limitations. The following limitations apply to those uses identified as “L” in Table 2.3.200:

1.    New Residential Uses. In order to ensure that the ME and PO Zones retain a focus on employment uses, new residential uses in the ME and PO Zones are limited as follows:

a.    Residential uses that are part of a mixed-use development in which nonresidential uses occupy at least the floor area equivalent to the entire ground-floor area of the development are permitted.

b.    Residential uses that are part of a mixed-use development in which nonresidential uses occupy less than the floor area equivalent to the entire ground-floor area of the development are conditional.

c.    Residential uses that are not part of a mixed-use development are prohibited.

2.    Retail Sales and Service and Medical Marijuana Dispensary and Marijuana Recreational Retailer. Retail sales and service uses and medical marijuana dispensary and marijuana recreational retailer uses are limited in certain Mixed-Use Zones as follows:

a.    In the MR and MN Zones, retail sales and service uses and medical marijuana dispensary and marijuana recreational retailer uses shall not exceed 50,000 square feet ground floor.

b.    In the ME Zone, retail sales and service uses and medical marijuana dispensary and marijuana recreational retailer uses shall not exceed 50,000 square feet ground floor, except that on property five acres or greater retail sales and service uses shall not exceed 75,000 square feet.

3.    Commercial and Public Parking. In the MU Zone, commercial or public parking in a parking structure shall be permitted. Surface parking lots for commercial and public parking as a stand-alone use (not accessory to another use on the site) shall require a conditional use permit.

4.    Commercial Storage. Commercial storage is permitted in an enclosed building and on an upper story; provided, that active uses, such as retail sales and service or restaurants/food services, are provided on at least 50 percent of the ground floor.

5.    Entertainment and Recreation. Entertainment and recreation uses in the MN Zone that are enclosed in a building shall not exceed 50,000 square feet per building without a conditional use permit.

6.    Schools. Schools in the MU and MN Zones shall not exceed a total site size of two acres without a conditional use permit.

7.    Manufacturing and Production. Manufacturing and production uses in the MU and MN Zones are limited to uses less than 5,000 square feet with a retail outlet. [Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2265, 2016; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.3.300 Development Standards. 

The following table provides the numerical development standards within the Mixed-Use Districts. Additional standards specific to each district follow within a separate section of this chapter.

 

Table 2.3.300 

Mixed-Use District Development Standards  

	Standard	ME	MR	PO	MU	MN

	Minimum Front Yard Setback	None	None**	10 feet	None	None

	Maximum Front Yard Setback (see subsection (A)(1) of this section)	10 feet/80 feet* (see subsection (A)(1)(e) of this section)	None**	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Rear Yard Setback	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)	None**	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)

	Side Yard Setback	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)	None**	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)	None/10 feet (see subsection (A)(2) of this section)

	Lot Coverage	None	None**	50%	None	None

	Building Height (see subsection (B) of this section)	45 feet	45 feet, except within 100 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River where the height is 35 feet**	45 feet	65 feet	45 feet

	Minimum Residential Density	See subsection (C) of this section	None	See subsection (C) of this section	Subject to RM Zone minimum density (see subsection (C) of this section)	Subject to RM Zone minimum density (see subsection (C) of this section)

	Maximum Residential Density	None	None	None	None	None

*    Subject to special standards in BDC 2.3.400

**    Subject to special standards in BDC 2.3.600

A.    Setbacks. Building setback standards provide building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation. Building setbacks are measured from the building footprint to the respective property line. The setback standards outlined in Table 2.3.300 apply to all new buildings and any building expansion, including primary structures and accessory structures.

1.    Front Yard Setbacks. In some of the Mixed-Use Districts, buildings are placed close to the street to create a vibrant pedestrian environment, slow traffic, provide a storefront character to the street, support future transit service, and encourage walking. The setback standards are flexible to encourage public spaces between sidewalks and building entrances (e.g., extra-wide sidewalks, plazas, squares, outdoor dining areas, and pocket parks). The standards also encourage the formation of solid blocks of commercial and mixed-use buildings for walkable Mixed-Use Districts.

a.    General Standards. See Table 2.3.300, Mixed-Use District Development Standards.

b.    Maximum Setback Calculation. Conformance with the maximum setback standard is achieved when one or both of the following is met:

i.    At least 90 percent of the building elevation facing the street that is subject to the maximum setback standard is at or within the maximum setback.

ii.    Where more than one building is proposed on a site, no less than 40 percent of the site’s frontage on a public or private street is occupied by one or more buildings that conform to the building setback and orientation standards of this chapter.

c.    The maximum setback standard may be increased as necessary when an approved usable public space with pedestrian amenities (e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, plaza, pocket park, outdoor dining area or a public square with seating) is provided between the building and front property line. (See also BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review Standards, and 2.2.700, Pedestrian Amenities, for related building entrance standards.)

d.    Multiple Frontage Lots. For buildings on sites with more than one frontage or through lots, the minimum front yard setback standards in Table 2.3.300 shall be applied as follows:

i.    For corner lots with two frontages, the maximum setback standards indicated in Table 2.3.300 shall be applied to all street frontages.

ii.    For through lots with two frontages, the maximum setback standards indicated in Table 2.3.300 shall be applied to only one of the frontages; provided, that where the abutting streets are of different street classification, the maximum setback standard shall be applied to the street with the higher classification.

iii.    For properties with three or more frontages, the maximum setback must be met on two abutting frontages.

e.    Exceptions to Front Yard Setbacks.

i.    In the ME and PO Zones, when the street fronting the development does not allow on-street parking, the maximum front yard setback of 80 feet applies. When on-street parking is permitted on the street fronting the development, the maximum front yard setback is 10 feet.

ii.    The following items are allowed to encroach into setbacks:

(A)    Canopies, marquees, and awnings.

(B)    Uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps that lead to the street-facing facade.

(C)    Uncovered decks and stairways that are no more than two and one-half feet above ground.

(D)    Mechanical structures such as heat pumps, air conditioners, and emergency generators are not allowed.

f.    Other special setbacks in conformance with BDC 3.4.200(J) may apply.

2.    Side and Rear Yard Setbacks.

a.    ME, MU and MN Zones. There is no rear or side yard setback required, except when abutting a Residential Zone. In such cases, the rear or side yard setback is 10 feet. Building step back standards in subsection (B)(3) of this section may also apply.

b.    PO Zone. There is no rear or side yard setback required, except when abutting a Residential Zone. In such cases, the rear yard setback is 10 feet and shall increase by one foot for each one foot the building height exceeds 25 feet.

c.    When a public alley abuts a side or rear yard of property within the PO or ME Zones, only the required 10-foot building setback shall apply.

B.    Height. All buildings in the Mixed-Use Districts shall comply with the height standards contained in Table 2.3.300 except as described below or in compliance with a variance approval.

1.    Height Bonus for Vertical Mixed Use. In the ME, MU and MN Zones the maximum height may be increased by 10 feet above the maximum allowed height when residential uses are provided above the ground floor (“vertical mixed use”), except for properties abutting a residentially designated district. The building height increase for residential uses applies only if the top floor is residential and does not apply to buildings that have variance approval to exceed the permitted height.

Figure 2.3.300 – Building Height Diagram (Residential Exception)
[IMAGE]


2.    Height Bonus for Affordable Housing. An increase in building height not to exceed 10 feet above the height of the zoning district may be allowed for multifamily housing when the additional units gained by the height increase are affordable housing units in conformance with BDC 3.6.200(C), except for properties abutting a residentially designated property. This shall not be combined with the increase in building height for vertical mixed use under subsection (B)(1) of this section.

3.    Building Height Step-Backs Abutting a Residentially Designated District. In the ME, MU, and MN Zoning Districts, portions of the building subject to this subsection (B) that exceed 35 feet in height or the height limit of the abutting residentially designated district, whichever is greater, shall step back one foot from side or rear lot lines abutting a residentially designated district for each foot the building height exceeds 35 feet or the height limit of the abutting residentially designated district.

C.    Residential Density. The following density standards apply to all new developments for residential uses in the Mixed-Use Districts. The density standards are intended to ensure efficient use of buildable lands and provide for a range of needed housing, in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. In the Mixed-Use Zones, residential density standards apply to any portions of the development where ground-floor residential uses are proposed. Area used to calculate residential density includes all area dedicated to parking and landscaping required for the ground-floor residential uses. Where ground-floor residential uses are part of a mixed-use development, area used to calculate residential density does not include land dedicated to right-of-way.

1.    ME and PO Zoning Districts. The minimum residential density standard in the ME and PO Zoning Districts is as follows:

a.    Where residential uses are part of a mixed-use development in which nonresidential uses occupy at least the floor area equivalent to the entire ground-floor area of the development, there is no minimum residential density standard except that for properties located within 660 feet of a transit route, the minimum residential density standards of the RM Zone shall apply.

b.    Where residential uses are part of a mixed-use development in which nonresidential uses occupy less than the floor area equivalent to the entire ground-floor area of the development, the minimum density standards of the RM Zone apply.

2.    MN and MU Zoning Districts. The minimum residential density standards of the RM Zone apply.

3.    There is no minimum residential density standard for “vertical” mixed use.

4.    Maximum residential density is controlled by the applicable lot coverage and building height standards.

D.    Other Requirements.

1.    Buffering. A 10-foot-wide landscape buffer is required along the side and rear property lines between nonresidential uses and any adjacent residentially designated districts. The buffer is not in addition to (may overlap with) the side and rear setbacks required in subsection (A) of this section. The buffer shall provide landscaping to screen parking, service and delivery areas and walls without windows or entries. The buffer may contain pedestrian seating but shall not contain trash receptacles or storage of equipment, materials, vehicles, etc. The landscaping standards in BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, provide other buffering requirements where applicable.

2.    Outdoor and rooftop mechanical equipment as well as trash cans/dumpsters shall be architecturally screened from view. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning units shall have a noise attenuating barrier to protect adjacent Residential Districts from mechanical noise.

3.    Building and Fire Codes. All developments shall meet applicable fire and building code standards. Larger setbacks than those listed above may be required due to the proposed use and/or storage of combustible materials.

E.    Landscaping. Development in the MU and MN Zones is exempt from the minimum landscaping area requirements of BDC 3.2.300(C). All other standards of BDC Chapter 3.2 are applicable. [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.3.400 Site Layout and Building Orientation.

In addition to the site layout and building orientation standards of BDC 2.2.500, all of the following standards shall apply to new and expanded development within the Mixed-Use Districts, unless otherwise specified in this code, in order to reinforce streets as public spaces and encourage alternative modes of transportation, such as walking, bicycling and transit.

A.    Walkway Connections. Walkways may be installed in setbacks as necessary to provide direct and convenient pedestrian circulation between developments and neighborhoods. Walkways shall conform to the standards in BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

B.    Parking.

1.    In the MU and MN Zones, parking and maneuvering areas shall be prohibited between the street and the building.

2.    In the ME and PO Zones, parking and maneuvering areas are prohibited between the street and the building when on-street parking is allowed on the street fronting the development property. Parking shall be provided in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.3. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.3.500 Architectural Standards.

All developments in the Mixed-Use Districts are subject to commercial design review, BDC 2.2.600, or BDC 2.1.900, Architectural Design Standards, for multifamily residential uses, as applicable, and shall be reviewed for conformance with the standards in this section unless otherwise specified in this code.

A.    In the MU and MN Districts, building facades that are oriented to the street and are within the maximum front setback standard under BDC 2.3.300 (referred to as “street walls”) shall be designed to provide visual interest for pedestrians as follows:

1.    Ground-floor windows must be installed for at least 50 percent of the length of the street wall and have an area equal to 60 percent of the ground-floor wall area of the street wall. Ground-floor wall area includes all wall areas up to 10 feet above finished grade. Windows are required to be transparent to foster both a physical and visual connection between activities in the building and pedestrian activities on the street.

2.    Weather protection shall be provided along 50 percent of the street wall and at all street-facing entrances. Weather protection projections may include but are not limited to awnings, marquees, balconies, overhangs, or building appendages. Weather projections are required to extend five feet over the sidewalk in order to meet this standard and must not obstruct or prevent the placement of street trees, tree canopies or other improvements within the public right-of-way. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.3.600 Special Development Standards for the MR Zone.

A.    Development Plans Required. The Mixed-Use Riverfront Zone shall only be applied to the area designated Mixed Riverfront on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map. Before development of properties can occur in the MR Zone, a Facilities Plan shall be reviewed for conformance with this chapter. Before development of properties, other than property described in subsection (C)(4) of this section, can occur in the MR Zone, a Master Development Plan and a Facilities Plan must be approved.

1.    The Facilities Plan shall be reviewed through a Type II procedure.

2.    The Master Development Plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission through a Type III procedure.

B.    Facilities Plan. Prior to or concurrent with submitting a Master Development Plan, a Facilities Plan that shows how the area will be served by roads and utilities shall be reviewed by the City through the Type II procedure.

1.    Due to the size and physical variations of the MR Zone area, the Facilities Plans shall be prepared for three sub-areas:

a.    West of the river and north of Colorado Avenue.

b.    West of the river and south of Colorado Avenue.

c.    East of the river.

2.    The Facilities Plan shall, at a minimum, include:

a.    A map of existing and planned water and sewer facilities to serve the sub-area including line sizes, general location or routes, and how the lines will tie in with areas adjacent to the MR Zone.

b.    A map of existing and planned collector and arterial streets adjacent to the sub-area and of the general route of planned collector, arterial, and major local streets through the sub-area and where the streets will connect with the existing collector or arterial street system.

c.    Such other utility or transportation information as the City may determine is necessary.

d.    The function and location of any private utility systems.

e.    A written narrative that explains or describes how the Facilities Plan meets the following approval criteria:

i.    The proposed water, sewer, and street system will be adequate to serve the type and size of development planned for the area;

ii.    The location and sizing of facilities on site will be consistent with the existing and planned utilities; and

iii.    Adequate water flow volumes will be provided to meet fire flow and domestic demands.

3.    The Facilities Plan shall be approved by the Review Authority if it is determined to be consistent with the criteria in subsection (B)(2)(e) of this section, and with the City’s Sewer and Water Public Facility Plans and Transportation System Plan.

C.    MR Zone Master Development Plan. The minimum acreage for an MR Zone Master Development Plan is 10 acres unless specifically exempted as described in subsection (C)(4) of this section. The MR Zone Master Development Plan shall include information that meets the requirements of subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section.

1.    The MR Zone Master Development Plan shall include a plan view drawing with dimensions that show the following elements and how they fit together as a functional design:

a.    Building envelope;

b.    Parking area location, size and access;

c.    Access points to local streets and major street network;

d.    Pedestrian/bicycle corridors;

e.    Landscape areas;

f.    Other open space and common areas;

g.    The expected uses to be developed and approximate square footage of building area in each category;

h.    Any private development covenants, conditions or restrictions that will be recorded with the property; and

i.    Any other information the City may require.

2.    The MR Zone Master Development Plan shall demonstrate that the proposal satisfies the following approval criteria:

a.    Creation of a stimulating and attractive mixed-use environment through the use and inter-relationship of open spaces, building locations, building scale and design, and pedestrian amenities;

b.    Providing pedestrian access and movement to and through the site in a manner that maximizes foot traffic exposure to goods and services and minimizes conflicts with vehicle circulation areas;

c.    Encouraging access to and enjoyment of the Deschutes River;

d.    Providing for traffic and service vehicle circulation between on-site uses as appropriate;

e.    Maintaining and improving the aesthetic and location advantages provided by the terrain and natural features of the site and minimizing alteration thereof as much as practicable;

f.    Reducing to a minimum any negative impacts of proposed uses on adjacent properties and ensuring the livability of residential areas when applicable;

g.    How the types and levels of uses are consistent with the planned function, capacity and level of service of transportation facilities.

3.    Upon approval of an MR Zone Master Development Plan, all subsequent building and site development must comply with the approved MR Zone Master Development Plan and the standards and conditions in this section. Minor alterations to an approved MR Zone Master Development Plan may be processed as a Type II application using the standards in this section. A minor alteration to a master plan may include adjustments to local street and pedestrian corridor alignments, alterations to site design guidelines, changes to lot configurations, and the relocation of plazas and open space within the master plan area provided the approved MR Zone Master Development Plan concept is not compromised.

4.    Exemptions.

a.    Properties less than 10 acres in size that are not a part of a previously approved and valid MR Zone Master Development Plan and cannot practicably be combined with surrounding properties in the MR Zone may apply independently for an MR Zone Master Development Plan in accordance with this subsection (C); and

b.    As an alternative to subsection (C)(4)(a) of this section, properties that were less than 10 acres in size on or before August 4, 1995, and that are not part of a previously approved and valid Master Development Plan may develop after obtaining Site Plan and Design Review approval from the Planning Commission after demonstrating compliance with BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review, BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review Standards, and BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. The Commission shall use the master planning and design objectives set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section to the extent applicable to the subject property. When determining compliance with BDC Chapter 4.2, BDC 2.2.600 applies even if BDC 2.2.600, by its express terms, would not otherwise apply to such an application.

Any proposed development that is on property within 100 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River is also subject to the design review standards in BDC 2.7.600, Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ).

D.    Building and Site Development Standards. In addition to the Master Development Plan approval above, the development of individual buildings and related areas shall comply with the following standards:

1.    Deschutes River Corridor Design Review. Property within 100 feet of the ordinary water mark of the Deschutes River shall comply with BDC 2.7.600, Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ).

2.    Building Design. Buildings and structures shall have architectural elements and features which are in scale with each other. The colors and exterior material of buildings within the Master Development Plan shall be compatible. Buildings housing retail uses shall provide ample window area oriented toward pedestrian walkways or plazas.

3.    Landscaping and Open Space. The design and development of landscaping and open space shall:

a.    Retain and conserve riparian vegetation within the bed and banks of the Deschutes River and adjacent to the river to the maximum extent practicable. There shall be no net loss of natural wetlands adjacent to the river.

b.    Emphasize the use of native trees, shrubs, or other plants adapted for survival and growth in the high desert life zone.

c.    Include street trees and parking area trees which are in scale with the development.

d.    Provide a cohesive open space and pedestrian network within the development, with appropriate connections to surrounding properties and uses.

e.    Provide pleasing transitions between uses, soften and buffer utility and loading areas, and provide pleasing textures and variety particularly next to buildings, along walkways, and within pedestrian plazas.

f.    Include open spaces and plazas which are in scale with the development and invite activity appropriate to adjoining uses.

4.    Operations within Buildings. For industrial and commercial uses all manufacturing, processing, assembling, packaging, repairing, and storing of equipment, materials and supplies shall occur within enclosed buildings. Exceptions to this requirement may be allowed as necessary to comply with State and local safety regulations.

5.    Refuse Collection and Recycling. Refuse collection and recycling areas for businesses shall be enclosed with a fence, wall or structure high enough to screen all collection bins.

6.    Outside Mechanical Equipment. Industrial or commercial heating, ventilation, air conditioning, or other mechanical equipment on rooftops or ground shall be screened with a material and design that is visually compatible with the building.

7.    Drainage. All drainage from buildings, parking/loading areas, and other impervious surfaces shall be retained on the development site or directed to a drainage facility as part of an overall drainage master plan using dry wells or other City-approved method such as landscaping, retention basin, swale, or similar bio-filtration systems that are not directly connected to a surface stream or canal.

8.    Parking. Motor vehicle and bicycle parking shall comply with the standards in BDC Chapter 3.3. The following exceptions to the parking standards may be allowed as part of the approved Master Development Plan:

•    The use of parking areas away or separated from the building or uses; and

•    Parallel parking on collector streets if bicycle lanes and adequate vehicle lanes are provided.

9.    Utilities. Electric power, natural gas, telephone and cable lines shall be installed underground.

10.    Industrial Air Emissions. There shall be no emission of odorous, toxic, noxious matter, or dust in such quantities from industrial operations as to produce a public nuisance or hazard.

11.    Local Streets. Local streets approved as part of the Master Development Plan may be public or private streets. If private streets are proposed as part of a Master Development Plan, they shall comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 2.4 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS (IG, IL)

Sections:

2.4.100    Purpose.

2.4.200    Applicability and Location.

2.4.300    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.4.400    Setbacks.

2.4.500    Lot Coverage.

2.4.600    Building Height.

2.4.700    Orientation and Architectural Design Standards.

2.4.800    Special Development Standards.


2.4.100 Purpose.

The Industrial Districts are intended to accommodate a range of light and heavy industrial land uses. They are intended to segregate incompatible industrial developments from other districts, while providing a high-quality environment for businesses and employees. This chapter guides the orderly development of industrial areas based on the following principles:

•    Provide for efficient use of land and public facilities and services.

•    Provide transportation options for employees and customers.

•    Locate business services close to major employment centers.

•    Ensure compatibility between industrial uses and nearby commercial and residential areas.

•    Provide appropriate design standards to accommodate a range of industrial users, in conformance with the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

•    Conserve industrial zoned lands for industrial uses. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.200 Applicability and Location.

This chapter applies to all development in the General Industrial District (IG) and Light Industrial District (IL). The Industrial Districts are identified on the City’s official Zoning Map. The districts serve distinctly different uses as described below.

	Zone District	Location and Characteristics

	General Industrial	This zone is intended to provide for the establishment of light and heavier industrial uses essential to the development of a balanced economic base in an industrial environment with a minimum conflict between industrial uses and nonindustrial uses.

	Light Industrial	This zone is intended to provide for heavier commercial and light industrial uses with easy access to collector and arterial streets.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.300 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

A.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.4.300 are permitted in each of the applicable districts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.4.300, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.4.300 through a development approval are allowed.

B.    Existing Uses. Office uses within an office building lawfully established within an Industrial Zone under previously effective land use regulations are a permitted use. Expansion or enlargement of 25 percent or less of such office uses or structures that are nonindustrial shall be subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review. For expansion or enlargement greater than 25 percent, Conditional Use Permit approval is also required. Conditions of prior approval shall continue to apply unless modified in conformance with BDC 4.1.1325, Modification of Approval.

Table 2.4.300 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	IG	IL

	Industrial

	Light manufacturing, fabrication and repair (e.g., appliances, electronic equipment, printing, furniture, signs and similar goods) with incidental sales associated with a permitted use.	P	P

	Heavy manufacturing, assembly, and processing of raw materials and recycling	P	C

	Junk yards, automobile wrecking yards, and similar uses	P	N

	Research and development facilities	C	P

	Wholesale warehousing, storage and distribution	P	P

	Fuel distribution	P	C

	Production office	C	P

	Wholesale processing uses (e.g., dry cleaning, laundry)	P	P

	Food and beverage processing and packaging	P	P

	*Marijuana grow sites and marijuana producing	P	P

	*Marijuana wholesale	P	P

	*Marijuana processing of cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid products	P	P

	*Marijuana processing of cannabinoid extracts	P	P

	Residential

	One caretaker unit shall be permitted for each development

Note: Other residential uses are not permitted; however, residences existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code may continue subject to the standards in BDC Chapter 5.2, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.	P	P

	Commercial

	Vehicle, equipment and boat repair, rental, storage, service	P	P

	Industrial service (e.g., cleaning, repair)	P	P

	Medical and dental laboratories and veterinary clinics	C	P

	Outdoor commercial uses (e.g., outdoor storage, building and garden supply)	C	C

	Small-scale personal and professional services	 	 

	•	up to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area (e.g., coffee shop/deli, dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, copy center, banks, and financial institutions and similar uses)*	C	C

	•	No limit to size (child care and similar uses)*	C	C

	Kennel with or without overnight boarding	P	C

	Equipment rental and repair services	P	P

	Corporate headquarters/office when co-located with a permitted or conditional use	C	P

	Mini-storage warehouse	P	P

	Contractor storage	P	P

	Heavy equipment sales	P	P

	Ambulance service/transportation yards	P	C

	Commercial parking lot	C	P

	Recreation facility (privately owned)	C	C

	Redemption center	C	P

	*Marijuana testing, research and development facilities	P	P

	Public and Institutional

	Government facilities where the public is generally not received (e.g., public safety, utilities, school district bus facilities, public works yards, transit and transportation, and similar facilities)	P	P

	*Utilities (above ground)	P	P

	Special district facilities (e.g., irrigation district, and similar facilities)	P	P

	Vocational and trade schools	C	C

	Public park and recreation facility	C	C

	Miscellaneous Uses

	*Small hydroelectric facility	P	P

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	Key to Districts:	Key to Permitted Uses

	IG = General Industrial District	P = Permitted

	IL = Light Industrial District	N = Not Permitted

	 	C = Conditional Use

*    Special standards in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards for Certain Uses, and BDC 2.4.800, Special Development Standards.

[Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.400 Setbacks.

Setbacks provide separation between industrial and nonindustrial uses for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation. All developments shall meet applicable fire and building code standards, which may require greater setbacks than those listed in this section (e.g., for combustible materials, etc.).

A.    Front Yard Setbacks.

1.    General Industrial District. The minimum front yard setback is 10 feet.

2.    Light Industrial District. The minimum front yard setback is 10 feet.

3.    Exceptions.

a.    Other special setbacks in conformance with BDC 3.4.200(J), Special Setbacks, may apply.

B.    Rear Yard Setbacks. There is no required rear yard setback in the IG or IL Industrial Districts, except when development is abutting a Residential Zone. In this situation, no building or structure shall be constructed less than 20 feet from the Residential District. Portions of buildings or structures that exceed 35 feet in height shall be set back an additional one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 35 feet.

C.    Side Yard Setbacks. There are no required side yard setbacks in the IG or IL Industrial Districts, except when development is abutting a Residential Zone. In this situation, no building or structure shall be constructed less than 20 feet from the Residential District. Portions of buildings or structures that exceed 35 feet in height shall be set back an additional one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 35 feet.

Table 2.4.400  

	Yard Setback	Light Industrial	General Industrial

	Minimum Front Yard	10 feet	10 feet

	Minimum Rear Yard*	0 feet / 20 feet (see BDC 2.4.400)	0 feet / 20 feet (see BDC 2.4.400)

	Minimum Side Yard*	0 feet / 20 feet (see BDC 2.4.400)	0 feet / 20 feet (see BDC 2.4.400)

	Maximum Lot Coverage	80%	80%

	Maximum Building Height**	50 feet	50 feet

*    These standards are supplemented by the provisions of this section.

**    Subject to the provisions of BDC 2.4.600, Building Height.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.500 Lot Coverage.

The maximum allowed lot coverage in the General Industrial and Light Industrial Districts is 80 percent. The maximum allowed lot coverage is computed by calculating the total area covered by buildings including accessory structures, and comparing this figure with the total area of the development site. Compliance with other sections of this code may preclude development of the maximum lot coverage for some land uses. [Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.600 Building Height.

The following building height standards are intended to promote land use compatibility and flexibility for industrial development at an appropriate community scale:

A.    Base Requirement.

1.    Buildings and structures in the General Industrial and Light Industrial Districts shall be no more than 50 feet in height and shall comply with the building setback standards in BDC 2.4.400.

B.    Exceptions. The height may be increased over the base height if approved through a Conditional Use Permit when one or more of the following mitigation methods are applied:

•    Additional setbacks;

•    Stepping down of building elevations;

•    Visual buffering, screening; and/or

•    Other appropriate measures to provide a height transition between industrial development and adjacent nonindustrial development.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.700 Orientation and Architectural Design Standards.

A.    Industrial Development Orientation. All industrial developments shall be oriented on the site to minimize off-site adverse impacts of noise, glare, smoke, dust, exhaust, vibration, etc., and protect the privacy of adjacent Nonindustrial Zones to the extent practicable. The following standards apply to all development in the Industrial Districts when abutting nonindustrial zoning districts.

1.    Equipment Standard. Mechanical equipment, lights, emissions, shipping/receiving areas, and other components of an industrial use that are outside of an enclosed building shall be located away from abutting Residential Zones, schools, parks and other nonindustrial zoned areas as practicable;

2.    Buffering Standard. The City may require a landscape buffer of a specific width, or other visual and/or sound barrier (fence, wall, landscaping, or combination of such measures), to mitigate adverse impacts that cannot be avoided through building orientation standards alone. For additional buffering standards see BDC 2.4.800(C).

Figure 2.4.700 – Industrial Development Orientation
[IMAGE]


B.    Architectural Standards. All developments in the Industrial Districts shall be evaluated during site plan review for conformance with the following standards:

1.    Building Mass. Where building elevations are oriented to the street, architectural features such as windows, pedestrian entrances, building offsets, projections, detailing, change in materials or similar features shall be used to break up large building facades and walls that are longer than 75 linear feet. A minimum of 15 percent of the horizontal building facade shall contain a variety of architectural features.

The horizontal building elevation facing an arterial or collector street shall provide a variety of the architectural features described above for a minimum of 30 percent of the horizontal building facade.

Figure 2.4.700.B

Architectural Features (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Note: Figure above is intended to illustrate typical building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required architectural style.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.4.800 Special Development Standards.

The Industrial Districts accommodate a range of manufacturing, industrial office uses, and small personal service commercial uses.

A.    Small-Scale Personal and Professional Services. Small-scale personal and professional services and incidental sales uses as specified in Table 2.4.300 shall comply with the following development standards:

1.    Small-scale personal service commercial uses may be allowed when accessory to a primary user of the industrial development (in the case of a large industrial area). No more than 10 percent or 2,500 square feet (whichever is greater) of a permitted or conditionally allowed industrial development may be occupied by an accessory commercial use, unless otherwise approved through a Conditional Use Permit.

2.    Primary use, small-scale personal and professional and incidental sale uses may occur as stand-alone businesses when the total gross floor area of each use does not exceed 2,500 square feet. For multiple uses, where the uses share one building, the total building area shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. A single use may occupy 5,000 square feet if approved through a Conditional Use Permit. These nonindustrial use buildings shall comply with the provisions of BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review Standards.

B.    Location Standards. Child care centers and other similar uses shall be limited to properties located at the perimeter of the Industrial Districts with frontage on arterial or collector streets, unless they are accessory to a primary permitted use. When these uses occur as a stand-alone building, the provisions of BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review Standards, apply.

C.    Buffering. A buffer with a minimum width of 20 feet is required between industrial development and any adjacent Residential Zoning District. The buffer shall provide landscaping to screen the industrial activities, such as parking, service and delivery areas, from the Residential Districts. The buffer shall not contain trash receptacles or be used for the storage of equipment, materials, vehicles, etc.

D.    Prohibited Uses. Retail medical marijuana dispensaries and marijuana recreational facilities. [Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 2.5 SURFACE MINING ZONING DISTRICT (SM)

Sections:

2.5.100    Purpose and Applicability.

2.5.200    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.5.300    Development Standards.

2.5.400    Site Plan Review.

2.5.500    Site Plan Requirements.

2.5.600    Special Requirements Near Residential Areas.

2.5.700    Procedure for Site Plan Review.

2.5.800    Approval of Site Plan.

2.5.900    Failure to Comply.

2.5.1000    Exceptions.


2.5.100 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    The purpose of the Surface Mining (SM) Zoning District is to allow the extraction of surface mining materials needed by the community while protecting the health and safety of adjoining residents and uses.

B.    Applicability. The standards of this chapter apply to all development in the SM Zoning District.

[Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.200 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

In the SM District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright or conditionally allowed subject to the provisions of this chapter:

Table 2.5.200 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	SM

	Industrial	 

	Rock crushing, processing, washing and sizing	P

	Extraction of materials including: sand, gravel, rock, cinders, pumice, topsoil, fill material (including select fill) and any other mineral or aggregate material	P

	Landfill**	C

	Utilities (above ground)	C

	Ore smelter***	C

	Other related activities using materials found primarily on site, such as concrete batching plants and mineral refining plants	C

	Accessory uses and structures	P

	Residential	 

	One caretaker unit shall be permitted for each development*

Other residential uses are not permitted; however, residences existing prior to August 7, 2006, may continue subject to the standards in BDC Chapter 5.2, Nonconforming Uses and Developments	P

	Commercial	 

	Sale of products produced on site	P

	Miscellaneous Uses	 

	*Small hydroelectric facility	P

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

Key to Table

P = Permitted Use

C = Conditional Use

(*) = Special standards for certain uses

(**) = When a written tentative approval by DEQ is submitted with the conditional use application

(***) = Using materials from the site subject to all applicable pollution controls

[Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.300 Development Standards.

In a SM District, the following standards apply:

A.    Lot Size. The minimum lot size shall be as determined by the Development Services Director to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

B.    Setbacks.

1.    Uses within a SM District shall be set back 100 feet from the property line when adjacent to a Residential Zoning District.

2.    The applicant shall provide the minimum setback required by this code for an adopted Upland Area of Special Interest, River Corridor Area of Special Interest or other identified Goal 5 resources or greater as determined necessary to protect and preserve the identified feature. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed setback is large enough to prevent any adverse impact to the resource. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.400 Site Plan Review.

In a SM Zone, a permitted or conditional use is subject to the provisions of this chapter. Before development of a new site or expansion of an existing site beyond the area covered by an existing State or County permit may begin, a Site Plan Review application, in conformance with BDC Chapter 4.2, shall be approved by the Development Services Director. Construction and development of the site shall be in conformance with the approved site plan. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.500 Site Plan Requirements.

In addition to the submittal requirements of BDC Chapter 4.2, the Site Plan Review application shall provide the following:

A.    A reclamation plan, which meets the guidelines and in a format established by Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI).

B.    A maintenance program. All buildings, structures and equipment used for the production and processing of minerals and other materials affected by this title shall be maintained in such a manner as to assure that such buildings, structures and equipment will not become dilapidated or hazardous. The reclamation plan shall also address disposition of buildings, structures and equipment used in production and processing of minerals and other materials, offices, storage garage and watchman’s house or any remains of any structures and equipment.

C.    Air, water and noise requirements. Air and water quality and noise level shall be in accordance with the requirements of State and Federal laws and regulations and City codes.



 

D.    A complete description of all planned uses.

E.    The Development Services Director may require the following at the time of Site Plan Review approval:

1.    An increase or decrease in required setbacks.

2.    Screening of the proposed use, or parts thereof, by fencing or landscaping.

3.    Limitations on lighting.

4.    An adequate plan for phased mining and reclamation of the site.

5.    Restrictions on the hours, days and noise levels of operation.

6.    Dust-free site access roads near residential areas.

7.    Adequate water supplies to enable landscaping reclamation and dust control conditions are to be met. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.600 Special Requirements Near Residential Areas.

A.    Unless the applicant can show that the natural topography of the site offers sufficient screening of the site from public view, the exposed side of the operation shall be screened with landscaped berms, hedges, walls, fences or similar devices to effectively screen the site from the public.

B.    If necessary, the Development Services Director may determine that meeting screening requirements is not economically feasible or physically possible.

C.    When an unusually high level of conflict between the proposed SM use and surrounding uses exists, off-site stockpiling and/or processing may be required. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.700 Procedure for Site Plan Review.

Site plan review applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the criteria of BDC Chapter 4.2 and this chapter following a Type II review process.

The City’s decision shall also be based on the impact of the proposed use on nearby uses of land, the impact of traffic on affected public facilities and the economic, social and environmental impact on the community. [Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.800 Approval of Site Plan.

Subsequent to receiving Site Plan Review approval, operation of the approved use is valid for a period of time specified by the reclamation plan. A bond or security deposit in a form satisfactory to the City shall be required to cover costs plus 20 percent of reclamation and other pertinent conditions. [Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.5.900 Failure to Comply.

A.    If the Development Services Director determines that the permittee is not in compliance with the Site Plan Review approval, he or she may institute enforcement proceedings to require such compliance. Enforcement may include citing the permittee to Municipal Court, injunctive proceedings, enforcement of any bond provisions or other appropriate legal recourse.

B.    If a permittee fails to faithfully perform the reclamation required by his reclamation plan, or if the bond or security deposit required by this section is not sufficient to compensate the City for all reasonable necessary expenses incurred by it in performing the reclamation plan, the amount due shall be a lien upon all property, whether real or personal, owned by the permittee. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 2.5.1000]


2.5.1000 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.    Mineral and aggregate activities when assumed by the Oregon Division of State Lands pursuant to ORS 541.605 through 541.660.

B.    Dredging mineral and aggregate materials administered by Oregon Division of State Lands pursuant to ORS 517.611 through 517.700.

C.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede the provisions of the Forest Practices Act (ORS 527.610 through 527.730), as amended by Chapter 400, Section I of Oregon Laws of 1979 and regulations which preempt City law. [Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 2.5.1100]


Chapter 2.6 PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONING DISTRICT (PF)

Sections:

2.6.100    Purpose and Applicability.

2.6.200    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.6.300    Development Standards.


2.6.100 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    Purpose. The Public Facilities (PF) Zoning District is intended to provide area for buildings and facilities that are owned and operated by Federal, State, or local governments, public utilities, special districts, or nonprofit organizations which are used to provide governmental or public services. This zone also provides for school sites, public park and recreational facilities, natural areas, trails, wetlands, and similar types of open space owned and managed by a local government or special district.

B.    Applicability. The PF Zoning District is identified on the City’s official Zoning Map. The properties identified within the PF Zone shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.6.200 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

A.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.6.200 are permitted or conditionally allowed in the PF Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this code.

B.    Existing Uses. Uses and structures lawfully established within the Public Facilities Zone under previously effective land use regulations may continue subject to BDC Chapter 5.2.

Table 2.6.200 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	PF

	Publicly owned buildings such as City Hall, County courthouse, administrative buildings, library, museum, fire station, public safety training facilities, and similar structures, but excluding correctional facilities	P

	Public parks, playgrounds, swimming pool, skateboard park, pedestrian/bicycle trails and similar public recreation facilities	P

	Publicly owned and operated community meeting halls, lodges, and conference halls open to and used by the general public	P

	Public reservoirs, well sites, pump stations, utilities (above ground), and similar utility buildings or structures	P

	Institution of higher education	P

	Schools	P

	Trails, natural areas, open space, future park sites, and similar public or special district-owned lands with no or minimal improvements	P

	Accessory uses and buildings customarily used to support a permitted use or an approved conditional use	P

	Minor repairs and maintenance to any permitted or conditional use	P

	Parking lots and parking areas to serve a permitted or conditional use	P

	Public utility maintenance facilities and operation yards with outdoor storage of materials and supplies	C

	High schools operated by the Bend-La Pine School District	C

	Ball fields, sport complexes, and similar outdoor recreational areas that have night lighting or amplified sound systems	C

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	County solid waste disposal sites or solid waste transfer sites	C

	Correctional facilities for adults and juveniles including work farms and training centers	C

	Park sites with outdoor amphitheater or facilities for community events such as music or theater performances, and similar events	C

	*Small hydroelectric facility	P

Key to Permitted Uses

P = Permitted

N = Not Permitted

C = Conditional Use

*    Special standards for certain uses subject to BDC Chapter 3.6 and BDC 2.1.900.

[Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.6.300 Development Standards.

Development standards provide building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation.

Table 2.6.300 

	Standard	PF

	Lot Area	No requirement

	Lot Width	No requirement

	Lot Depth	No requirement

	Front Yard Setback	None, except when abutting to a Residential Zone, then the front yard setback to a building or parking area shall be the required setback of the abutting Residential Zone

	Side and Rear Yard Setback	None, except when abutting a Residential Zone, then the side or rear setback to a building or parking area is 10 feet. The required side and rear yard setback shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the structure exceeds 20 feet in height

	Building Height	35 feet except where a setback of 100 feet can be provided the building height may be a maximum of 55 feet. If the abutting zoning district allows buildings taller than 35 feet, the height of the abutting zone may be applied to the PF Zone

	Lot Coverage	No maximum requirement

A.    Other Requirements.

1.    In addition to the requirements in BDC Chapter 3.3, parking and loading areas abutting or directly across the street from a Residential Zone shall be set back the minimum front yard setback as indicated in Table 2.6.300. This setback area shall be appropriately landscaped along the residential street frontage to protect the character of the adjoining residential property and to shield vehicle headlights.

2.    All service, repair, processing, or storage on property abutting or across the street from a Residential Zone shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the Residential Zone by a site-obscuring fence or wall.

B.    Special Design Standards. All buildings constructed within the Public Facilities District shall be reviewed for conformance with the standards in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section unless otherwise specified in this code.

1.    Building Mass. Where building elevations are oriented to the street in conformance with BDC 2.2.500, Site Layout and Building Orientation, architectural features, such as windows, pedestrian entrances, building offsets, projections, detailing, a change in materials or similar features, shall be used to break up large building facades and walls greater than 50 feet in length. A minimum of 15 percent of the horizontal building facade and a minimum of 10 percent of all other horizontal building elevations shall contain a variety of architectural features.

2.    Pedestrian-Scale Building Entrances. Recessed entries, canopies, and/or similar features shall be used at the entries to buildings in order to create a pedestrian scale. [Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 2.7 SPECIAL PLANNED DISTRICTS, REFINEMENT PLANS, AREA PLANS AND MASTER PLANSRevised 11/19 Revised 2/20 Revised 4/20

Sections:

2.7.100    Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

Article I. Lava Ridge Refinement Plan

2.7.200    Lava Ridge Refinement Plan.

Article II. NorthWest Crossing Overlay Zone

2.7.300    NorthWest Crossing Overlay Zone.

2.7.310    Definitions.

2.7.320    Districts.

2.7.330    NorthWest Crossing Special Street Standards.

Article III. Dean Swift Refinement Plan Development Standards

2.7.400    Dean Swift Refinement Plan Development Standards.

Article IV. Medical District Overlay Zone

2.7.500    Medical District Overlay Zone.

2.7.510    Purpose and Applicability.

2.7.520    Permitted Land Uses.

2.7.530    Development Standards.

2.7.540    Special Development Standards.

2.7.550    Architectural Design Standards.

Article V. Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ)

2.7.600    Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ).

2.7.610    Purpose.

2.7.620    Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone.

2.7.630    River Corridor Areas of Special Interest Sub-Zone.

2.7.640    Floodplain Combining Zone.

2.7.650    Deschutes River Corridor Design Review Combining Zone.

Article VI. Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone

2.7.700    Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone.

Article VII. Murphy Crossing Refinement Plan

2.7.800    Murphy Crossing Refinement Plan.

2.7.810    Purpose.

2.7.820    Districts.

2.7.830    Murphy Crossing Special Street Standards.

Article VIII. Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay

2.7.900    Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay.

2.7.910    Purpose and Applicability.

2.7.920    Residential Density.

2.7.930    Special Development Standards.

Article IX. Farmington Reserve Master Planned Development

2.7.950    Farmington Reserve Master Planned Development.

2.7.955    Applicability.

2.7.960    Purpose.

2.7.965    Permitted Uses.

2.7.970    Development Standards.

2.7.975    Street Improvement Standards.

Article X. Central Oregon Community College (COCC) – Special Planned District/Overlay Zone

2.7.1000    Central Oregon Community College (COCC) – Special Planned District/Overlay Zone.

2.7.1001    Purpose.

2.7.1002    Definitions.

2.7.1003    Applicability.

2.7.1004    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.7.1005    Parking.

2.7.1006    Access and Circulation.

2.7.1007    Transportation.

2.7.1008    Development Not Requiring Site Plan Approval.

2.7.1009    Natural Resource Plan.

2.7.1010    COCC Road/Drive Design Review.

Article XI. Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone

2.7.2000    Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone.

2.7.2010    Purpose.

2.7.2020    Implementation.

2.7.2030    Employment Sub-District.

2.7.2040    Town Center Sub-District – Reserved for Future.

2.7.2050    Educational Sub-District – Reserved for Future.

2.7.2060    Residential Sub-District – Reserved for Future.

Article XII. Stone Creek Master Planned Development

2.7.3000    Stone Creek Master Planned Development. Revised 11/19

2.7.3010    Applicability. Revised 11/19

2.7.3020    Purpose. Revised 11/19

2.7.3030    Permitted Uses. Revised 11/19

2.7.3040    Development Standards. Revised 11/19

2.7.3050    Single-Family District. Revised 11/19

2.7.3055    Multifamily District. Revised 11/19

2.7.3060    Public/Community Use Districts. Revised 11/19

2.7.3065    Commercial District. Revised 11/19

2.7.3070    Housing Mix and Density. Revised 11/19

2.7.3075    Street and Pedestrian Standards. Revised 11/19

Article XIII. Wildflower Master Planned Development

2.7.3100    Wildflower Master Planned Development.

2.7.3110    Applicability.

2.7.3115    Purpose.

2.7.3125    Districts.

2.7.3130    Wildflower Glen Housing District.

2.7.3135    Wildflower Hills Multifamily Housing District.

2.7.3140    Wildflower Plaza Mixed Employment (ME) District.

2.7.3145    Site Plan and Design Review.

2.7.3150    Street and Pedestrian Standards.

Article XIV. Bend Central District

2.7.3200    Bend Central District (BCD).

2.7.3205    Bend Central District Purpose. Revised 4/20

2.7.3207    Main Streets. Revised 4/20

2.7.3210    Applicability. Revised 4/20

2.7.3220    Land Uses. Revised 4/20

2.7.3230    Development Standards. Revised 4/20

2.7.3240    Design Standards. Revised 4/20

2.7.3245    Commercial-Ready Space. Revised 4/20

2.7.3250    Parking. Revised 4/20

2.7.3260    Special Street Standards. Revised 4/20

2.7.3270    Low Impact Stormwater Management. Revised 4/20

2.7.3280    Landscaping. Revised 4/20

Article XV. Shilo Master Planned Development (Repealed by Ord. NS-2351)

Article XVI. River Vale Master Planned Development

2.7.3400    River Vale Master Planned Development.

2.7.3410    Applicability.

2.7.3420    Purpose.

2.7.3430    Development Standards.

2.7.3440    Street Standards.

Article XVII. Oregon State University – Cascades Overlay Zone

2.7.3500    Oregon State University – Cascades.

2.7.3510    Purpose and Applicability.

2.7.3520    Definitions.

2.7.3530    Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses.

2.7.3540    Special Development Standards.

2.7.3550    Parking and Loading.

2.7.3560    Special Street Standards.

2.7.3570    Transportation Mitigation Plan.

2.7.3580    Transportation and Parking Demand Management Plan.

2.7.3590    Future Capacity Reservation.

Article XVIII. 15th Street School Overlay Zone

2.7.3600    15th Street School Overlay Zone.

2.7.3610    Purpose.

2.7.3620    Definitions.

2.7.3630    Applicability.

2.7.3640    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

2.7.3650    Development Standards.

2.7.3660    Design Standards.

2.7.3670    Access, Landscaping and Parking.

2.7.3680    Special Street Standards.

2.7.3690    Transportation Mitigation Plan.

2.7.36100    Future Capacity Reservation.

Article XIX. Discovery West Master Planned Development

2.7.3700    Discovery West Master Planned Development.

2.7.3710    Purpose.

2.7.3720    Applicability.

2.7.3730    Districts.

2.7.3740    Review Procedures.

2.7.3750    Large Lot Residential District.

2.7.3760    Standard Lot Residential District.

2.7.3770    Residential Mixed-Use District.

2.7.3780    Commercial/Mixed Employment District.

2.7.3790    Special Street Standards.

Article XX. Shevlin West Master Planned Development

2.7.3800    Shevlin West Master Planned Development.

2.7.3810    Purpose. Revised 2/20

2.7.3820    Applicability. Revised 2/20

2.7.3830    Permitted and Conditional Uses. Revised 2/20

2.7.3890    Special Development Standards. Revised 2/20

Article XXI. Petrosa Master Planned Development

2.7.3900    Petrosa Master Planned Development.

2.7.3910    Purpose. Revised 4/20

2.7.3920    Applicability. Revised 4/20

2.7.3930    Definitions. Revised 4/20

2.7.3940    Review Procedures. Revised 4/20

2.7.3950    Residential Zoning Districts. Revised 4/20

2.7.3960    Commercial General. Revised 4/20

2.7.3970    Special Street Standards. Revised 4/20

2.7.3980    Transportation Mitigation Plan. Revised 4/20

2.7.3990    Future Capacity Reservation. Revised 4/20

Article XXII. Treeline Master Planned Development

2.7.4000    Treeline Master Planned Development.

2.7.4010    Purpose. Revised 4/20

2.7.4020    Applicability. Revised 4/20

2.7.4030    Districts. Revised 4/20

2.7.4040    Review Procedures. Revised 4/20

2.7.4050    Residential Zoning Districts. Revised 4/20

2.7.4060    Special Street Standards. Revised 4/20


2.7.100 Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans describe in more detail the type of development planned for a specific area than is typically found in a Comprehensive Plan, zone map, or public facilities plan. A Special Planned District, Refinement Plan or Area Plan may be initiated by the City Council at its own initiative in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, and BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments and the Area Plan policies contained in Chapter 11 of the Comprehensive Plan (Type IV process), or at the request of property owners in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, and BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments (Type III process). [Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]

Article I. Lava Ridge Refinement Plan


2.7.200 Lava Ridge Refinement Plan.


[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.200.A

The area covered by the Lava Ridge Refinement Plan is approximately 700 acres of partially developed land on the northeast edge of Bend. It is bounded on the north by Cooley Road, to the east by the Urban Growth Boundary, to the south by Empire Boulevard and to the west by the railroad.

The purpose of the Lava Ridge Refinement Plan is to create overlay zoning standards for the Residential and Commercial Districts within the refinement plan area. The refinement plan objectives are:

•    Identify and coordinate street and utility locations.

•    Develop a street plan that will allow individual property owner to develop independently and still create an interconnected street system and compatible uses.

•    Designated neighborhood open space and provide a mechanism for construction and maintenance of designated parks.

•    Determine density locations and ranges that will allow flexibility for individual property owners.

•    Establish design standards for street, sidewalks and building locations to create streetscapes that are safe and accessible for pedestrians.

The plan promotes the development of neighborhoods based on traditional planning principles. A network of connected streets, some narrower than the current standard, will help to reduce cut-through traffic while distributing local traffic more evenly. Neighborhood parks are provided, particularly in higher density areas. Neighborhood commercial at the edge of the neighborhood can reduce daily car trips while keeping the associated commercial traffic away from the residential areas.

A.    Residential Density and Development Provisions. The permitted residential densities shall be the same as in the underlying zones except as specified below:

1.    In the RL Zone, a parcel or a lot in existence on September 6, 2000 (the date of adoption of the Lava Ridge Refinement plan) may be partitioned into no more than two lots. This standard shall apply even if sewer service is provided to the RL Zone.

2.    In the RS Zone in the area north of Morningstar Drive in Sections 17-12-15CB and 17-12-15CC, all new lots next to the Morningstar subdivision lots shall have a minimum width of 100 feet along any rear or side property line that abuts the existing Morningstar subdivision lots.

B.    Neighborhood Public Parks. Public parks shall be provided at the locations depicted in Figure 2.7.200.B, Parks and Pedestrian Access Ways, of the refinement plan. The developer shall work with the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District on park design to comply with district standards. The developer may be reimbursed by the Park District for park land and/or construction costs up to the amount of park system development charges for the development. Procedures for developing such proposals are outlined in the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District SDC Ordinance No. 1, Section 7. The proposal to develop a park and receive park SDC credits must first be approved by the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District Board of Directors. Upon construction of the park to district standards and reimbursement to the developer, the designated park land shall be transferred to Park District ownership. The Park District shall be responsible for ongoing park maintenance.


[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.200.B


[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.200.C

C.    Street and Pedestrian Standards. Street and pedestrian standards shall be consistent with the requirements of the Bend Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance, except as set forth below:

	1. Boyd Acres Road.	
[IMAGE]


	2. Empire Boulevard.	
[IMAGE]


	3. Local Street.	
[IMAGE]


	4. Local Street with Median.	
[IMAGE]


	5. Alley. Alleys shall include a minimum of 20 feet of right-of-way and 16 feet of paved travel surface.	
[IMAGE]


	6. Pedestrian Access Way. Pedestrian access ways shall be located within a right-of-way no less than 14 feet wide. The trail or path shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and paved with asphalt or concrete.	
[IMAGE]


7.    Hammerhead Streets. Hammerhead streets meeting the following design standards may be permitted in the Lava Ridge Refinement Plan RM and RS Zones.

a.    Hammerhead streets shall be private streets.

b.    The hammerhead street length shall be no more than 150 feet.

c.    The minimum right-of-way width shall be 40 feet plus a five-foot utility easement on each side.

d.    Utility easements shall be required for public and/or private development.

e.    The minimum street pavement width shall be 20 feet.

f.    The maximum public street block length shall be 600 feet.

g.    The maximum width of a housing cluster on a hammerhead street shall be 300 feet.

h.    Sidewalks are not required within the cluster.

i.    Sidewalks shall be required on the external public streets.

j.    Parking is not permitted on the hammerhead street.

k.    Off-street parking requirements shall be met for underlying zone.

l.    Landscaping on interior of hammerhead cluster shall be required in area from house to edge of pavement.

m.    Street Frontage. Houses on lots fronting a public street, except an arterial, shall face the public street.

n.    Building setback shall be the same as the underlying zone unless modified in the plat.

o.    Fences or walls adjacent to an arterial shall be approved at the time of plat. Walls shall be built with varied texture and materials and shall comply with any adopted design standards. The maximum height shall be six feet except where the elevation between the arterial street and the lot line exceeds eight feet, in which case reductions to the wall or fence height may be required. The area between the fence or wall and the arterial curb shall be landscaped and maintained by abutting property owner(s) or homeowners association.

p.    Fencing. On hammerhead and public streets, except arterials, fences within the yard setback area may not exceed three and a half feet in height. A fence up to six feet in height may be constructed outside of the setback area; provided, that it is no closer to the street than the building face. A fence up to six feet in height may be constructed on rear lot line.

D.    Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided along all arterial streets and streets designated as connector streets on Figure 2.7.200.C, Lava Ridge Plan Circulation Plan diagram. Only street trees from a list maintained by the City Planning Department shall be planted. Street trees shall be planted 25 to 30 feet on center. Trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper measured four feet from ground level.

E.    Block Perimeter. In addition to block length standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, the perimeter of blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet.

F.    Design Review and Building Orientation.

1.    Design review standards in BDC 2.2.600 shall apply to development in the Commercial and Professional Office Zones and any other Design Review Overlay District specified in BDC 2.2.600.

2.    Residential development shall be oriented to a street, with a primary entrance that fronts on the street. Garages shall be no more than five feet in front of the front of the house. Front sides of garages shall represent no more than 50 percent of the building frontage of any residential structure. The width of the garage door opening shall be used to determine the percentage of frontage. The Planning Director or designee may waive the standards if they are impractical due to factors including, but not limited to, the following:

•    When the slope at the front of the lot exceeds 12 percent.

•    Preservation of natural features, such as rock outcrops.

•    Preservation of trees or other vegetation.

•    Lot width at the front property line of lots existing prior to December 3, 2004, is less than 50 feet.

G.    Area of Special Interest. Areas of Special Interest shown on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map shall be subject to policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

H.    Fences. Walls and fences in the setback area between the front of the house and the adjacent local or collector street shall not exceed three and a half feet in height. Six-foot-high fences are permitted outside the front yard setback area between the property line and the building and on side lot lines. Fences up to six feet high may be provided along alleys.

Figure 2.7.200.D

Fence Setbacks
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2037, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1944, 2004; Ord. NS-1754, 2000]

Article II. NorthWest Crossing Overlay Zone


2.7.300 NorthWest Crossing Overlay Zone.

The purpose of the NorthWest Crossing Overlay Zone is to implement the NorthWest Crossing Master Development Plan and the Bend Comprehensive Plan policies regarding the NorthWest Crossing property, and to create overlay zoning standards for the Residential, Commercial and Industrial Districts within the NorthWest Crossing Master Development Plan boundaries. The overlay zone standards will:

•    Provide a variety of employment opportunities and housing types.

•    Locate higher density housing adjacent to collector and arterial streets or public parks.

•    Create opportunities for community commercial and small-scale businesses in selected locations to foster a mixed-use residential neighborhood.

•    Promote pedestrian and other multi-modal transportation options.

•    Ensure compatibility of uses within the development and with the surrounding area.

•    Create an interconnected system of streets with standards appropriate to the intensity and type of adjacent use.

•    Create safe and attractive streetscapes that will meet emergency access requirements and enhance pedestrian and bicycle access.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2198, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1968, 2005; Ord. NS-1892, 2003; Ord. NS-1782, 2001]


2.7.310 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to uses, building types and standards that are specific to the NorthWest Crossing Overlay Zone:

A.    Accessory dwelling means a separate, complete dwelling unit, either attached to or separate from the primary dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling may be no larger than 40 percent of the living area, excluding the garage, of the primary dwelling, or 600 square feet, whichever is less. Maximum height for a detached accessory dwelling is 24 feet. Accessory dwelling units must meet the setbacks for the City of Bend Standard Density Residential (RS) Zone. Accessory dwellings may be permitted on any lot in accordance with the provisions of the RS Zone.

B.    Community commercial means a building not exceeding a total of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area containing a retail, service, office, or food and beverage service establishment, excluding drive-through. A community commercial building is a stand-alone commercial use to serve neighborhood needs. It is not intended to draw large numbers of patrons from outside of the neighborhood. The design of the building shall be residential in scale and character. Off-street parking is limited to a maximum of one space per 500 square feet of building. Off-street parking must be located at the side or rear of the building. The public entrance to the building shall be on the primary street frontage.

C.    Cottage means a small, detached dwelling unit, not greater than 1,200 square feet in total floor area, developed in accordance with the standards contained in BDC 2.7.320(E) that is developed at a density greater than the underlying zone.

D.    Cluster housing development is detached single-family cottages in a cluster around a central shared open space and has the following characteristics:

1.    Each cottage is of a size and function suitable for a single person or very small family;

2.    Each cottage has the construction characteristics of a single-family house; 

3.    Cottages may be located on platted lots or as units in a condominium development and may share use of common facilities such as a party room, tool shed, garden, workshop and parking areas;

4.    The site is designed with a coherent concept in mind, including shared functional open space, off-street parking areas, access within the site and from the site, and consistent landscaping;

5.    Each tentative plat or condominium plat for a cluster housing development within the NorthWest Crossing Cluster Housing Overlay District shall be reviewed against the regulations of this zoning district;

6.    A cluster housing development shall have a homeowners association for the ownership and management of shared open space and common parking areas.

E.    Live/work dwelling means a dwelling in which a business may be operated on the ground floor. The ground floor commercial or office space has visibility, signage and access from the primary street. To preserve the pedestrian orientation of the commercial or office space, alley access is required to provide trash service and residential parking. A live/work dwelling is allowed instead of, or in addition to, home occupation as defined by this code. The location of lots where live/work dwellings may be sited shall be specified on the subdivision plat. The permitted live/work housing types are defined below:

1.    Live/work house means a single-family detached house with no more than 50 percent of the ground floor of the building available as commercial or office space.

2.    Live/work townhome means a residential, fee simple townhome unit in which a business may be operated. The commercial or office portion of the building shall be limited to the ground floor and may not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the entire building, excluding the garage.

3.    Live/work apartment means a primarily residential multi-story, multi-unit building with a maximum of 50 percent of the building ground floor square footage used as commercial or office space. Residential units may be for rent or for sale in condominium or cooperative ownership.

F.    Parking district means the area designated for common parking lots or facilities in the two NorthWest Crossing Commercial/Mixed Employment Districts. Each Commercial/Mixed Employment District has areas designated for common off-street parking lots or facilities designed to serve the minimum parking needs for permitted uses in the Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment Districts. The designated parking areas will be located behind or at the side of buildings permitted in the Parking District, or on private streets within the Parking District. The designated common parking areas will allow all buildings to be close to the street to create a lively pedestrian-oriented commercial streetscape. A public entrance to all buildings shall be on the primary street frontage.

G.    Primary street frontage means the location along a street in the Residential Mixed-Use District where live/work housing or community commercial uses may be located. Table 2.7.320 identifies areas and limits the maximum lot frontage along the primary street frontage that may be used for live/work housing or community commercial uses in each area. The primary entrance to the office or commercial portion of live/work housing or a community commercial building must be located on the primary street frontage.

H.    Townhome means a single-family dwelling type with common walls on one or both side lot lines and continuous front facades. Townhomes are the highest density housing type in NorthWest Crossing that provides yards and fee simple ownership. Townhomes may be located on lots with detached garages and accessory dwellings. Alleys, to the rear of the building, provide parking and service access. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2198, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1968, 2005; Ord. NS-1892, 2003; Ord. NS-1782, 2001]


2.7.320 Districts.

A.    Applicability. The special standards of the NorthWest Crossing overlay districts shall supersede the standards of the underlying zone. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone shall apply.

B.    Standard Density Residential District.

1.    Purpose. The purpose of the Standard Density Residential District is to implement the Standard Density Residential Zone with flexibility to allow greater lot coverage to accommodate single-family houses on small lots. The Standard Density Residential District in NorthWest Crossing also is the base zone for the Residential Overlay Districts described in this subsection and subsections (C) through (F) of this section.

2.    Application of Residential Overlay Districts. The standards of the Standard Density Residential Zone, as provided for in this section, shall apply to the land zoned as Standard Density Residential. Where a Residential Overlay District is shown, the special standards of the Overlay District shall apply to uses permitted by the Overlay District.

3.    Uses Permitted.

a.    All uses permitted in the Standard Density Residential Zone, except neighborhood commercial uses.

b.    Duplex on a lot identified as a duplex lot on an approved subdivision plat, subject to RS minimum lot size for a duplex.

c.    Notwithstanding subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section, preschool use and child care facility use shall not be permitted on Tax Lot 311 of Deschutes County Assessor’s Map 17-11-36 (more specifically described in Exhibit C of Ordinance NS-2131).

d.    Notwithstanding subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section, the use of the approximately 100-foot-wide set aside area on Tax Lot 311 of Deschutes County Assessor’s Map 17-11-36 (more specifically described in Exhibit D of Ordinance NS-2131) shall be restricted to the following uses: neighborhood park, single-family detached housing, accessory dwellings, Type 1 home occupation, accessory uses and structures.

4.    Conditional Uses.

a.    Except for duplexes, which are allowed on identified duplex lots on approved subdivision plats, conditional uses permitted in the underlying Standard Density Residential Zone are subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.4.

5.    Height Standards.

a.    No building shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed 30 feet in height without a variance.

6.    Lot Requirements.

a.    The lot requirements of the RS Zone shall apply to all permitted and conditional uses, with the following exceptions applicable only to new lots platted after December 31, 2012, that also front on Mt. Washington Drive:

i.    Minimum lot depth of 70 feet when the lot width is at least 50 feet;

ii.    Minimum lot width of 35 feet when the lot depth is at least 100 feet.

b.    Setbacks. The setback requirements of the RS Zone shall apply to all permitted and conditional uses.

c.    Lot Coverage.

i.    On lots 6,000 square feet or greater, the maximum lot coverage for buildings shall be 35 percent.

ii.    On lots that are less than 6,000 square feet, the maximum lot coverage for buildings shall be 50 percent.

7.    Site Plan Review. A duplex located on a lot approved as a duplex lot on an approved subdivision plat is not subject to a site plan review under the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures.

C.    Residential Townhome Overlay District.

1.    Purpose. The purpose of the Townhome Overlay District is to permit townhomes along collector streets, adjacent to public parks or a Multiple-Family District. The Townhome District will allow a diversity of housing types and a mix of residential density within NorthWest Crossing.

2.    Uses Permitted.

a.    All uses permitted in the Standard Density Residential Zone.

b.    Townhomes.

c.    Duplex on a lot identified as a duplex lot on an approved subdivision plat, subject to RS minimum lot size for a duplex.

3.    Conditional Uses.

a.    Except for duplexes, which are allowed only on identified duplex lots on approved subdivision plats, all conditional uses permitted in the underlying Standard Density Residential Zone, subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.4.

4.    Height Standards.

a.    No building shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed 35 feet in height without a variance.

5.    Lot Requirements.

a.    The lot requirements of the RS Zone shall apply to all permitted and conditional uses except townhomes.

b.    Except as specified in this section, the lot requirements of the RM Zone shall apply to townhomes.

c.    Setbacks. For townhomes the front yard setback is a minimum of five feet and the side yard setback may be zero feet.

d.    Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage standard for townhomes and accessory structures on a townhome lot.

6.    Maximum Density. The maximum density in the Townhome District is 12 units per net acre.

7.    Site Plan Review. Townhomes and duplexes on a lot approved as a duplex lot on a subdivision plat are not subject to site plan review under BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

D.    Residential Multiple-Family Overlay District.

1.    Purpose. The Residential Multiple-Family Overlay District is applied in specific locations adjacent to arterial or collector streets, public parks or commercial areas. The purpose is to provide a diversity of housing types in the Standard Density Residential Zone at the edges of single-family neighborhoods and to locate higher density housing adjacent to commercial services and/or open space.

2.    Uses Permitted.

a.    All uses permitted in the Standard Density Residential Zone.

b.    Multifamily housing.

c.    Cluster housing.

3.    Conditional Uses.

a.    Conditional uses permitted in the underlying Standard Density Residential Zone subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.4.

4.    Height Standards.

a.    No building, except multifamily housing, shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed 30 feet in height without a variance.

b.    The maximum height for multifamily housing is 45 feet unless a greater height is approved through a variance in conformance with the provisions of BDC Chapter 5.1, Variances.

5.    Lot Requirements.

a.    The lot requirements of the RS Zone shall apply to all permitted and conditional uses except multifamily housing.

b.    Except as specified in this section, the lot requirements of the RH Zone shall apply to multifamily housing.

c.    Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage standard for multifamily housing.

6.    Maximum Density. The maximum density in the Multifamily District is 21.7 units per net acre.

7.    Site Plan Review. Multifamily housing shall be subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

E.    Residential Cluster Overlay District.

1.    The purpose of this section is to provide a housing type that responds to changing household sizes and ages (e.g., retirees, small families, single-person households) and provides opportunities for ownership of small, detached dwelling units within the NorthWest Crossing neighborhood. The Residential Cluster Overlay Zone supports the following principles:

•    Encourages the creation of more usable open space for residents of the development through flexibility in density and lot standards;

•    Supports the growth management goal of more efficient use of urban residential land;

•    Provides development standards to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses; and

•    Creates a small area of higher density residential development within the RS Zone with detached dwellings and private and shared open space.

2.    Uses Permitted.

a.    All uses permitted in the Standard Density Residential Zone.

b.    Cluster housing developments subject to the development standards in subsection (E)(4) of this section.

c.    Buildings accessory to a cluster housing development subject to the development standards in subsection (E)(4) of this section.

d.    Community buildings in a cluster housing development. Community buildings shall be incidental in use and size to the cottage housing and shall be commonly owned by the residents.

3.    Conditional Uses. Conditional uses permitted in the underlying Standard Density Residential Zone are subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits.

4.    Development Standards and Site Requirements for Cluster Housing Developments.

a.    Site Requirements.

i.    The permitted density within the NorthWest Crossing Cluster Housing Overlay District is 12 units per acre.

ii.    There is no minimum lot size for cluster housing developments.

iii.    New lots created as a part of a cluster housing development within the NorthWest Crossing Overlay District are not required to have frontage on either a public or private street.

iv.    Cottages adjacent to property lines fronting a public street shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet and a maximum of 20 feet.

v.    Accessory structures, garages or carports shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from property lines fronting a public street.

vi.    Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of five feet.

vii.    Interior Separation. There shall be a minimum separation of 10 feet between all buildings.

viii.    Maximum height for structures within the NorthWest Crossing Cluster Housing Overlay District is 25 feet.

b.    Cottage Development Standards. The design standards and floor area requirements ensure that the overall size and scale including bulk and mass of cottage structures remain smaller and incur less visual impact than standard sized single-family dwellings, particularly given the allowed density of the cluster housing development.

i.    The total floor area of each cottage shall not exceed 1,200 square feet. Attached garages shall not be included in the calculation of total floor area.

ii.    Cottage areas that do not count toward the total floor area calculation are:

(A)    Unheated storage space located under the main floor of the cottage;

(B)    Architectural projections, such as bay windows or fireplaces;

(C)    Attached roofed porches;

(D)    Detached garages or carports;

(E)    Spaces with a ceiling height of six feet or less measured to the exterior walls, such as in a second floor area under the slope of the roof.

iii.    The maximum main floor area for cottages is 1,000 square feet. For the purposes of this calculation, the area of interior stairway may be allocated between floors served.

iv.    Cottages shall have a roofed porch at least 80 square feet in size.

v.    The total square foot area of a cottage may not be increased. A deed restriction shall be placed on the title to the property for the purpose of notifying future property owners that any increase in the total square footage of a cottage is prohibited for the life of the cottage or duration of NorthWest Crossing Cluster Housing Overlay District regulations.

vi.    All proposed cottages and accessory buildings are subject to review and approval by the NorthWest Crossing Architectural Review Committee.

c.    Required Open Space.

i.    Shared Open Space.

(A)    Shall provide a centrally located, focal area for the cluster housing development.

(B)    Shall total a minimum of 500 square feet per cottage when all shared open space areas are combined.

(C)    Shall abut at least 50 percent of the cottages.

(D)    Each cottage must be connected to the shared open space by a pedestrian pathway.

(E)    Shall be within 75 feet walking distance of each cottage.

(F)    Common parking areas are not counted in the shared open space area requirements.

ii.    Private Open Space.

(A) Shall be a minimum of 300 square feet of private, contiguous, usable open space with no dimension less than 10 feet adjacent to each dwelling unit, for the exclusive use of the cottage resident.

(B) Shall be located on slopes of less than 10 percent.

d.    Parking Location and Screening. The parking location and screening standards are designed to ensure minimal visual impact from vehicular use and parking areas for residents of the NorthWest Crossing Cluster Housing Overlay District and adjacent properties, and to maintain a single-family character along public streets.

i.    A minimum of one parking space and a maximum of two parking spaces are required for each cottage.

ii.    A parking area is a location for two or more contiguous vehicle spaces, which are required to meet the minimum parking requirements, and are not within a garage or carport. Parking areas:

(A) May be on lots created for shared parking for the cluster housing development.

(B) Shall be located in the cluster housing development.

(C) Shall be screened from public streets and cottages by landscaping, fencing or buildings.

(D) Shall be prohibited within 20 feet of a public street.

(E) Shall have access via an alley.

F.    Residential High Density Multiple-Family Overlay District.

1.    Purpose. The Residential High Density Multiple-Family Overlay District is applied in specific locations adjacent to arterial or collector streets, public parks or commercial areas. The purpose is to provide a diversity of housing types in the Standard Density Residential Zone at the edges of single-family neighborhoods and to locate higher density housing adjacent to commercial services and open space.

2.    Uses Permitted.

a.    All uses permitted in the Standard Density Residential Zone.

b.    Multiple-family housing.

3.    Conditional Uses.

a.    Conditional uses permitted in the underlying Standard Density Residential Zone subject to a Conditional Use Permit.

4.    Height Standards.

a.    No building, except multiple-family housing, shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed 45 feet in height without a variance.

5.    Lot Requirements.

a.    The lot requirements of the RS Zone shall apply to all permitted and conditional uses except multiple-family housing.

b.    Except as specified in this section, the lot requirements of the RH Zone shall apply to multiple-family housing.

c.    Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage standard for multiple-family housing.

6.    Maximum Density. The maximum density shall be that established by the RH Zone.

7.    Minimum motor vehicle parking for housing that is limited to residents of age 55 and older is one parking space per dwelling unit.

8.    Site Plan Review. Multiple-family housing is not subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2. It shall be subject to design review through the NorthWest Crossing Architectural Review Committee.

G.    Residential Mixed-Use Overlay District.

1.    Purpose. The Residential Mixed-Use Overlay District is applied in locations adjacent to collector streets, Commercial/Mixed Employment Districts, or public parks to allow higher density residential uses, live/work housing and community commercial uses in the Standard Density Residential Zone. The purpose is to create small areas of mixed-use at specific locations within the neighborhood.

2.    Uses Permitted.

a.    All uses permitted in the Standard Density Residential Zone.

b.    Multifamily housing.

c.    Townhome.

d.    Live/work single-family house subject to the provisions of this district.

e.    Live/work townhome subject to the provisions of this district.

f.    Live/work apartment subject to the provisions of this district.

g.    Community commercial subject to the provisions of this district.

h.    Cluster housing.

i.    Off-street parking area when abutting or across a street from land within the Commercial/Mixed Employment District.

3.    Conditional Uses. Conditional uses permitted in the underlying Standard Density Residential Zone subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.4.

4.    Site Plan Review.

a.    Townhomes, live/work houses and live/work townhomes are not subject to the site plan review provisions of this code.

b.    Live/work apartments and community commercial uses are subject to site plan approval according to BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review, except that where special standards of the Residential Mixed-Use District conflict with standards within the code, the standards of the Residential Mixed-Use District shall apply.

5.    Height Standards.

a.    No building except multifamily or live/work apartment housing shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed 30 feet in height without a variance.

b.    The maximum height for multifamily housing or live/work apartment is 45 feet unless a greater height is approved through a variance.

c.    The maximum height for a townhome or live/work townhome is 35 feet unless a greater height is approved through a variance.

6.    Lot Requirements.

a.    The lot requirements of the RS Zone shall apply to all permitted and conditional uses except multifamily housing, townhomes, live/work townhomes, live/work apartments and community commercial.

b.    The lot requirements of the RH Zone shall apply to multifamily housing and live/work apartments except that the minimum front yard setback is five feet and the minimum side yard setback is zero feet.

c.    The lot requirements of the RM Zone shall apply to townhomes and live/work townhomes, except that the minimum front yard setback is five feet, the minimum side yard setback is zero feet, and the minimum lot width is 24 feet.

d.    The lot requirements for neighborhood commercial uses in BDC 3.6.300(J) shall apply to community commercial except that the minimum front yard setback is five feet.

e.    There is no maximum lot coverage standard for townhomes, live/work townhomes, live/work apartments or multiple-family housing.

7.    Density. The density in the Residential Mixed-Use District is a maximum of 19 units per net acre.

8.    Primary Street Frontage. Live/work housing and community commercial uses may only be located along primary street frontage identified in Figure 2.7.330.C. The amount of live/work housing and community commercial is further limited to the maximum lot frontage identified in Table 2.7.320.

 

Table 2.7.320 – Residential Mixed-Use District 

Maximum Allowable Live/Work Housing and Community Commercial by Area  

	Area	Linear Feet of Primary Frontage in District	Maximum Primary Street Frontage for Live/Work Housing Lots	Maximum Primary Street Frontage for Community Commercial Lots

	Discovery Park	650	325 linear feet	200 linear feet

	Lewis and Clark Park	200	200 linear feet	50 linear feet

	Compass Park	1,000	800 linear feet	100 linear feet

	Lemhi Pass/NW Crossing	500	500 linear feet	Not permitted

9.    Platting Lots for Live/Work Housing and Community Commercial Uses.

a.    The final plat for a subdivision in the Residential Mixed-Use Overlay District shall specify the lots where live/work housing or community commercial uses will be permitted.

b.    A deed restriction shall be recorded with each lot identified on the final plat as a live/work housing or community commercial.

c.    The number of lots in the Residential Mixed-Use Overlay District shall be limited to a maximum amount of linear primary street frontage.

10.    Sign Standards.

a.    Each live/work house or live/work townhome may have nonilluminated sign(s) not exceeding a combined maximum area of 16 square feet. Signs shall be attached to the building.

b.    Each live/work apartment or community commercial building may have one nonilluminated monument sign and/or one building-mounted sign not exceeding a combined maximum area of 32 square feet.

c.    Individual businesses in live/work apartment buildings may have additional nonilluminated sign(s) mounted on the building not exceeding a combined maximum of eight square feet in size.

11.    Off-Street Parking Standards.

a.    Each live/work house or live/work townhome may have no more than two off-street spaces in addition to the two spaces required by BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

b.    The off-street parking standards in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking, shall apply to a work use in a live/work apartment building.

c.    Community commercial uses shall have a minimum of one off-street vehicle parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area and a minimum of four covered bicycle parking spaces. The maximum number of off-street parking spaces for a community commercial building is five, including one disabled accessible space, if required.

12.    Special Standards for Live/Work Townhomes and Live/Work Houses.

a.    The area dedicated to the work use in the live/work unit shall not exceed the size requirement in the applicable definition of live/work house or live/work townhome in BDC 2.7.310(E).

b.    The work use shall not generate noise exceeding 55-decibel level as measured at the lot line of the lot containing the live/work house or live/work townhome.

c.    No outside storage of materials or goods related to the work occupation or business shall be permitted.

d.    No dust or noxious odor shall be evident off the premises.

e.    Employees of the work occupation or business may not occupy more than two on-street parking spaces at any time.

f.    If the business is open to the public, public access must be through the front door and the business may not be open to clients or the public before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.

H.    Commercial/Mixed Employment Overlay District.

1.    Purpose and Applicability. This district applies to all land zoned Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment within the NorthWest Crossing Overlay District. The purpose of this district is to allow a special front yard setback that is not permitted in the underlying Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment Zones and to create parking districts. The purpose of the parking districts is to allow minimum parking needs to be met in common, shared, off-site parking lots. The special setback and parking districts will create a pedestrian-friendly, main-street environment.

2.    Uses Permitted.

a.    The permitted uses allowed in the underlying Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment Zones shall be allowed unless otherwise specified in Table 2.7.320A, which shall control where conflicts exist.

3.    Conditional Uses.

a.    Conditional uses permitted in the underlying Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment Zones subject to a Conditional Use Permit and the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.4. In addition to the conditional uses identified in Chapter 2.3 for the Mixed Employment Zone, there are certain uses that require a Conditional Use Permit if sited on site-specific properties. These uses and properties are identified in Table 2.7.320A.    

Table 2.7.320A  

The Special Land Use Limitations shown in the following table apply in the Commercial/Mixed Employment Overlay District on the following specific lots fronting on Mt. Washington Drive, south of NW Clearwater Drive: District 1, Lot 17; and District 2, Lots 2 and 3.

	Land Use	ME

	Residential

	Temporary Housing* as a secondary use	C

	Commercial

	Retail Sales and Service (auto dependent*)	C

	Retail Sales and Service (auto oriented*)	C

	Restaurants/Food and Beverage Services	 

	•	with drive-through*	C

	•	without drive-through	P

	Commercial Storage	 

	•	enclosed in building and on an upper story	P

	•	not enclosed in building	N

	•	enclosed in building on ground floor (i.e., mini-storage)	N

	Entertainment and Recreation	 

	•	enclosed in building (e.g., theater)	P

	•	not enclosed (e.g., amusement)	C

	Industrial

	Warehouse	C

	Industrial Service (e.g., cleaning, repair)	C

	Key to Districts	Key to Permitted Uses

	ME = Mixed Employment	P = Permitted; subject to BDC Chapter 4.1

	 	N = Not Permitted

	 	C = Conditional Use, subject to BDC Chapter 4.4

*    Special Standards for Certain Uses subject to BDC Chapter 3.6 and BDC 2.1.900

4.    Height Standards.

a.    The height standards of the underlying Commercial Limited or Mixed Employment Zone shall apply.

5.    Lot Requirements. None.

6.    Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage standard.

7.    Front Yard Setback.

a.    No front yard setback is required when an entrance to the building is located at the front lot line and the building is adjacent to a sidewalk 10 feet or wider in a public or private street right-of-way.

8.    Site Plan Review. The provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review, shall apply in the Commercial/Mixed Employment District. The provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2 pertaining to Commercial Design Review and BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review Standards, shall not apply in the Commercial/Mixed Employment District; provided, that West Bend Property Company maintains design review standards and process consistent with the May 2003 NorthWest Crossing Commercial Rules and Design Guidelines.

9.    Parking District Standards.

a.    Each Commercial/Mixed Employment District will have areas designated for common off-street parking lots and streets designed to serve the minimum parking needs for permitted and conditional uses in the Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment Zones.

b.    Buildings shall be located on and oriented to the streets and the parking lots will be located in the interior of the site or at the sides of buildings. The designated common parking areas will allow all buildings to be close to the street to create a pedestrian-scale street environment.

c.    When uses are approved under this code in the Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment Zones, the minimum off-street parking requirements may be met in off-site, common parking lots or facilities, or in on-street parking on designated streets conveniently located to serve the commercial, office and industrial uses.

d.    City approval of a use in the Commercial/Mixed Employment District shall be conditioned on evidence that the City minimum parking requirements for a proposed use are met by:

i.    A deed, easement or irrevocable lease, contract or other irrevocable legal agreement assuring reservation of the required minimum number of spaces in a common Parking District parking lot or facility, or in on-street parking on private streets for the term the parking is needed; or

ii.    City approval of a shared or joint use agreement evidenced by an irrevocable deed, lease, contract or other legal agreement for the term that the required parking is needed.

e.    Any parking desired over the minimum city standard shall be met with on-street or shared parking within the Commercial/Mixed Employment Districts.

f.    Designated pedestrian access from the common district parking areas to the street and entrances to the commercial uses shall be provided.

g.    All buildings must have at least one primary entrance directly fronting a public or private street.

h.    The Parking District facilities shall be managed and maintained by an association of building owners in the Commercial/Mixed Employment Districts.

i.    Parking for any secondary, second-story residential use shall be provided in assigned and reserved parking spaces, or through City approval of a shared or joint use agreement evidenced by a deed, lease, contract or other legal agreement. Reserved residential parking spaces shall not exceed the minimum city standard.

j.    Parking lot landscaping will meet or exceed minimum City standards.

I.    Industrial Employment Overlay District.

1.    Purpose and Applicability. The Industrial Employment Overlay District applies to all land zoned Light Industrial (IL) within the NorthWest Crossing Overlay District. The purpose of the Industrial Employment Overlay District is to provide for research or development of materials, methods, or products, and compatible light manufacturing, in a park-like setting.

2.    Uses Permitted. The following uses are permitted in the Industrial Employment Overlay District subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

a.    Scientific research or experimental development of materials, methods or products including engineering and laboratory research.

b.    Administrative, educational and other related activities and facilities in conjunction with a permitted use.

c.    Light manufacturing, assembly, fabricating or packaging of products from previously prepared materials.

d.    Manufacture, assembly, and testing of electronic equipment, medical instruments and apparatus, optics, photographic equipment and supplies, musical instruments, related equipment and similar uses.

e.    Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals, and the like, but not including the production of fish or meat products, or fermented foods, such as sauerkraut, vinegar, or the like, or the rendering of fats and oils.

f.    Master Planned Development subject to the requirements of BDC Chapter 4.5.

g.    Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental storage, are permitted.

h.    Enclosed storage facilities including mini-warehouse operations, which may include outdoor storage of vehicles, boats, and recreational vehicles screened from adjacent roadways.

i.    Printing, publishing and book binding.

j.    Motorized and nonmotorized vehicle repair, service and sales, provided wholly within an enclosed building.

k.    Bakery for wholesale and retail distribution.

l.    Creamery, soft drink or alcoholic beverage bottling plant and similar uses.

m.    Dwelling unit for a caretaker or watchman working on the property.

n.    Commercial laundry, dry cleaning and fabric dyeing.

o.    Motion picture and video production sound stages and studios, television or radio broadcasting studios.

p.    Warehouse and distribution or shipping center for prepared goods or packaged items.

q.    Park, open space, and recreational facilities.

r.    Public buildings and public utility structures and yards.

s.    Fitness facility or health center, to include child care for patrons only, showers, spa, bathrooms, related offices, related retail for exercise clothing and equipment and sale of refreshments.

t.    Veterinary clinics.

3.    Reserved.

4.    Height Standards.

a.    No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed a height of 45 feet.

5.    Lot Requirements. The following lot requirements shall be observed:

a.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum area of one-half acre.

b.    Lot Width. No requirements.

c.    Lot Depth. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet.

d.    Front Yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet.

e.    Side Yard. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet except when abutting a lot in an “R” Zone and then the required side yard shall be 30 feet.

f.    Rear Yard. A rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet except when abutting a lot in an “R” Zone and then the rear yard shall be 30 feet.

g.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall be 50 percent of the total lot area.

h.    Site Plan Review and Design Review. The provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2 shall apply in the Industrial Employment Overlay District. The provisions of BDC 4.2.300 shall not apply in the Industrial Employment Overlay District; provided, that West Bend Property Company maintains design review standards and process consistent with the May 2003 NorthWest Crossing Rules and Design Guidelines.

i.    Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided as required in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

6.    Other Required Conditions.

a.    In an Industrial Employment Overlay District directly across the street from an “R” Zone an off-street parking and loading area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the right-of-way, and said area shall be appropriately landscaped along the residential street frontage to protect the character of the adjoining residential property. Such landscaping shall be maintained.

b.    Other yards and unused property on a developed site shall be landscaped and maintained.

c.    Any use or portion thereof causing noise shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property.

d.    Any use or portion thereof causing vibration shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property.

e.    Any operation producing intense heat or glare shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard on adjacent property.

f.    There shall be no emission of odorous, toxic, noxious matter, or dust in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along or outside property lines so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard.

g.    All off-street parking or loading areas and access drives shall be surfaces with dust-free surface and shall be maintained.

J.    Final Determination of Overlay District Boundaries.

1.    When an Overlay District boundary abuts a right-of-way, the final determination of the District boundary shall be established at the time the abutting right-of-way is dedicated. [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2198, 2013; Ord. NS-2131, 2009; Ord. NS-2100, 2008; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-2003, 2006; Ord. NS-1968, 2005; Ord. NS-1902, 2003; Ord. NS-1892, 2003; Ord. NS-1782, 2001]


2.7.330 NorthWest Crossing Special Street Standards.

A.    Figure 2.7.330.A depicts the street type, tentative street location and alignment in NorthWest Crossing. Table 2.7.330.B defines the standards to correspond to the street type shown in Figure 2.7.330.A. The precise street alignment shall be determined as tentative subdivision plans are submitted and approved. The NorthWest Crossing Street Type Plan, Figure 2.7.330.A, and the NorthWest Crossing Street Standards, Table 2.7.330.B, shall be applied to the NorthWest Crossing development as illustrated except when an alternate standard is permitted under this section or through the tentative plan approval process.

B.    Any City street standard adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permits a lesser street standard, may be applied to NorthWest Crossing in conformance with the provisions of the new standard.

C.    Clear Vision Area. At local/local, stop controlled street intersections, the clear vision areas shall consist of a triangular area two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection on the street lot lines for a distance of 20 feet.

D.    Performance Standards for Local Residential Street “B.”

1.    Average daily traffic volumes on the local “B” street do not exceed 300 ADT.

2.    The street is connected to a grid street pattern at both block ends.

3.    Blocks shall have dedicated public alley access constructed to NorthWest Crossing standards.

4.    “No Parking” zones are established 55 feet from the centerline of intersecting local streets.

5.    For block lengths exceeding 300 feet, “No Parking” zones shall be established on both sides of the street spaced no greater than 250 feet apart. The “No Parking” zones shall be a minimum of 30 feet in length.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]





[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2266, 2016; Ord. NS-2198, 2013; Ord. NS-2131, 2009; Ord. NS-2100, 2008; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-2003, 2006; Ord. NS-1980, 2005; Ord. NS-1968, 2005; Ord. NS-1892, 2003; Ord. NS-1782, 2001]

Article III. Dean Swift Refinement Plan Development Standards


2.7.400 Dean Swift Refinement Plan Development Standards.

A.    Purpose. The Dean Swift Refinement Plan overlay is intended to implement the Dean Swift Neighborhood Plan concepts and to create special overlay zoning standards for the residential and mixed-use designations within the refinement plan area. The overlay standards will:

•    Provide a variety of housing types.

•    Locate higher densities near commercial corridors and services or along transit corridors.

•    Create opportunities for neighborhood-oriented services.

•    Ensure compatibility within the neighborhood and surrounding area.

•    Improve the local street grid for automobiles and pedestrian benefit.

•    Create a livable neighborhood for all ages.

The Dean Swift Refinement Plan area is approximately 29 acres in size. The area is intended to remain primarily residential in character and use. Through the refinement plan public process, approximately 2.05 acres of the total land area were identified for development as Mixed Employment. In addition, residential sub-areas within the neighborhood have been identified to create a transition between the commercial high use areas along Highway 20 and the established residential uses to the south. The sub-areas are shown on the attached map. The Dean Swift residential neighborhood will have an overall density between six and 21 units per acre. However, development standards and densities will be different within each sub-area.

B.    Use Standards. The special standards of the Dean Swift Refinement Plan area supersede the standards of the underlying zone. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone apply.

1.    Modified RM Residential Overlay.

a.    Sub-area “A” is located along the north side of Carl and Don Streets and south of the Highway 20 Commercial District. Sub-area “A” does not extend to Purcell Boulevard. The purpose of this area is to provide a transition between the commercial development to the north along Highway 20 and the residential neighborhood. The development characteristics of sub-area “A” are as follows:

•    The residential density range is 10 to 21 units per gross acre.

•    The maximum building height is 40 feet.

•    Lot coverage has been increased to 50 percent to allow flexibility to develop higher residential densities.

•    Two locations within the sub-area have been designated for “live/work” development. This allows low impact commercial use on the ground floor of a building; provided, that an equal or greater area of residential use is provided on the upper floors.

b.    Sub-area “B” is located between Carl Street and Damascus Street, west of Dean Swift Road. The purpose of sub-area “B” is to provide a diversity of housing types in close proximity to goods and services. The development characteristics of sub-area “B” are as follows:

•    The residential density range for this sub-area is seven to 12 units per gross acre.

•    The minimum lot size in this sub-area is 4,500 square feet, except where zero lot line attached housing is proposed, the minimum lot size can be 2,000 square feet.

•    Lot coverage is increased to 45 percent to allow the flexibility for a variety of housing types.

•    The maximum building height is 35 feet.

c.    Sub-area “C” is located north of Bear Creek Road, south of Damascus Street along the west side of Dean Swift Road. A second area encompasses an existing single-family development lying south of Don Street and west of the north/south extension of “C” Street. This area represents a more traditional residential neighborhood. The development characteristics of sub-area “C” are as follows:

•    The residential density range for this sub-area is six to 10 units per gross acre.

•    The predominant housing type will be single-family except on corner lots where duplex and triplex units may be developed provided each duplex unit shall access and/or front on different streets.

•    Accessory dwelling units that are subordinate to the main home are encouraged.

•    The minimum lot size is 5,000 square feet.

•    On lots greater than 7,000 square feet, two detached homes may be built, provided all provisions of this code can be met.

•    The maximum lot coverage is 45 percent.

•    The maximum building height is 35 feet.

d.    Sub-area “D” is located north of Bear Creek Road between Dean Swift Road and the north/south extension of “C” street. The development characteristics of sub-area “D” are as follows:

•    The residential density range for this sub-area is 12 units to 17 units per acre.

•    The allowable housing types are attached single-family townhomes and multifamily.

•    Attached single-family townhomes and multifamily buildings must not exceed six dwelling units.

•    The maximum building height is 40 feet.

•    The maximum lot coverage is 45 percent.

e.    Sub-area “E” is located north of Bear Creek Road and west of Purcell Boulevard. This area shall be developed as a residential care facility. The development characteristics of sub-area “E” are as follows:

•    The predominant housing type shall be senior housing.

•    The maximum building height is 60 feet.

•    The maximum lot coverage is 55 percent.

•    The minimum number of vehicle parking spaces for residential care facilities is 0.8/unit.

f.    Lot Requirements. The lot requirements for the RM Zone as described in BDC Chapter 2.1 shall be observed unless specifically addressed by each sub-area or as indicated below.

i.    The minimum front yard setbacks within all sub-areas shall be five feet for buildings, except garages and carports shall be set back 18 feet. Corner lots will need to observe the clear vision setbacks in addition to the overlay setbacks. Uncovered porches and stoops may encroach into the setback a maximum of two feet.

ii.    Side and rear yard setbacks do not increase based on building height.

iii.    Vehicular access shall be from an alley where provided.

2.    Modified Mixed Employment Overlay.

a.    The permitted and conditional uses in the Mixed Employment Zone are very diverse. Some of the uses in the ME Zone could adversely impact the residential character of the Dean Swift neighborhood, thereby obstructing the intent and purpose of the overlay. For this reason, the overlay zone will restrict the permitted and conditional uses for this area. ME uses within the Dean Swift Refinement Overlay will be limited to the following permitted and conditional uses.

b.    Permitted Uses.

i.    Service commercial and retail uses, excluding drive-through service.

ii.    Professional office, excluding medical uses.

iii.    Residential housing located above or behind a permitted or conditional use.

iv.    Auto-related/auto-dependent uses when contiguous to a Commercial Zone.

c.    Conditional Uses.

i.    Commercial day nursery or day care facility that is not part of a service for employees of a permitted or conditional use.

d.    Service commercial, retail or office buildings greater than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall provide residential dwelling units above or behind the use at a ratio of two dwelling units per 5,000 square feet.

C.    Neighborhood Open Space. An area of land located in the southwest corner of the Plan area with frontage along Bear Creek Road has been designated as open space as shown on the Refinement Plan map. A natural rock outcrop elevates this area. The area would be difficult to develop for residential purposes and shall remain as natural open space unless it is combined with the contiguous property to the west for public use. The development potential for the preserved area may be transferred to the balance of the parcel for development.

D.    Street and Pedestrian Standards. All streets within the refinement area are designated as local streets. Bear Creek Road, designated as a minor arterial, and Purcell Boulevard, designated as a major collector, border the refinement area. All streets and pedestrian facilities shall be consistent with the requirements of the Bend Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance and the Land Division Ordinance.

E.    Alleys. If private or public alleys are proposed within the refinement area, the alley way shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width with a minimum of 18 feet of paved travel surface. All alleys shall comply with emergency service access requirements.

F.    Pedestrian Corridors/Trails. Pedestrian corridors and trails shall be dedicated to the City on a final plat. The right-of-way width shall be 15 feet with a minimum 10-foot paved surface.

G.    Street Trees. Tall stature trees shall be planted along all street frontages within the Dean Swift Refinement area with the development of the adjacent properties. Those properties located within the flight path of the private airport located south of Bear Creek shall limit selection to tree species with a maximum mature height of 60 feet. Proposed street tree varieties shall be approved by the City prior to planting. The trees shall be planted a maximum of 30 feet apart. Trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper measured four feet above the ground at the time of planting. Maintenance of the street trees is the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.

H.    Fences. Walls and fences located within the front yard setbacks shall not exceed three and one-half feet in height. Taller fences or walls may be permitted along interior property lines after first obtaining the necessary permits.

I.    Lot Access. New lots within the Dean Swift Refinement Plan area shall utilize rear or side alley ways for vehicular access as designated on the circulation plan.

J.    Design Standards. The design standards are intended to provide detailed human-scale design to preserve the quaint character of the neighborhood while allowing flexibility to develop a variety of building types.

All single-family, multiple-family, mixed-use and commercial buildings must comply with all of the following standards. The illustrations provided are intended to show how to comply, not restrict building types. Other building types and designs can be used to comply so long as they are consistent with the design standards.

All buildings shall incorporate design features such as offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements to preclude large expanses of building surfaces.

1.    Detailed Design Elements. All buildings shall provide detailed design along all elevations (front, sides, and rear). A minimum of five architectural features shall be provided on the front elevation and a minimum of three architectural features shall be provided on the side and rear elevations selected from the following list of features:

a.    Dormers.

b.    Gables.

c.    Recessed entries.

d.    Covered porches.

e.    Cupolas or towers.

f.    Pillars or posts.

g.    Eaves with a minimum 12-inch projection.

h.    Window trim with a minimum four-inch width.

i.    Offsets in building face or roof by a minimum of 16 inches.

j.    Bay windows.

k.    Balconies.

l.    Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, board and batt, masonry).


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2341, 2019; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2197, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1877, 2003]

Article IV. Medical District Overlay Zone


2.7.500 Medical District Overlay Zone.


2.7.510 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Medical District Overlay Zone is to allow for the continuation and flexible expansion of the hospitals, medical clinics and associated uses in a planned and coordinated manner. Flexibility is essential to allow existing and future uses to respond and adapt to changes in technology, the medical profession, and society as a whole. The primary uses in the Medical District Overlay Zone are hospitals and other medical clinics and uses. Related uses may be located within the hospital or clinic buildings or as independent uses within the overlay zone area. The overlay zone is intended to enhance the underlying zones of the Urban Medium Density Residential (RM) Zone, Urban High Density Residential (RH) Zone, and the Convenience Commercial (CC) Zone. The overlay zone standards will:

1.    Strengthen the role currently played by the Medical District area around 27th Street and Neff Road as a regional center for healthcare and related services.

2.    Provide flexibility within the underlying zones to allow medical uses.

3.    Allow limited commercial/retail uses to supplement the Medical District.

4.    Balance the need for residential development within the overlay zone to provide options for medical services development.

B.    Applicability. Provisions of this section apply to all property within the boundaries of the Medical District Overlay Zone as shown on the boundary map, Figure 2.7.550.F, and on the Bend Urban Area Zoning Map. These provisions modify existing standards of the City of Bend Zoning Ordinance, by applying requirements, limiting allowable uses, or allowing exceptions to general regulations. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of the Medical District Overlay Zone and those of other portions of the Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this overlay district shall control. [Ord. NS-2301, 2017; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1914, 2004]


2.7.520 Permitted Land Uses.

A.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.7.520 are permitted in each of the applicable districts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.7.520, and land uses that are approved as similar to those in Table 2.7.520, may be approved.

B.    Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar land use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in BDC 4.1.1400, Declaratory Ruling.

Table 2.7.520 Permitted Uses within the Medical Services District Overlay Zone  

	Land Use	RM	RH	CC

	Residential

	All residential uses permitted or conditionally allowed in the applicable zoning district unless specifically listed herein	P/C	P/C	N

	Public and Institutional

	All public and institutional uses permitted or conditionally allowed in the applicable zoning district unless specifically listed herein	P/C	P/C	P/C

	Hospitals	N	P	P

	Commercial

	All commercial uses permitted or conditionally allowed in the applicable zoning district unless specifically listed herein	N	N	P/C*

	General office*	 	 	P*

	•	In buildings built after April 2, 2004, office uses may occupy no more than 33% of the floor area*	P*	P*	 

	•	In buildings built after April 2, 2004, offices may occupy more than 33% of the floor area*	C*	C*	 

	Dancing and music schools	N	N	P

	Mortuaries	N	N	P

	Photographic studios	N	N	P

	Hotels	P*	P*	P*

	Service commercial uses up to 4,000 square feet gross floor area, excluding drive-through and auto-related and auto-dependent uses*	C*	C*	P

	Eating and drinking establishments up to 4,000 square feet gross floor area in size*	C*	C*	P

	Auto parts sales	N	N	N

	Automobile service station	N	N	N

	Minor auto repair	N	N	N

	Medical offices/uses including a pharmacy	P	P	P

	Miscellaneous Uses

	Club, lodge and fraternal organization	N	N	C

	Plant nursery	N	N	N

	Timeshare units	N	N	N

	Short-term rental	N	N	N

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	Key to Districts:	Key to Permitted Uses:

	RM = Medium Density Residential	P = Permitted, subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.1

	RH = High Density Residential	N = Not Permitted

	CC = Convenience Commercial	C = Conditional Use, subject to permit standards in BDC Chapter 4.4

*    Use has special development standards subject to BDC 2.7.540.

[Ord. NS-2301, 2017; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1914, 2004]


2.7.530 Development Standards.

A.    Height Regulations. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed a height of 45 feet without approval of a variance.

B.    Lot Requirements. The following lot requirements must be observed:

1.    Lot Area. For all dwelling units including single-family dwellings, two- and three-family housing, and multiple-family housing in the underlying RM Zone, the lot shall be a minimum area of 2,500 square feet for the first unit plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

For all dwelling units including single-family dwellings, two- and three-family housing, and multiple-family housing in the underlying RH Zone, the lot shall be a minimum area of 2,500 square feet for the first unit plus 1,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

For any other use there shall be no minimum lot area.

2.    Lot Width. For single-family dwellings, two- and three-family housing, and multiple-family housing the lot shall be a minimum width of 30 feet. This lot width may be reduced to 20 feet for lots in an approved zero lot line subdivision.

For any other use there shall be no minimum lot width.

3.    Front Yard. The minimum front yard setback shall be 10 feet except on corner lots where the clear vision clearance area requirements shall apply and, except when adjacent to a lot outside of the Medical District Overlay Zone, the front yard setback shall be same as the front yard setback required in the adjacent zone.

4.    Side Yard. The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet. The side yards shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building exceeds 15 feet in height.

For existing or development of new single-family detached housing the side yard setback shall be a minimum of five feet on each side.

The side yard setback distance for one or both sides may be waived for an approved zero lot line subdivision or partition.

5.    Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard setback shall be five feet except when adjacent to a lot outside of the Medical District Overlay Zone and then the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The required rear yard setback shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building exceeds 15 feet in height.

6.    Side and rear yard setbacks for duplexes and triplexes are subject to standards in BDC 3.6.200(H), Duplex and Triplex Development.

7.    Lot Coverage. The following maximum lot coverage standards apply to all development within the MDOZ:

Lot Coverage 

	Zone	Maximum Lot Coverage

	Medium Density Residential (RM)	50% for lots or parcels with single-family detached dwelling unit(s).

60% for lots or parcels with single-family attached townhomes, duplexes, triplexes and multifamily.

For any other use there is no maximum lot coverage.

	High Density Residential (RH)	None

	Convenience Commercial (CC) District 	None

C.    Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2301, 2017; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1914, 2004]


2.7.540 Special Development Standards.

Within the Medical Services District Overlay Zone certain nonmedical uses are permitted or conditionally allowed within the RM and RH Zones. These uses are intended to support the medical services uses and their customers.

A.    Nonmedical Uses. Nonmedical uses excluding residential uses as specified in Table 2.7.520 shall be developed in conformance with the following special standards:

1.    Nonmedical uses may be allowed when accessory to a medical use building or development provided the gross floor area of the accessory use does not exceed 4,000 square feet in area for buildings less than 50,000 square feet. For medical buildings with a gross floor area greater than 50,000 square feet, no more than 10 percent of the gross floor area of the building may be occupied by an accessory nonmedical use, unless otherwise approved through a conditional use permit.

2.    Except for hotels, nonmedical uses may occur within the Medical Service District Overlay Zone as a stand-alone business provided the total gross floor area of any individual building does not exceed 4,000 square feet or, where more than one nonmedical use shares one building, the total building area does not exceed 8,000 square feet.

3.    Hotels may be developed as a stand-alone business within the Medical Service District Overlay Zone provided 75 percent of the guest rooms are designed and furnished for multi-night stays by providing in-unit amenities for sleeping, eating, cooking (more than a microwave), and sanitation.

B.    Standards for Commercial/Retail Uses and Eating and Drinking Establishments.

1.    Drive-up windows and/or drive-through services shall not be permitted.

2.    A restaurant, delicatessen, cafeteria, or coffee shop may include an outdoor seating/eating area, provided the outdoor area consists of an all-weather surface not greater than 900 square feet in gross floor area and screened from residentially zoned properties by a sight-obscuring hedge and/or fence as determined through the site plan review process.

3.    For service commercial/retail uses, hotels, and eating and drinking establishments as allowed in Table 2.7.520:

a.    There shall be no more than a total of eight acres of site area developed for stand-alone commercial/retail uses, hotels, and/or eating and drinking establishments within the Medical District Overlay Zone on residentially zoned land.

b.    Four of the allowable eight acres shall be located south of Neff Road and are in addition to the existing Commercial Convenience zoned property along 27th Street and Cushing Drive (Watt Way) and Medical Center Drive.

c.    The other four acres of allowable area shall be located north of Neff Road.

C.    Landscaping Requirements. The following standards shall apply to all new development:

1.    Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted along the frontage of all properties. Only street trees from a list maintained by the City shall be planted. Street trees shall be planted a maximum of 30 feet on center. Trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper measured four feet from ground level.

2.    Buffering. The City may require additional landscaping within setback areas to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and aesthetic impacts to adjacent residential properties from new development. [Ord. NS-2301, 2017; Ord. 2209-NS, 2013; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1914, 2004]


2.7.550 Architectural Design Standards.

The design standards are intended to provide detailed human-scale design to preserve the character of the area and surrounding neighborhoods while allowing flexibility to develop a variety of building types.

A.    Detailed Design Elements. The following standards shall be met for all new development. A design feature used to comply with one standard may be used to comply with another standard.

1.    Design of Small-Scale Buildings. All buildings under 20,000 square feet in size shall provide detailed design along all elevations (front, sides, and rear). A minimum of five architectural features shall be provided on the front elevation and a minimum of three architectural features shall be provided on the side and rear elevations selected from the following list of features:

a.    Dormers.

b.    Gables.

c.    Recessed entries.

d.    Covered porches.

e.    Cupolas or towers.

f.    Pillars or posts.

g.    Eaves with a minimum 12-inch projection.

h.    Window trim with a minimum four-inch width.

i.    Offsets in building face or roof by a minimum of 16 inches.

j.    Bay windows.

k.    Balconies.



l.    Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, board and batt, masonry).

2.    Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments. The standards in subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section shall apply to “large-scale buildings and developments,” as defined in subsections (A)(2)(a) and (b) of this section:

a.    Individual buildings with more than 20,000 square feet of enclosed ground-floor space (i.e., “large-scale”). Multi-tenant buildings shall be counted as the sum of all tenant spaces within the same building shell; and

b.    Multiple-building developments with a combined enclosed ground-floor space more than 40,000 square feet (e.g., shopping centers, public/institutional campuses, and similar developments).

c.    All large-scale buildings and developments, as defined in subsections (A)(2)(a) and (b) of this section, shall provide human-scale design by conforming to all of the following criteria:

i.    Incorporate changes in building direction (i.e., articulation), and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes, as shown in Figures 2.7.550.C and 2.7.550.D. Such changes may include building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction; sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; and use of windows, screening trees, small-scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting), and similar features.

ii.    Every building elevation adjacent to a street with a horizontal dimension of more than 100 feet, as measured from end-wall to end-wall, shall have a building entrance; except that building elevations that are unable to provide an entrance due to the internal function of the building space (e.g., mechanical equipment, areas where the public or employees are not received, etc.) may not be required to meet this standard. Pathways shall connect all entrances to the street right-of-way.

Note: The illustrations provided are intended to show how to comply, not restrict building types. Other building types and design can be used to comply so long as they are consistent with the design standards.

Figure 2.7.550.A

Examples of Architectural Details (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.550.B

Examples of Architectural Details: Townhomes and Multifamily (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.550.C

Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.550.D

Design of Large-Scale Buildings and Developments (Typical)
[IMAGE]


Note: The examples shown above are meant to illustrate examples of these building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required design style.

B.    Building Height Transition.

1.    This standard applies to new and vertically expanded buildings on property located in the Medical District Overlay Zone within 100 feet of the boundary of the overlay zone and new or vertically expanded buildings adjacent to properties developed with single-story residential uses within the Medical District Overlay Zone, except that this standard shall not apply to new or vertically expanded single-family detached houses.

2.    Any new or vertically expanded building, meeting the applicability criterion above, within 20 feet (as measured horizontally) of an existing single-story building with a height of 25 feet or less, as shown in Figure 2.7.550.E, shall meet the building height transition requirements.

3.    To provide compatible building scale and privacy between developments, buildings taller than 25 feet shall “step-down” to create a building height transition to adjacent single-story building(s).

4.    The building height transition standard is met when the height of the taller building (“x”) does not exceed one foot of height for every one foot separating the two buildings (“y”), as shown in Figure 2.7.550.E.

Figure 2.7.550.E

Building Height Transition
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.550.F

Medical District Overlay Zone Boundary
[IMAGE]


C.    Outdoor and rooftop mechanical equipment as well as trash cans/dumpsters must be architecturally screened from view. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning units must have a noise attenuating barrier to protect adjacent Residential Districts from mechanical noise. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2301, 2017; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1914, 2004]

Article V. Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ)


2.7.600 Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ).


2.7.610 Purpose.

A.    Purpose. The Deschutes River and Tumalo Creek stream corridors within the urban growth boundary of the City of Bend are valuable economic, recreational, scenic and natural resources for the community. The Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ) is inclusive of all special purpose provisions that pertain to these stream corridors. The WOZ is intended to conserve and enhance the natural resource values of areas along the Deschutes River and Tumalo Creek within the City by:

•    Recognizing and respecting the unusual natural beauty and character of the City’s major waterways;

•    Protecting and enhancing water quality for human use and aquatic life;

•    Conserving and restoring habitat for wildlife, fish and other aquatic life;

•    Conserving wetlands;

•    Controlling erosion and reducing the effects of flooding;

•    Improving coordination between the City and agencies regarding development activities near waterways;

•    Promoting development that is compatible with the purposes of the WOZ;

•    Promoting the preservation and restoration of native riparian vegetation;

•    Maintaining the scenic quality of the canyon and rimrock areas along these waterways;

•    Conserving and protecting property values; and

•    Encouraging development, preservation and enhancement of reasonable public access to major waterways for recreational use and visual enjoyment.

B.    Applicability. Provisions of this section apply to all property within the boundaries of the WOZ as shown on the Bend Urban Area Zoning Map and consistent with WOZ boundary determination procedures of subsection (C) of this section. Many parcels within the WOZ are affected by more than one sub-zone. Where this is the case, applicable development standards for each sub-zone shall apply within that sub-zone’s boundaries. Standards of this section shall apply in addition to applicable standards of the underlying zone. Where there are conflicts between sub-zone standards, the more restrictive standards shall control. The WOZ includes the following sub-zones which are included in this chapter as BDC 2.7.620 through 2.7.650:

1.    Riparian corridor.

2.    Deschutes River Corridor Design Review.

3.    River Corridor Areas of Special Interest.

4.    Floodplain.

C.    WOZ Boundary Determination. The WOZ boundary is inclusive of all WOZ sub-zones, as specified in this section. Except for the River Corridor Areas of Special Interest and the Floodplain Sub-Zone, the boundary of all sub-zones shall be determined by distance measurement from the designated waterway. The boundary for the River Corridor Areas of Special Interest Sub-Zone is designated on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map, and shall be considered to be the outer (upland) edge of the mapped boundary line. Unless otherwise provided for specific WOZ sub-zones, boundary measurements shall be made from the ordinary high water mark. Distance measurements shall be made horizontally and at right angles to the edge of the waterway.

D.    Tree Removal.

1.    Removal. Consistent with the purposes of this section, and because trees contribute to the overall health of the riparian corridor, removal of existing trees greater than four inches in diameter within the WOZ is prohibited, except as follows:

a.    Where necessary to accommodate an approved development activity; or

b.    Where the tree is determined by a qualified professional to be diseased or hazardous; or

c.    Where necessary to mitigate potential fire hazard in accordance with the Fire Protection Act of 1997.

2.    Findings. Tree removal under this subsection may be authorized by the Review Authority, based on findings demonstrating conformance with criteria in subsection (D)(1)(a), (b), or (c) of this section. Where tree removal is proposed apart from an approved development activity, the Review Authority may authorize removal as a development action. If no hazard will be created, a tree or snag requested for removal may be required to be left in place as wildlife habitat.

E.    Review Process.

1.    State Agency Coordination. Within the WOZ, the State of Oregon has jurisdiction over certain development activities. In order to ensure coordination between the City of Bend and affected State agencies, notice of proposed activities within the WOZ will be provided to the Division of State Lands, the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department, and the Department of Environmental Quality, in accordance with provisions of BDC 4.1.245, Notice to Public Agencies.

2.    Application Information. In addition to application information required under BDC 4.1.220, Application Requirements, an application for a development or land use action within the WOZ shall include the following:

a.    A detailed written explanation of the proposal, including the location, amount, and type (species) of any vegetation to be removed or planted, and any material to be graded, excavated, or filled.

b.    An explanation of why any proposed grading, excavation, or fill of material and/or vegetation is necessary.

c.    A site plan drawn to scale, accompanied by such drawings, sketches, photos, and descriptions as are necessary to describe and illustrate the proposed activity. The site plan shall, at a minimum, include:

•    Any proposed structures or impervious surfaces on the site;

•    Location of property lines, easements, existing and proposed structures;

•    Identification of existing vegetation on the site, indicating areas of native and nonnative plant species;

•    Any proposed modifications to existing vegetation;

•    A grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed site contours at two-foot intervals, or less;

•    All applicable WOZ sub-zone boundaries;

•    Location of the ordinary high water mark;

•    Location of designated wetlands on or abutting the site; boundaries of designated wetlands shall be delineated using methods accepted by the Oregon Division of State Lands;

F.    Enforcement and Penalties. In addition to the enforcement and penalty provisions of BDC Chapter 1.3, Enforcement, the Review Authority may require the replacement of vegetation removed in violation of the Waterway Overlay Zone. The City may require greater than one-to-one replacement. The amount of replacement trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be determined by the area of removed vegetation. The property owner shall enter into a mitigation agreement plan approved by the City. The mitigation plan shall include:

1.    Mitigation Plan. A plan providing for the planting and maintenance of the replacement vegetation. The plan shall make provisions for the replacement of plants that die within three years of planting.

2.    Agreement. Failure to enter into a mitigation agreement plan as required by this section or failure to comply with any condition of that plan shall be a Class A civil infraction. Such failure shall be a separate infraction each day the failure to comply continues. In addition, the City may refuse to accept any development permit application for the subject property or stop work on any development approved for the subject property until an acceptable mitigation plan has been executed or complied with.

3.    Relief. In addition to monetary penalties, the City may seek injunctive relief to require the property owner or other responsible party to restore the property to the conditions prior to the violation. The injunctive relief may include imposition of a mitigation plan.

G.    Replacement of Existing Structures. Notwithstanding other provisions to the contrary in the City of Bend Zoning Ordinance, in the event that an existing structure is partially or entirely damaged or destroyed by fire, natural disaster or other casualty, the subject structure may be repaired or replaced in the same location; provided, that additional riparian surface area is not disturbed. A property owner who has been convicted of any degree of arson (including inchoate offenses) in relation to a fire that damages or destroys the subject structure will not be permitted to utilize this section as a basis for rebuilding the damaged or destroyed structure. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1931, 2004; Ord. NS-1846, 2002]


2.7.620 Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone.

A.    Riparian Corridor Boundary. The width of the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone adjacent to various waterway segments is specified in Tables 2.7.620.A, 2.7.620.B and 2.7.620.C. Boundary distances shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark, or from the upland edge of any designated wetlands, whichever is more landward. For purposes of riparian corridor boundary determination, steep slopes are considered to exist in an area having:

•    Sixty percent or greater slope; and

•    A vertical rise of 20 feet or more; and

•    A continuous horizontal length of 50 feet or more.

Table 2.7.620.A – West Side Riparian Corridor Boundary: Deschutes River  

	Deschutes River – West Side	Distance

	From the South UGB line to the COID intake	30/75 feet1

	From the COID intake to the Southern River Crossing alignment	30/50 feet2

	From the Southern River Crossing alignment to the north boundary of McKay Park	40 feet

	From the north boundary of McKay Park to the Tumalo Irrigation District intake (south boundary of Block 15, Awbrey Heights Subdivision)	30 feet

	From the Tumalo Irrigation intake (south boundary of Block 15, Awbrey Heights Subdivision) to the Mt. Washington Drive bridge	30/50 feet3

	From the Mt. Washington Drive bridge to the south boundary of Sawyer Park	30 feet

	From the south boundary of Sawyer Park to the north UGB line	30/50 feet4

1    Where steep slopes are present within 75 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 75 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 75 feet from OHW.

2    Where steep slopes are present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 50 feet from OHW.

3    Between the River’s Edge Golf Course and the Mt. Washington Dr. bridge, where steep slopes are present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 50 feet from OHW.

4    Where steep slopes are present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 50 feet from OHW.

Table 2.7.620.B – East Side Riparian Corridor Boundary: Deschutes River  

	Deschutes River – East Side	Distance

	From the South UGB line to the COID intake	30/75 feet1

	From the COID intake to the Southern River Crossing alignment	30/50 feet2

	From the Southern River Crossing alignment to the south boundary of the Mill Addition subdivision	40 feet

	From the south boundary of the Mill Addition subdivision to the north boundary of the Bend Riverside Motel Condominiums	30 feet

	From the north boundary of the Bend Riverside Motel Condominiums to the Mt. Washington Drive bridge	30/40 feet3

	From the Mt. Washington Drive bridge to the south boundary of Sawyer Park	30 feet

	From the south boundary of Sawyer Park to the north UGB line	30/50 feet4

1    Where steep slopes are present within 75 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 75 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 75 feet from OHW.

2    Where steep slopes are present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 50 feet from OHW.

3    Between the North Unit Dam and the Mt. Washington Dr. bridge, where steep slopes are present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 50 feet from OHW.

4    Where steep slopes are present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 30 feet from OHW. Where steep slopes are not present within 50 feet horizontally of OHW, the riparian corridor boundary is 50 feet from OHW.

Table 2.7.620.C – Riparian Corridor Boundary: Tumalo Creek 

	Tumalo Creek – Both Sides	Distance

	Entire segment inside City limits	50 feet

B.    Activities Subject to Review and Approval. Within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone, permanent alteration by grading, removal of native vegetation, excavation or fill of soils or rocks, or by placement of structures or impervious surfaces is prohibited, except as provided in subsections (C), (E), (F) and (G) of this section.

C.    Land Use Actions. The following may be approved within the riparian corridor by the Review Authority as a land use action:

1.    Streets, roads, bridges and driveways.

2.    Hard surface pedestrian and bicycle paths, unpaved trails, and boardwalks.

3.    Public and private utility transmission and distribution lines, including irrigation pumps and facilities, and drainage facilities.

4.    Water-related and water-dependent uses, including parks, interpretive areas, and viewpoints.

5.    Maintenance or repair of existing streets, roads, paths, and lawfully existing structures that involves grading, fill, or excavation of more than 10 cubic yards of material, including vegetation.

6.    Restoration of the riparian corridor, including site grading and re-contouring, when carried out in conformance with an approved restoration plan (see subsection (E) of this section).

D.    Approval Criteria for Land Use Actions. The Review Authority may approve a land use permit for uses listed in subsection (C) of this section, based on findings that the following criteria are satisfied:

1.    All necessary State and Federal permits have been obtained, or will be obtained by the applicant, as a condition of approval.

2.    The proposed development or activity is designed and constructed to minimize intrusion into the riparian corridor. This criterion shall not preclude placement of permitted uses in the riparian corridor at intervals and locations for purposes of providing reasonable public access to, and views of, the waterway. The following shall be specifically addressed in demonstrating conformance with this criterion:

a.    Removal of riparian vegetation shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to accommodate the proposed use; any vegetation removed in excess of this standard shall be nonnative species. The proposal shall specify replacement of that vegetation with riparian species that are native to the Bend area, and similar to existing plant species in the vicinity (excluding noxious weeds as identified by the Deschutes County Soil and Water Conservation District).

b.    Any proposed construction shall be designed in such a manner as to minimize adverse impacts upon a designated wetland, native riparian vegetation, fish and wildlife habitat and water quality within this sub-zone.

c.    Erosion within the riparian corridor shall be prevented during and after construction by the use of mulch, erosion blankets, debris fencing, or similar preventative practices.

d.    Demonstrate that surface runoff from impervious areas will not flow unfiltered or untreated into the adjacent waterways.

E.    Restoration Plan. The Review Authority may require that a restoration plan be prepared by a qualified professional and submitted with an application for a development or land use action within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone. The Review Authority may require that the applicant post a performance bond in an amount sufficient to ensure fulfillment of an approved planting plan. A restoration plan shall demonstrate conformance with criteria of subsection (D) of this section; the plan shall include the following elements, in addition to those items required under BDC 2.7.610(E)(2):

1.    The location, type, and volume of material to be graded, dredged, filled, or removed.

2.    Identification of existing walls, riprap, or previously filled steep slopes to be altered or removed.

3.    Location, species, and amounts of existing vegetation to be removed.

4.    A detailed planting plan for any site area where vegetation is proposed to be removed or replaced.

5.    A plan to maintain new vegetation.

a.    The restoration plan shall indicate the minimum grading, dredging, or excavation necessary for any proposed activity. Bio-engineered bank stabilization measures may be required by the Review Authority.

b.    Species of vegetation to be planted shall be well suited to soil types and slopes. Limited use of nonnative species may be approved on an interim basis where necessary to retain soils, prevent noxious weeds, or otherwise facilitate the establishment of native species. The plan shall indicate replacement of all nonnative vegetation with native species within a maximum period of five years from the date of approval.

c.    The plan shall indicate maintenance measures for new vegetation sufficient to ensure successful establishment, including irrigation methods, surface water containment, and measures to prevent overspray of herbicides and pesticides.

F.    Exempt Activities. The following activities are exempt from review within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone:

1.    Normal maintenance of yards and landscaped areas with existing plantings of lawns, ornamental plants, and other nonnative vegetation.

2.    Normal maintenance and repair of lawfully existing buildings, structures, streets, roads, bridges, dams, paths, utilities, drainage facilities, and irrigation pumps and facilities.

3.    Alterations of lawfully existing buildings or accessory structures that do not increase building coverage within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone.

4.    Removal of nonnative vegetation and noxious weeds, as identified by the Deschutes County Soil and Water Conservation District, and replacement in equal or greater volume with species that are native to the Bend area and similar to existing plant species in the vicinity.

5.    Tree removal in accordance with BDC 2.7.610(D).

6.    In all instances exempted above, related disturbance inherent to the exempted activity and intrusion into the riparian area shall be kept at a minimum.

G.    Exceptions.

1.    Exemptions. The following exceptions to applicable standards of the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone may be authorized by the Review Authority as a land use action:

a.    A legally created lot or parcel which is located entirely within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone may be developed with permitted uses, subject to the applicable land use review, in a manner that will have the least impact to inventoried resources of the riparian corridor.

b.    Required yard setback distances may be reduced when such reduction is necessary to enable a proposed structure to be placed outside the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone.

c.    Structures and impervious surfaces may be placed within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone when the Review Authority, in consultation with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, determines that the proposal will provide equal or better protection of riparian resources than would be achieved by excluding the proposed improvements from the sub-zone. Equal or better protection of riparian resources shall be ensured through restoration of riparian areas, enhanced buffer treatment, or similar measures. In no case shall such alterations occupy more than 50 percent of the width of the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone on properties upstream of the COID intake; alterations shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the width of the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone downstream of the COID intake. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.630 River Corridor Areas of Special Interest Sub-Zone.

A.    Approval Criteria. Proposed development or land use actions on property subject to the River Corridor Areas of Special Interest Review shall be subject to the following provisions:

1.    The proposal shall be designed and constructed so as to maintain the integrity of the existing natural features and biological system by utilizing exterior building materials that have earth tone colors. Removal of native vegetation shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to accommodate the proposed development or land use action; any vegetation removed in excess of this standard shall be nonnative species.

2.    Structures located along the canyon rim of the river shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the River Corridor Area of Special Interest boundary for a building 20 feet or less in height. For buildings over 20 feet in height, the building shall set back one additional foot for every additional foot over 20 feet. The maximum building height shall not exceed that of the underlying zone.

3.    The permanent alteration of a River Corridor Area of Special Interest by grading, excavation or fill, the placement of structures or impervious surfaces, or by the removal of existing vegetation is only permitted as authorized within the Riparian Corridor Sub-Zone, or as provided as follows:

a.    Streets and Crossings. Public or private streets and river crossings may be placed within a River Corridor Area of Special Interest to access development activities if it is shown that no other practicable method of access exists. If allowed, the applicant shall demonstrate that:

i.    No other practicable access to the buildable area exists, or access from an off-site location through the use of easements is not possible;

ii.    Roads and driveways are designed to be the minimum width necessary and the minimum intrusion into the River Corridor Area of Special Interest while also allowing safe passage of vehicles and/or pedestrians;

b.    Utilities, Irrigation Facilities, and Drainage Facilities. Public and private utilities, irrigation facilities, or drainage facilities may be placed within a River Corridor Area of Special Interest when it is shown that no other practicable alternative location exists. If allowed, the applicant shall demonstrate that:

i.    No other practicable access exists or access from an off-site location through the use of easements is not possible;

ii.    The corridor necessary to construct utilities shall be the minimum width practicable;

iii.    Removal of existing trees and native vegetation shall be avoided unless absolutely necessary;

iv.    Minimal visual impact to the river corridor will result from the construction of the facility.

c.    Removal of Vegetation. Removal of existing vegetation from a River Corridor Area of Special Interest is prohibited, except as indicated below:

i.    Existing trees may be removed as provided in BDC 2.7.610(D).

ii.    The removal of noxious weeds and nonnative grasses (e.g., knap weed, toad flax or cheat grass) is encouraged when practicable with minimal disturbance to the ASI.

iii.    The removal of existing vegetation, other than trees, when the amount of vegetation removed is the minimum necessary to reduce fire fuels as determined by a qualified professional.

d.    Enhancement of a River Corridor Area of Special Interest. Planting of additional vegetation within a River Corridor Area of Special Interest is permitted as indicated below:

i.    Plant materials that are or will be visible from the river shall be native to Central Oregon and similar to the existing plant species in the vicinity of the River Corridor Area of Special Interest.

B.    Development Credit. When an applicant preserves a River Corridor Area of Special Interest, the development potential for the preserved area may be transferred to the balance of the parcel for development or applied to the subject property as indicated below:

1.    For residential lands where the property owner preserves a River Corridor Area of Special Interest, the property owner shall receive a density credit equivalent to the area being preserved as determined through the land use permit process.

2.    Where the applicant preserves a River Corridor Area of Special Interest, the property owner may initiate one or more of the activities listed below; provided, that the compensation does not exceed the benefit of the ASI protection as determined through the land use permit process.

a.    Substitute the area of the preserved ASI as the equivalent required on-site landscaping;

b.    Receive up to 10 percent reduction in the required on-site parking spaces;

c.    Reduce the front yard setback up to 50 percent of the standards required for the applicable zone.

3.    For subdivision development, where the applicant proposes to preserve a River Corridor Area of Special Interest, the property owner may apply the PUD development standards to the subject property without the additional CUP application.

C.    Exceptions. An exception to the provisions of the River Corridor Areas of Special Interest sub-zone may be permitted as provided below:

1.    For existing legal lots where the location of a River Corridor Area of Special Interest results in a lot depth for a single-family dwelling of 50 feet or less or a building envelope of 800 square feet or less, the front and side yard setbacks may be reduced up to 50 percent of the standard required for the applicable zone.

2.    For existing residential lots where the entire lot is located within an ASI, the property may be developed with permitted uses, subject to the applicable land use review, in a manner that will have the least impact to the ASI.

3.    For the construction of public trails or paths that provide public access into the preserved River Corridor Areas of Special Interest.

4.    For lots or parcels existing prior to the adoption of this code, where there are buildings on both of the abutting lots with canyon rim setbacks less than the required depth, the setback need not exceed the average setback on the abutting buildings. If there is a building on only one abutting lot or parcel with a setback less than the required setback depth, the setback need not exceed the average of the setback of the abutting building and the required setback.

D.    River Corridor Areas of Special Interest Mitigation Requirements.

1.    Proposed development or land use actions in the River Corridor Areas of Special Interest Sub-Zone may trigger a requirement for mitigation. The purpose of mitigation is to restore the value of the visual resource lost due to development activity. It is the burden of the applicant to demonstrate how mitigation restores visual significance. When a proposal impacts a River Corridor Area of Special Interest by grading, excavation, or fill, the placement of structures or impervious surfaces, or by the removal of vegetation, a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional shall be submitted to the Review Authority. The mitigation plan shall include the following:

a.    The location of the impact;

b.    Existing conditions and size of the resource area prior to impact;

c.    Location and size of the proposed mitigation area.

2.    The mitigation plan shall be approved by the Review Authority upon finding conformance with the following criteria:

a.    Proposed vegetation to be removed shall be replaced on the site at a ratio of at least 1:1;

b.    All proposed vegetation planted within the mitigation area shall be native to the region and similar to the vegetation to be removed;

c.    Additional mitigation measures may be required, based on the nature of the impact, such as:

•    Site reclamation;

•    Screening of structures, cuts or fills;

•    Increased vegetative quantities and/or sizes.

E.    Standards for Designating Additional River Corridor Areas of Special Interest.

1.    Any individual or organization may apply for designating new River Corridor Areas of Special Interest. Designation of new areas shall be coordinated with the affected property owners. A “River Corridor Area of Special Interest” designation may be applied or modified pursuant to BDC 2.7.700(G). A new designation shall be processed as a map amendment to both the Bend Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Maps pursuant to BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, and this section. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.640 Floodplain Combining Zone.

A.    Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

1.    To protect human life and health;

2.    To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

3.    To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

4.    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

5.    To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

6.    To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazards so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

7.    To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

8.    To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

B.    Application of FP Zone.

1.    The FP Combining Zone shall apply to the areas identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as special flood hazard areas inundated by 100-year flood and floodway areas. The FIA Flood Insurance Study for “Deschutes County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas” and the FIRM map dated September 28, 2007, are hereby adopted and by this reference included herein. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Planning Division. The A and AE Zones shown on the FIRM map are hereby zoned FP.

2.    The Planning Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the Floodplain Combining Zone by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties and responsibilities of the Planning Director shall include, but not be limited to:

a.    Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this code have been satisfied.

b.    Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

c.    Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of subsection (M)(1) of this section are met.

d.    Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). A person contesting the location of the special flood hazard boundary shall be given an opportunity to seek a declaratory ruling or to appeal the interpretation as provided in BDC Chapter 4.1.

3.    When base flood elevation data has not been provided on the FIRM, the Planning Director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer this section.

4.    Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

a.    Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in subsection (B)(3) of this section, verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

b.    For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures, verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed and maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection (G)(2) of this section.

C.    Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This code does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This code shall not create liability on the part of the City of Bend, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this code or any administrative decision made hereunder.

D.    Alteration of Watercourses.

1.    Prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, notice of the proposed alteration shall be given to affected, adjacent communities and appropriate State agencies such as the Department of Land Conservation and Development and the State Department of Water Resources. The Planning Director shall also submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

2.    The applicant shall maintain the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

E.    Permit for Use or Development in an FP Zone. No development shall occur in an FP Zone unless a permit has been received for the work. Except for improvement of an existing structure which is less than substantial, as determined by the City, no permit shall be issued unless the work will be reasonably safe from flooding, otherwise complies with this code, and all necessary State, Federal, and local permits will be obtained as a condition of approval on any permit in an FP Zone. The following information shall be submitted with the permit application:

1.    The location of the property with reference to channel stations and flood profile elevations.

2.    The existing topography and proposed grading plan for the property. Contour intervals shall not be more than one-foot for ground slopes up to five percent and, for areas immediately adjacent to a stream, two-foot for ground slopes between five and 10 percent, and five-foot for greater slopes.

3.    The location of existing and proposed diking or revetments, if any.

4.    Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher flood insurance rates.

F.    Structural Elevation Data Required.

1.    A building permit application for substantial improvement to an existing structure or for a new structure within an FP Zone shall contain the following data referenced to mean sea level:

a.    The level of the lowest habitable floor and of any basement floor whether or not intended to be habitable. This information shall be submitted on FEMA Form 81-31.

b.    The level to which the structure is to be floodproofed, if applicable.

2.    A statement which notes whether the structure contains a basement.

3.    The information required by this subsection shall be maintained in the files of the Building Department with the subject building permit.

G.    Regulation of Structures in an FP Zone.

1.    Residential Construction.

a.    New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above base flood elevation.

b.    Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

i.    A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

ii.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

iii.    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

2.    Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

a.    Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

c.    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the City’s Building Official.

d.    Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (G)(1)(b) of this section.

e.    Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level).

3.    Crawlspace Construction. Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas:

a.    The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required openings stated in subsection (G)(3)(b) of this section. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.

b.    The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

c.    Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.

d.    Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.

e.    The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

f.    The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.

g.    There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.

h.    The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used.

4.    Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones AH or AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection (I)(2) of this section.

5.    Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

a.    Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

b.    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

c.    Meet the requirements of subsection (G)(3) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

H.    Construction Materials and Methods.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3.    Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

I.    Anchoring.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

2.    All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

J.    Land Development Standards in a Flood Hazard Area.

1.    In addition to the terms of subsections (J) and (K) of this section, a subdivision or other land development, including all utility facilities, within an FP Zone shall be designed, located, and constructed to minimize flood damage, including special provisions for adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

2.    A land development which will alter or relocate a watercourse shall be designed, constructed and maintained to retain the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.

3.    Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

K.    Manufactured Home Development Standards.

1.    All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones AH and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection (I)(2) of this section.

2.    The placement of a manufactured home in the floodway is prohibited.

L.    Utilities Standards in a Flood Hazard Area.

1.    A public utility or facility associated with a land development within a FP Zone shall be designed, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and to avoid raising the water elevation in a regulatory floodway.

2.    Any new or replacement water supply system shall be designed, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.

3.    Any new or replacement sewerage system shall be designed, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the system into the floodwaters.

M.    Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection (B)(1) of this section, Application of FP Zone, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

1.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

2.    If subsection (M)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection (G) of this section, Regulations of Structures in an FP Zone.

N.    Before Regulatory Floodway. In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

O.    Critical Facilities. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.

P.    Technical Variances. A technical variance from the requirements of this section may be granted by the Hearings Body for new construction and for improvements to existing structures which could not otherwise be authorized, provided the construction or improvements are to be erected or installed on a parcel of land one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to or more or less surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the minimum floor elevation established for flood protection purposes. A parcel of land in excess of one-half acre in single ownership on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code is not excluded from the granting of a technical variance, but the burden of proof required for issuing the variance increases as the size of the property under single ownership increases, and the variance shall be granted only if required to equalize circumstances, considering previously developed land adjacent to the parcel for which a variance is sought.

Q.    Historic Variance. A variance for historic preservation may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.

R.    Other Variances. All other variance applications shall be considered according to the terms of BDC Chapter 5.1.

1.    Applicants for a variance shall include with their application the following information:

a.    The location of the property with reference to channel station and flood profile elevation.

b.    The existing topography and proposed grading plan for the property. Contour intervals shall not be more than one foot for ground slopes up to five percent and for areas immediately adjacent to a stream, two feet for ground slopes between five and 10 percent, and five feet for greater slopes.

c.    The location of existing and proposed diking or revetments if any. [Ord. NS-2072, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1846, 2002; Ord. NS-1631, 1995; Ord. NS-1617, 1994; Ord. NS-1475, 1988; Ord. NS-1462, 1987]


2.7.650 Deschutes River Corridor Design Review Combining Zone.

A.    Purpose. It is the purpose of the Deschutes River Corridor Design Review Zone to ensure compliance with the objectives of this code and the goals and policies relating to the Deschutes River in the Bend Comprehensive Plan. The purpose shall also be to:

•    Recognize and respect the unusual natural beauty and character of the Deschutes River.

•    Conserve and enhance the existing riparian zone along the Deschutes River.

•    Allow the community flexibility in reviewing development proposals within the Areas of Special Interest that are designated on the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

•    Maintain the scenic quality of the canyon and rimrock areas of the Deschutes River.

•    Conserve and enhance property values.

•    Preserve, protect and enhance water quality.

•    Encourage development, preservation and enhancement of reasonable public access to the river for recreational use and visual enjoyment.

B.    The following areas and uses are exempt from the Deschutes River Design Review process:

1.    Public streets and utility facilities existing as of the date of adoption of this code. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this code, a variance may be granted to the mandatory 40-foot setback for future public streets and utility facilities.

2.    Irrigation facilities, canals and flumes existing as of the date of adoption of this code.

3.    The existing Korpine Mill operation on the east side of the Deschutes River.

C.    Design Review Procedure. All new development, structures, additions and exterior alterations to structures, including outside storage and off-street parking lots within the Deschutes River Corridor, are subject to a design review process.

1.    Prior to filing a design review application, the applicant shall confer with the Planning Department concerning the requirements of formal application.

2.    The design review application shall be filed on a form provided by the City Planning Department and shall be accompanied by drawings and information as specified by the Planning Department. Copies of the plan shall be submitted and such additional information as is deemed necessary for the Site Plan Committee or Bend Urban Area Planning Commission to adequately review the applications.

3.    The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the design plan. The decision of the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed in accordance with the City of Bend’s land use procedures.

4.    To approve a design plan the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission must find compliance with the provisions of this code.

D.    Site Plan Committee. The Site Plan Committee, as designated in subsection (C) of this section, Design Review Procedure, shall review a site plan application subject to design review on its technical merits and submit recommendations for approval, conditional approval, or rejection to the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission. The Commission decision shall be based on the site plan criteria, City policies, and standards.

E.    Minimum Standards. Within the Deschutes River Corridor the following minimum standards shall apply:

1.    Building and Parking Setbacks.

a.    One-Hundred-Foot Setback Area. For the areas described below, the setback for all new buildings, parking lots and loading areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet from the ordinary high water mark unless the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission approves a lesser setback. In no case shall the setback be less than 40 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River.

i.    The east and west bank from the Arizona/Commerce Street line to the southern boundary of the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map;

ii.    The east bank from the southern property line of Magill’s Landing Subdivision to the northern property line of the Bend Riverside Motel;

iii.    The east bank from the southern property line of Sawyer Park to the southern boundary of the Rimrock West Subdivision;

iv.    The east and west banks from the northern boundary of the Rimrock West subdivision to the northern boundary of the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map; and

v.    The west bank north of the Park District property known as “Flume Park” to the southern boundary of the Rimrock West Subdivision.

The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may approve a lesser setback after the applicant has demonstrated through design review that the project provides at least the following:

i.    Protection of water quality, and fish and wildlife habitat;

ii.    The improvement or restoration of riverfront riparian areas by the creation of new riparian vegetation areas or by improvements to existing riverfront riparian areas through appropriate plantings; and

iii.    The provision of open space along the riverfront.

b.    Commercial Property. For all existing commercially zoned property within the Deschutes River Corridor in existence upon the adoption of this code, the setback for all buildings, parking lots, and loading areas shall be 30 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River.

c.    Other Areas. For the areas not described in subsection (E)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, all buildings, parking lots, and loading areas shall be 40 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River. In no case shall the setback be less than 40 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River.

2.    Features in Building Setback Area. Within the 30-, 40- and 100-foot building setback area, required in subsections (E)(1)(a), (b) and (c) of this section, the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may approve features to enhance or support public use. Such features may include sidewalks, trails, utility facilities, streets and bridges crossing the river, boardwalks, decks, plazas, outdoor cafe seating areas, utilities, lights, bike racks, trash and recycling receptacles, furniture, bank stabilization structures, fences, art work, stairs, bike and pedestrian bridges, boat launch facilities, and vendor carts as defined by the Bend Code. The placement and uses shall be subject to the criteria in subsection (F) of this section.

3.    Rebuilding of Existing Structures. This setback restriction shall not prohibit rebuilding an existing structure; provided, that the rebuilt structure is comparable in size, profile, use and location to the structure that previously existed. The term new development shall not include rebuilding an existing structure; provided, that the rebuilt structure is comparable in size, profile, use and location to the structure that previously existed.

4.    Building Heights. Maximum structure height shall be limited to 30 feet at the minimum setback line. The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may allow increases in building heights up to the allowed height in the underlying zone the farther the building sets back from the river. The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may limit building height the closer to the river a building is allowed. The building height shall be measured from the lowest natural grade facing the river to the highest measurable point on or projecting from the roof of the structure.

F.    Site and Design Review Criteria. In addition to the minimum standards above, the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission shall review the development using the following design criteria:

1.    Conservation of Natural Features. Major rock outcrops, stands of trees, riparian areas, or other prominent natural features are an important part of the visual character and quality of the community. The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission shall review the applicant’s proposal for impacts on these resources and may limit the amount of removal, require additional screening, or moving or reducing in size the development, addition or structure in order to preserve, to the greatest extent possible, existing natural features.

2.    Compatibility with Existing Area. The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission shall consider the relationship of the proposed development with the existing surroundings, in terms of building bulk, height, location, separation, shape, parking areas, lighting, fences, landscaping, open space, visual and physical corridors to the river and adjacent land use.

3.    Colors and Materials. The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission shall consider colors and materials. The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may require new structures and additions to existing structures to be finished in muted earth tones that blend with and reduce contrast with the surrounding vegetation and landscape of the building site or colors that are compatible with adjacent buildings.

4.    No large areas, including roofs, shall be finished with bright or reflective materials. Metal roofing material is permitted if it is nonreflective and of a color which blends with the surrounding vegetation and landscape.

5.    The Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may establish increased setbacks, limitations of building heights, and limitations on the bulk and length of buildings, limitations on lighting, landscaping, fences, size and shape of windows facing the river, size and location of parking, and outdoor storage areas and any other improvement or use listed in subsection (E) of this section in order to carry out the purpose of this code.

6.    For projects proposing development within the setback area, the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may consider the degree to which the project provides public access along the riverfront, and may require the dedication of public access on an individualized determination that the required access is reasonably related to the project, and that the required dedication is also roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed project.

7.    For projects incorporating a setback less than 100 feet the Bend Urban Area Planning Commission may require enhanced site landscaping, minimum corridors between buildings, variations in building setbacks, size or bulk of facades and may impose any other conditions of approval reasonably required to meet the purposes of this code. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1846, 2002; Ord. NS-1625, 1994; Ord. NS-1593, 1993; Ord. NS-1584, 1993; Ord. NS-1414, 1985]

Article VI. Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone


2.7.700 Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone.

As early as 1975, Areas of Special Interest have been identified as important features in the landscape intended to be preserved as growth occurs. These areas represent potential private and public open space. The upland features consist of scattered rock outcrops, stands of trees, and dominant ridges and faults that are typical of the Central Oregon landscape. These areas contain high points or changes in elevation that break the line of sight so that the area retains a feeling of undeveloped open space.

A.    Purpose. Bend is a community that values its natural features of trees and rocks. This section will fulfill the vision of the Bend Comprehensive Plan to retain and conserve the “natural character” of Bend. Natural resources such as rock outcroppings, draws, mature trees, natural vegetation and animal habitat are assets to the community.

The Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone is intended to protect valuable natural resources within the City of Bend’s Urban Growth Boundary while ensuring reasonable use of the property. This section will establish clear and objective design and development standards to protect these resources and preserve and enhance this vision for Bend’s future livability.

B.    Applicability.
[IMAGE]


1.    Affected Property. The procedures and requirements of the Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone apply to any real property designated as having an ASI as mapped on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map and the City Zoning Map. These standards shall be in addition to the standards of the underlying zone.

2.    Activities Subject to Review. Unless specifically exempted from review as described in subsection (B)(3) of this section, activities subject to review and which require a permit shall include all development on properties described below:

a.    Partitioning and subdividing of land.

b.    New structural development.

c.    Exterior expansion of any building or structure, or increases in impervious surfaces or storage areas.

d.    Site modifications including grading, excavation or fill, installation of new utilities, construction of roads, driveways, or paths.

e.    Removal of trees or cutting or clearing of any native vegetation within the Upland Area of Special Interest.

3.    Exemptions. Activities exempt from this section include:

a.    The sale of property.

b.    Temporary emergency action necessary for the safety and protection of property or the public.

c.    Commercial forest practices regulated by the Oregon Forest Practices Act.

C.    ASI Review Process. For all activity subject to the Upland Area of Special Interest Overlay review, the following shall apply:

1.    The ASI Review shall be processed as a “Land Use Permit” as defined in BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures. When practicable, the ASI Review shall be processed concurrently with other land use permits.

2.    The ASI Review application is subject to the provisions of this chapter.

3.    The ASI Review application shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, drawings and information specified in this chapter.

D.    Development Standards. The ASI Boundary is delineated by the outside edge of the boundary line shown on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map and the City Zoning Map. No development as defined in this chapter shall occur within an Upland Area of Special Interest boundary unless expressly permitted by the provisions of this chapter.

The development standards shall apply to structures, fences, impervious surfaces including streets and driveways except where provided for in this section and landscaping as described in subsection (D)(5) of this section. In addition, no stock piling of fill materials, parking or storage of equipment or personal property shall be placed within an Upland Area of Special Interest.

1.    Setbacks. There shall be a 25-foot setback from the ASI boundary for all structures requiring a building permit to provide adequate fire fuel break and to reduce the visual impact to the Area of Special Interest. This additional setback area may be used in addition to the ASI area to calculate any density credit.

The permanent alteration of an Upland Area of Special Interest by grading, excavation or fill, the placement of impervious surfaces, or by the removal of existing vegetation is only permitted in association with the following enumerated uses and subject to the requirements.

2.    Streets and Driveways. Public or private streets and driveways may be placed within an Upland Area of Special Interest to access development activities if it is shown that no other practicable method of access exists. If allowed, the applicant shall demonstrate that:

a.    No other practicable access to the buildable area exists, or access from an off-site location through the use of easements is not possible;

b.    Roads and driveways are designed to be the minimum width necessary and the minimum intrusion into the Upland Area of Special Interest while also allowing safe passage of vehicles and/or pedestrians;

c.    The need for future extensions of shared access, access easements, or private streets to access potential new building sites have been considered at the time of this application in order to avoid subsequent encroachments into an Upland Area of Special Interest.

3.    Utilities and Drainage Facilities. Public and private utilities or drainage facilities may be placed underground within an Upland Area of Special Interest when it is shown that no other practicable alternative location exists. If allowed, the applicant shall demonstrate that:

a.    No other practicable access exists or access from an off-site location through the use of easements is not possible;

b.    The corridor necessary to construct utilities shall be the minimum width practicable;

c.    Removal of existing trees and native vegetation shall be avoided unless absolutely necessary.

Any permanent alteration of an Upland Area of Special Interest by the construction of public or private streets, driveways, utilities or drainage facilities is subject to the mitigation requirements under subsection (F) of this section.

4.    Removal of Vegetation. Removal of existing vegetation from an Upland Area of Special Interest is prohibited, except as indicated below:

a.    A tree in danger of falling and thereby posing a hazard to life or property may be removed, following an assessment evaluation from a Qualified Professional. If no hazard will be created, the tree or snag may be required to be left in place within the Upland Area of Special Interest to provide wildlife habitat.

b.    Diseased or dying trees that may pose a threat to the health of surrounding vegetation as determined by a Qualified Professional.

c.    The removal of noxious weeds and nonnative grasses (e.g., knap weed, toad flax or cheat grass) is encouraged when practicable with minimal disturbance to the ASI.

5.    Enhancement of an Upland Area of Special Interest. Planting of additional vegetation within an Upland Area of Special Interest is permitted as indicated below:

a.    Plant materials shall be native to Central Oregon and similar to the existing plant species in the vicinity of the ASI.

b.    No permanent irrigation shall be installed.

6.    Development Credit. When an applicant preserves an Upland Area of Special Interest, the development potential for the preserved area may be transferred to the balance of the parcel for development or applied to the subject property as indicated below:

a.    For residential lands where the property owner preserves an Upland Area of Special Interest, the property owner shall receive a density credit equivalent to the area being preserved as determined through the land use permit process.

b.    Where the applicant preserves an Upland Area of Special Interest, the property owner may initiate one or more of the activities listed below; provided, that the compensation does not exceed the benefit of the ASI protection as determined through the land use permit process.

•    Substitute the preserved ASI as the equivalent required on-site landscaping;

•    Receive up to 10 percent reduction in the required on-site parking spaces;

•    Reduce the front yard setback up to 50 percent of the standards required for the applicable zone;

•    Develop accessory dwelling units on lots abutting an area of special interest.

c.    For subdivision development, where the applicant preserves an Upland Area of Special Interest, the property owner may incorporate flexible lot development standards typical of a PUD when the area of special interest occupies more than 20 percent of the subject property.

d.    Opportunities for tax benefit in accordance with the provisions of the Deschutes County Tax Assessor.

E.    Exceptions and Variances. An exception or variance to the provisions of this code shall apply to property where no further land division is feasible. An exception or variance is permitted only when considered necessary to allow reasonable economic use of the subject property or to provide public benefit.

1.    Exceptions.

a.    Properties which have existing structures or site development within an ASI on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and which do not conform to the standards stated herein, shall be considered nonconforming.

b.    For existing platted lots where the location of an Upland Area of Special Interest results in a building area depth for a single-family dwelling of 25 feet or less or a building envelope of 800 square feet or less, or a commercial building area depth of 100 feet, the front and side yard setbacks may be reduced up to 50 percent of the standard required for the applicable zone.

c.    For existing platted lots where the entire lot is located within an ASI, the property may be developed with permitted uses, subject to the applicable land use review, in a manner that will have the least impact to the ASI.

d.    The construction of public trails or paths that provide public access into the preserved Upland Areas of Special Interest.

2.    Variances. A variance shall only apply to property where strict interpretation of the standards would preclude reasonable use of the land that could be expected to occur in the zone, and that the property owner would be precluded a substantial property right enjoyed by the majority of landowners in the vicinity.

Criteria: No variance request shall be granted unless the applicant can establish:

a.    That special conditions exist which are peculiar to the subject property which make conformance to the standards of this chapter impractical.

b.    The variance is the minimal deviance from the standards of this chapter needed to accomplish the objective.

c.    The varied standard will conform to the purpose and objectives of the Bend Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.

In any case, the granting of a variance shall not adversely affect the potential for public access into an Area of Special Interest, adequate provision for fire protection or the visual integrity of the Area of Special Interest.

A variance to the standards of this chapter shall be processed as a “Land Use Permit” as defined in BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures. The Review Authority may attach conditions to any variance granted to ensure that the variance meets the objectives of the Bend Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.

F.    Areas of Special Interest Mitigation Standards. The development activities listed in subsections (B) and (D) of this section may trigger a requirement for mitigation. When a proposed development impacts an Upland Area of Special Interest by grading, excavation, or fill, the placement of impervious surfaces, or by the removal of vegetation, a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional shall be submitted to the Review Authority. The mitigation plan shall include the following:

1.    The location of the impact, the existing conditions and area size of the resource prior to impact, the location and size of the proposed mitigation area, and a proposed mitigation plan that represents a 1:1 replacement value;

2.    All proposed vegetation planted within the mitigation area shall be native to the region and similar to the vegetation removed. Species to be planted in the mitigation area shall replace those impacted by the development activity at a 2:1 ratio;

3.    Additional mitigation measures may be required based on the nature of the impact such as:

•    Site reclamation.

•    Screening of structures, cuts or fills.

•    Increased vegetative quantities and/or sizes.

G.    Standards for Designating New Upland Areas of Special Interest. Any individual or organization may apply for designating new Upland Areas of Special Interest. Designation of new areas shall be coordinated with the affected property owners. An “Upland Area of Special Interest” designation may be imposed or modified pursuant to an ASI analysis. During January of each “odd numbered” calendar year, individuals may apply to the City for new ASI designations to be added to the Bend Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Maps. The City will process applications received during this time without fee. During the same time period, the City shall review City-owned properties for potential new ASI designations. A new designation shall be processed as a map amendment to both the Bend Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Maps pursuant to the City of Bend Procedures Ordinance and this section.

1.    Procedure.

a.    The applicant shall file an application for a Bend Comprehensive Plan Map amendment and Zoning Map amendment on a form provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, drawings and appropriate information.

b.    The Review Authority shall conduct an evaluation. Using the “ASI” Analysis Methodology, the outcome of the analysis must establish that the proposed sites merit resource protection as an “Area of Special Interest” in order to proceed.

2.    ASI Analysis Methodology. The City shall evaluate potential Upland Areas of Special Interest using the 1999 Natural Areas Scoring System (NASS) developed by the Bend Urban Land Survey team. The NASS is a numerical ranking which represents the relative values of a natural resource site. The following nine criteria and scoring system are used to determine the total assessment score:

 

Natural Area Scoring System  

	Criteria	Score	Explanation

	Existing Site Use	6	Undeveloped

	 	4	Minor development

	 	2	Significant development

	 	0	Development that substantially reduces open space value

	Habitat Value	6	Supports a broad diversity of bird and/or animal life

	 	4	Supports moderate diversity of bird and/or animal life

	 	2	Limited habitat value

	 	0	Almost no habitat value

	Trees and Vegetation	6	Mature trees, quality riparian vegetation or other significant vegetation

	 	4	Some trees, other lower quality vegetation

	 	2	Little significant vegetation

	 	0	Almost no vegetation

	Natural Features	6	Uncommon or outstanding natural features

	 	4	Natural features of good quality

	 	2	Natural features are not distinctive

	 	0	Almost no natural features

	Conflict with Adjacent Land Use	6	No conflicts

	 	4	Slight conflicts

	 	2	Moderate conflicts

	 	0	Severe conflicts

	Wildlife Linkages	6	Quality connections to other wildlife areas

	 	4	Some connections

	 	2	Minor connections

	 	0	No connections

	Scenic Resources	6	Highly attractive scenic resources

	 	4	Moderately attractive

	 	2	Limited scenic value

	 	0	Unattractive

	Public Access	6	Potential for high use

	 	4	Potential for moderate use

	 	2	Low potential for use

	 	0	No potential for use

	Type of Water Present	6	Has a variety of flows

	 	4	Year-round water source of good quality

	 	2	Seasonal water

	 	0	No water or low quality water source

H.    Delineation of New Upland Areas of Special Interest. The ASI delineation is a more precise determination of the location of the designated area. The delineation is determined by several factors including but not limited to the topographical contours, the presence of significant trees and an on-site field location conducted by the Review Authority.

1.    Topography. The boundary of the designated area will be determined to be at the toe of the slope or slope transition for upland features as illustrated on an adopted map specific to each ASI unless otherwise determined by the Review Authority based on field observation.

2.    Significant Trees. The ASI boundary may include significant trees as defined in this code measured at the outer edge of the tree canopy based on aerial photos and field observation.

3.    Evaluation Methodology. A potential new site within the “Upland Feature” category would be evaluated using the following method:


[IMAGE]


ASI No. 4 on the east side of 15th Street

Upland features are natural areas consisting of geologic features and/or vegetation that provide visual and spatial breaks in the developed landscape.

4.    Upland Features.

a.    Use the following three criteria:

i.    Scenic Resources.

ii.    Existing Site Use.

iii.    Natural Features.

b.    Apply the NASS scoring system for these criteria.

c.    The combined score must total a minimum of 10 points.

Proposed new sites in the Upland feature category with a minimum score of 10 points would be subject to a second review using all nine NASS criteria. Under the second review, the site must total a minimum of 20 points to be further considered for adoption as an Upland Area of Special Interest.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1803, 2001]

Article VII. Murphy Crossing Refinement Plan


2.7.800 Murphy Crossing Refinement Plan.


2.7.810 Purpose.

The purpose of the Murphy Crossing Refinement Plan is to implement the Murphy Crossing Master Development Plan and the Bend Comprehensive Plan policies regarding the Murphy Crossing property, and to create overlay development standards for the residential, commercial and mixed-use districts and designated open space within the plan boundaries. The overlay development standards will:

•    Provide a variety of employment opportunities and housing types;

•    Locate residential uses adjacent to the existing neighborhoods west of the site;

•    Create opportunities for large-scale retail uses as well as community commercial and small-scale businesses in selected locations to foster a mixed-use district;

•    Promote pedestrian and other multi-modal transportation options;

•    Ensure compatibility of uses within the development and within the surrounding area;

•    Create an interconnected system of streets with standards appropriate to the intensity and type of adjacent use; and

•    Create safe and attractive streetscapes that will meet emergency access requirements and enhance pedestrian and bicycle access. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2031, 2006; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.820 Districts.

A.    Applicability. The standards provided for the Murphy Crossing Refinement Plan area by this section shall supersede the otherwise applicable standards of this Development Code, except where those other standards expressly state they are to supersede the standards of this section.

B.    District Location. The locations of the zoning overlay districts are depicted on the adopted Murphy Crossing Master Development Plan map and as described below.

Table 2.7.820.B  

	Zoning Overlay District (Zone)	Location and Characteristics

	Park/Open Space (PF)	This area is centrally located within the Refinement Plan area and is intended for park development by the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District as a neighborhood park.

	Park Open Space (RL)	These open space areas serve as a special buffer between more intense development and/or new roadway alignments. The open space area can provide passive pedestrian connections linking existing residential development with the new Murphy Crossing commercial center.

	Single-Family Residential (RS)	Located along the western boundary of the refinement plan area and predominantly north of Romaine Village Way, this area provides a transition between the existing Low Density Residential (RL) housing and the new Murphy Crossing development. The minimum lot size within the RS Zone will be 6,000 sq. ft. with a minimum lot depth of 100 feet when lots abut existing RL development. Homes may be clustered or attached as zero lot line to provide maximum preservation of existing trees.

	Multifamily Residential (RM)	The RM overlay located within the central plan area provides a transition between the new standard density single-family homes and the more intense commercial development along the easterly portion of the refinement plan area. RM development is also located at the north and south ends of the plan area along the Parkway. The density range is 7.3 to 21.7 units per gross acre.

	Mixed-Use (ME)	The Mixed-Use District is applied to areas of Murphy Crossing adjacent to primary commercial streets, to provide opportunities for a variety of smaller-scale, pedestrian-oriented commercial uses located in ground-floor street frontages, with residential uses and offices above. Residential units may be located on the ground floor when adjacent to other multifamily housing. The residential density for the residential component of mixed-use projects shall not exceed 21.7 units per gross acre.

	General Commercial (CG)	Located primarily between the Bend Parkway and the north/south frontage road, the General Commercial District provides for a mix of commercial uses with large site requirements and smaller-scale service commercial uses that can provide a pedestrian-oriented street frontage.

C.    Permitted Land Uses. Unless otherwise specified in the table below, the land uses listed within the applicable zoning districts within this Development Code shall be permitted, subject to the provisions of this code.

Table 2.7.820.C  

	Land Use	RS	RM	ME	CG

	Residential

	Single-Family Detached (as primary use)	P	N	N	N

	Single-Family Attached (Townhomes or Condominiums)	 	 	 	 

	•	as primary use	P (max. 2 units)	P	N	N

	•	as secondary use	N	N	P	C

	Multifamily	 	 	 	 

	•	Duplex/Triplex	N	P	P	N

	•	Multi-units	N	P	P	N

	Commercial/Mixed-Use

	All Commercial/Mixed-Use Buildings	 	 	 	 

	•	Building footprint less than 10,000 sq. ft.	N	N	P	P

	•	Building footprint 10,000 – 20,000 sq. ft. w/ max. building size of 30,000 gross sq. ft.	N	N	C	P

	•	Building footprint 20,000 – 50,000 sq. ft. w/ max. building size of 60,000 sq. ft.	N	N	N	P

	•	Building footprint greater than 50,000 sq. ft. w/ max. building size of 100,000 sq. ft. (location restricted to the north 400 ft. of the CG Zone)	N	N	N	P

	Recreation Facilities	N	N	C	C

D.    Special Development Standards. In addition to the development standards outlined in the City’s Development Code, the following standards shall apply as indicated:

Table 2.7.820.D  

	Standard	RS

Single-Family	RM

Multifamily	ME

Mixed-Use	CG

General Commercial

	Density	4 – 7.3 units/gross acre	7.3 – 21.7 units/gross acre	NA

	Lot size	6,000 sq. ft. min.	2,000 sq. ft. min.	NA	NA

	Setbacks:	 	 	 	 

	•	Front	Min. of 6 ft. for home, 20 ft. for garage	Min. of 6 ft. for home, 20 ft. for garage. Building entrances shall be oriented to the street front. Max. setback shall be 10 ft.	Min. of 5 ft. Max. setback shall be 10 ft. Except forecourt frontage may be 20 ft.	Min. of 5 ft. Max. setback shall be 10 ft. Except forecourt frontage may be 20 ft.

	•	Side	Min. of 5 ft. for 1 side and the sum of 2 side yards shall be 12 ft.	Min. of 5 ft.	No minimum required, except when abutting an “R” zone see BDC 2.2.500(E)	No minimum required, except when abutting an “R” zone see BDC 2.2.500(E)

	•	Rear	Min. 15 ft.	Min. 10 ft.	No minimum required, except when abutting an “R” zone see BDC 2.2.500(E)	No minimum required, except when abutting an “R” zone see BDC 2.2.500(E)

	Lot coverage	35%	40%	50%	NA

	Building height	35 ft.	30 ft./2 stories for buildings fronting on Murphy Road and the local north/south street bordering the park. 40 ft./3-story buildings are permitted elsewhere.

*See Exceptions below	45 ft./3 stories

	Lot access	Where new RS lots abut existing RL development, access shall be from the street. All other lots shall access from an alley.	All vehicular access shall be from an alley/private drive or internal parking lot.

	Parking standards	As required by BDC Chapter 3.3, except for the large box retail uses located in the north 400 ft. of the CG Zone, those uses may provide a maximum of 6 parking spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft. of building area.

	Frontage types	Not regulated	• Front Yard and Porch

• Stoop	• Stoop

• Forecourt

• Storefront	• Forecourt

• Storefront

• Gallery

	Min. building frontage	Not regulated	50%	80%	65%

	Special landscape setback	1.	Development along the east side of the north/south local street bordering the park between Murphy Road and the southern frontage road alignment shall provide an additional 10-foot landscaped pedestrian easement. The easement shall be combined with the street right-of-way to provide a pleasant pedestrian trail system the length of the Murphy Crossing project area that will easily connect to existing and planned trails, parks and open space. The pedestrian trail replaces the required sidewalk along that street frontage.

	2.	Development along both sides of the frontage road between Murphy Road and the Parkway off-ramp/roundabout shall provide an additional 4 ft. of sidewalk adjacent to the public sidewalk.

	Architectural design	As required by BDC 2.1.900 and 2.2.800

*    Single-family homes on adjoining lots shall share a common wall where it can be shown that tree preservation can be maximized.

1.    Buffering Standards. All loading and delivery areas shall be oriented away from residential neighborhoods and screened from view using a combination of vegetation, fences and walls.

2.    Building Height Exceptions. Buildings in the RM Zone that front on Murphy Road and the local north/south street which borders the park may be 40 feet tall or three stories when the portions of the building over 30 feet in height step back a minimum of 30 feet from the front property line.

E.    Frontage Types. The street facing facade of each proposed building shall be designed as one of the building frontage types allowed by the applicable zoning district as indicated in Table 2.7.820.D. Building frontage placement on the lots shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zone. For the purpose of this code, building frontage means the lineal length of facade facing the street.

Table 2.7.820.E  

	1.	Front Yard and Porch. The building facade is set back from the property line (frontage line) as required by the applicable zone, with a front porch providing a covered entry. A fence or wall not more than 36 inches high may define the private space of the yard. Porches shall be at least six feet deep and 12 feet wide and may be elevated no more than 36 inches above the surrounding grade.	
[IMAGE]


	2.	Stoop. The building facade is placed close to the property line with the ground floor either elevated a minimum of 24 (but no more than 36) inches above the sidewalk, or the facade is up to 10 feet from the back of the sidewalk, with an optional low fence not more than 36 inches at the back of the sidewalk. This type is suitable for ground-floor residential uses with minimal setbacks.	
[IMAGE]


	3.	Forecourt. Most of the building facade is at the property line with a portion of the facade set back. The resulting forecourt is suitable for gardens, restaurant seating, or an entry plaza. This type should be used sparingly and in conjunction with other frontage types, as an extensive setback deters pedestrians. Trees within forecourts should be placed to have their canopies overhang the street’s sidewalk. A low wall or fence no greater than 36 inches high may also be placed at the property line.	
[IMAGE]


	4.	Storefront. The building facade is placed at or close to the property line with the building entrance (which may be recessed) at sidewalk grade. This frontage type is intended for retail uses and is commonly equipped with an awning. An awning extending over the public sidewalk requires City approval. Transparent windows shall occupy at least 65 percent of the first-floor wall area of each storefront.	
[IMAGE]


	5.	Gallery. A gallery is a storefront with an attached colonnade that projects over a sidewalk. This frontage type is intended for retail use, but only when the sidewalk is fully covered by the arcade so that a pedestrian must walk under it. The City must approve any portion of the structure that extends into the public right-of-way.	
[IMAGE]


F.    Street Design Types. The roads within Murphy Crossing will have different designs based on their location and function. The diagram is the key to the different street types. Each street type design will be illustrated in a cross-section and described below.

The designated streets within Murphy Crossing are required street elements. The street alignments depicted are generally located to provide reasonable lot sizes and connectivity within the refinement plan area. During tentative plan development or site plan review, the street alignments of proposed streets shall be shown in their general location. The street alignments may move up to 30 feet in one direction without requiring a refinement plan amendment.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2031, 2006; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.830 Murphy Crossing Special Street Standards.

A.    Murphy Road.

1.    Murphy Road will transition from a 60-foot right-of-way to 100 feet and back to 60 feet as the road moves from east to west across the Parkway. The 60-foot segments will consist of two travel lanes with pedestrian sidewalks along both sides separated by a landscaped planter strip. Bike lanes will be located on both sides of the street.


[IMAGE]


2.    The 80-foot section is located between the west side of the Parkway and the last intersecting street before Brookswood Blvd. This street section will have two travel lanes divided by a 12-foot partially landscaped median with turn pockets. The northside will have a five-foot sidewalk that meanders through a landscaped strip. The south side will have a 12-foot urban sidewalk with street trees placed in tree wells. Bike lanes will be located on both sides of the road.


[IMAGE]


3.    The 100-foot section is located on both sides of Third Street and is needed for the intersection turn lanes and through movements.


[IMAGE]


B.    The Frontage Road has three distinctly different sections.

1.    Frontage Road North. Frontage Road North is a narrow 40-foot right-of-way that will provide a link from Murphy Road to Badger Road. The road will have two vehicle travel lanes and bike lanes on both sides. This road runs parallel to the Parkway and therefore only will have a sidewalk on the west side.


[IMAGE]


2.    Frontage Road Center. Frontage Road Center is the main commercial street section through the Commercial and Mixed-Use District. This street will have two travel lanes with a median. The street will allow on-street parking and have bike lanes on both sides of the street. Parking will be restricted within the proximity of protected intersections. The sidewalks will be shared between the right-of-way and the adjoining property with a minimum width of 12 feet. Street trees will be placed within the sidewalk right-of-way within tree wells.


[IMAGE]


3.    Frontage Road South. This street section will have two travel lanes with bike lanes on both sides. Parking will be allowed on the west side of the street. Again this street is a parallel facility next to the Parkway and will have sidewalks only on the west side except where the roadway turn to the west and sidewalks can serve two street frontages.


[IMAGE]


C.    Local Street. There are two local street types: Residential and Mixed-Use. Both have 60 feet of right-of-way, two travel lanes and on-street parking.

1.    Residential Local. Sidewalks are located at the property line and are separated from the street by a planter strip. The sidewalk on the east side of the north/south local residential street which borders the park will be replaced by an enhanced pedestrian trail system utilizing a 10-foot easement along the street frontage.


[IMAGE]


2.    Mixed-Use Local. Sidewalks are urban in nature and design with street trees located within tree wells. Along the park block, the sidewalks will be designed with the park.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2031, 2006; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]

Article VIII. Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay


2.7.900 Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay.


2.7.910 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    Purpose. Manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks provide a significant amount of the City’s affordable housing. When a manufactured home park redevelops, this type of affordable housing stock is lost, leaving the residents of those parks with few options. The purpose of the Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay is to implement City Ordinance NS-2036, by providing incentives to the park owners to continue the use of the land as a manufactured home park and, when redevelopment does occur, by providing a mechanism for capturing a portion of the redevelopment potential as replacement affordable housing. The Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay creates overlay development standards for increased residential housing and, where appropriate, commercial and mixed-use development and designated open space within existing manufactured home park boundaries. The overlay development standards will:

•    Provide a variety of housing types for a variety of markets;

•    Promote pedestrian and other multi-modal transportation options;

•    Ensure compatibility of uses within the development and within the surrounding area;

•    Create an interconnected system of streets with design standards appropriate to the intensity and type of proposed and adjacent uses.

If City Ordinance NS-2036 is repealed, invalidated by a court of competent jurisdiction or preempted by State or Federal law, then this subsection shall automatically be repealed.

B.    Applicability. The provisions of this overlay shall apply to all existing manufactured home parks at the date of adoption of this overlay. The provisions herein shall satisfy the Waiver of Relocation Requirements Option, (2) Increased Density Alternative referred to in the City Ordinance NS-2036, when implemented in conjunction with a Development Agreement with the City of Bend as required by City Ordinance NS-2036.


[IMAGE]


Figure 900.A

[Ord. NS-2048, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.920 Residential Density.

A.    Residential Density Provisions. The Oregon State law allows manufactured home parks to develop at a maximum residential density of 10 units per acre regardless of the underlying zone. This overlay will provide special increased density incentives for existing parks that are redeveloped as described below.

1.    Manufactured home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this overlay with an occupancy rate of at least 80 percent, that are developed in accordance with the City Ordinance NS-2036 and the provisions of the City of Bend Development Code, shall be allowed to develop at a residential density consistent with the RM, Urban Medium Density Residential District. The property owner shall mitigate all impacts of such development including but not limited to those impacts related to sewer, water, transportation and compatibility issues.

a.    Exception to Density. Where an existing manufactured home park already has a Bend Comprehensive Plan Density of Urban Residential Medium Density at the date of adoption of this overlay, the density bonus may be increased to RH, Urban High Density Residential District with the same provisions for redevelopment as described above. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2048, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.930 Special Development Standards.

A.    Permitted Land Uses. The uses and special standards permitted by the implementation of the Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment Overlay shall supersede the standards of the underlying intended rezone. Where no special development standards are provided by the overlay, the applicable standards of the intended RM or RH rezone or previously approved refinement plan shall apply.

B.    Continued Use as a Manufactured Home Park. Manufactured homes have reduced impacts on the land because the unit does not require a permanent foundation. However, many existing manufactured home parks are not developed at the maximum density. In order for the existing parks to develop at the allowable 10 units per acre park owners may take advantage of the following incentives:

1.    The average area of a mobile home site may be 3,000 square feet provided all spacing requirements of the Building Code can be met.

2.    Park owners that receive displaced residents from redeveloping parks will not be obligated to relocate these displaced units when the park redevelops as required by Ordinance NS-2036.

3.    Up to 10 percent of the existing trees may be removed to accommodate new manufactured home placement, provided the trees being removed are not specimen trees. For the purpose of this code, a specimen tree would be a tree of any species which is determined by a certified arborist to be of an exemplary size or variety for the area;

C.    Redeveloping Manufactured Home Parks. Redeveloping manufactured home park owners that choose to take advantage of the provisions of this overlay shall initiate an “Intent to Rezone” with the City by filing an application for a plan amendment and zone change in conformance with BDC Chapter 4.6. The application for “Intent to Rezone” shall be accompanied by an application for development, and the applicable fees.

In addition to the approval criteria for development found in BDC Chapter 4.6, the applicant shall address the following general standards.

1.    General Development Standards.

a.    Meet with the City of Bend Transportation Division to determine if a transit stop is needed within one-fourth mile of the subject property along an existing or future transit route. If needed, design and construct the transit stop to City standards. The transit stop shall be accessible from the redevelopment site.

b.    Passive and/or active open space areas shall be incorporated into the redevelopment plan.

c.    Where a redeveloping manufactured home park adjoins a Residential Zone, the development along the perimeter of the site within 100 feet of the property boundary shall be subject to the development standards of the adjoining Residential Zone including but not limited to lot coverage, building heights and setbacks.

2.    Building Height. To encourage innovative housing designs, provide more efficient use of land, encourage the preservation of open space and existing trees and to achieve greater allowable densities, an increase in building height not to exceed 10 feet above the height of the zone may be allowed provided the applicant’s proposal meets all of the following criteria:

a.    The added height will provide for additional affordable housing units.

b.    The additional building height is needed to preserve existing trees and the added height and total building area proposed is equivalent to the area of significant trees being saved.

c.    The additional building height is buffered from view by existing preserved trees.

d.    The building requesting the added height has a required minimum 1:1 side and/or rear yard setback from an existing adjoining residential use based on the finished building height.

Example: a 40-foot-tall building would have a 40-foot minimum side and/or rear yard setback from an existing adjoining residential use.

e.    The proposed building incorporates sustainable Leed Silver Certification construction methods.

3.    Building Setbacks. To ensure a safe, livable environment, the following setbacks shall be observed:

a.    Front Yard. Six-foot minimum for all portions of the structure, except garages shall be set back a minimum of 18 feet.

b.    Side and Rear Yard. The setbacks of the proposed RM or RH rezone shall apply.

Exception to side and rear yard setbacks:

i.    Attached single-family townhome development shall have an interior side yard setback of zero feet. End units not fronting on a street corner shall have the sum of the side yards equal to 12 feet. End units fronting on a street corner shall have a minimum setback of 10 feet, except as necessary to comply with the clear vision standards in BDC 3.1.500.

ii.    Garages and on-site parking shall take access from an alley or rear driveway.

4.    Lot Coverage. As a means of balancing the building mass on the land, the following lot coverage shall be applied based on housing type and/or use.

	Standard	Residential Use	Mixed-Use/Commercial

	Lot Coverage	40%	50%

5.    Standards for Nonresidential Development. Portions of some manufactured home parks may be suitable for nonresidential use development that will support the increased overlay density.

a.    Location Standards. The following location criteria shall be met to allow a park owner to develop nonresidential uses as a secondary use in conjunction with the allowable residential development.

i.    Nonresidential uses shall be subject to the location and size standards for neighborhood commercial uses in BDC 3.6.300(J).

ii.    Access can be provided from an existing intersecting local street or a new local street can be developed in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.1.

iii.    The property is within one-fourth mile of an existing or future transit stop.

iv.    The surrounding property is developed at RS density or greater.

6.    Development Standards for Nonresidential Uses. Nonresidential uses shall be subject to the development standards for neighborhood commercial uses in BDC 3.6.300(J)(6) through (10).

7.    Nonresidential Uses. The neighborhood commercial uses identified in Table 2.1.200 shall be permitted or conditionally allowed as a component of a Manufactured Home Park Redevelopment. Some of the uses may have special development standards as identified in BDC Chapter 3.6. [Ord. NS-2048, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]

Article IX. Farmington Reserve Master Planned Development 


2.7.950 Farmington Reserve Master Planned Development. 


2.7.955 Applicability.

The area regulated by the Farmington Reserve Master Plan is approximately 20 acres of land east of Alstrup Road and north of Brosterhous Road. It is bounded on the north by the Central Oregon Irrigation District main lateral, to the east by the Stone Creek Master Planned Development, to the south by the Island Park residential subdivision, and to the west by Alstrup Road. Conditions of approval pertaining to the timing of required public infrastructure improvements are contained in Ordinance NS-2227. [Ord. NS-2244, 2015; Ord. NS-2227, 2014] 


2.7.960 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to create the Farmington Reserve Master Development Plan. In addition, the Master Planned Development creates overlay development standards that will supersede the development standards of the underlying RM, Medium Density Residential District within the plan boundaries. The Master Plan Development objectives are to:

•    Provide a variety and mixture of housing types and densities in a coordinated neighborhood.

•    Identify and coordinate street locations.

•    Designate neighborhood open space.

•    Establish design standards for streets, sidewalks and building locations to create streetscapes that are safe and accessible for all modes.

•    Create safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle circulation and trail connections. [Ord. NS-2244, 2015; Ord. NS-2227, 2014; Ord. NS-2071, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.965 Permitted Uses.

Only detached single-family dwellings, with or without accessory dwelling units, shall be permitted in the Single-Family Overlay District. Only multifamily housing shall be permitted in the Multifamily Overlay District. The overlay districts are shown on the Farmington Reserve Master Plan Overlay Map, Figure 2.7.980. [Ord. NS-2244, 2015; Ord. NS-2227, 2014]


2.7.970 Development Standards.

The special standards of the Farmington Reserve Master Plan area shall supersede the standards of the underlying zone where they vary. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone shall apply.

A.    Setbacks Standards. Setback standards are as listed in Table 2.7.970. All single-family lots (except Lots 11 through 16 along the north boundary) shall be exempt from solar setback standards.

 

Table 2.7.970 – Setbacks  

	Use	Front	Side	Rear

	Single-Family Detached	10 feet, except garages shall be 20 feet	5 feet	5 feet

	Multifamily	10 feet, except garages shall be 20 feet	5 feet	5 feet

Note: Multifamily development that abuts RS zoned or designated property on the periphery of the master plan boundary, the rear and side yard setbacks shall increase beyond the minimum stated in BDC 2.7.970 by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 20 feet. Where a street or alley is at the periphery of the master plan, the width of the right-of-way or easement shall be included in the setback measurement.

B.    Building Height. Building height requirements are based on use as follows:

1.    Single-family dwellings: 35 feet.

2.    Multifamily (more than three attached units): 45 feet.

C.    Density. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be 293 (65 single-family and 228 multifamily). Density may be averaged across the residential districts; provided, that the overall density for the entire master plan development area meets the RM zone density requirement of 7.3 to 21.7 units per acre. [Ord. NS-2244, 2015; Ord. NS-2227, 2014; Ord. NS-2071, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.975 Street Improvement Standards.

Street improvement standards shall be consistent with the requirements of this code, except as set forth below:

A.    Street Section 1 – Public Local Streets. This section shall be used for all public streets within the development. These streets will consist of 60 feet of public right-of-way with eight-foot vehicle travel lanes, eight-foot-wide on-street parking, eight-foot landscape strips, and five-foot-wide sidewalks.


[IMAGE]


B.    Street Section 2 – Private Local Street. This street will consist of a 40-foot roadway tract, 12-foot vehicle travel lanes, no on-street parking, mountable rolled curbs, and five-foot-wide sidewalks.


[IMAGE]


C.    Street Section 3 – Public Alleys. The public alleys shall consist of 20 feet of public right-of-way with 10-foot vehicle travel lanes, no on-street parking, and no sidewalks. 


[IMAGE]


D.    Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided along all streets in conformance with BDC 3.2.400, Street Trees.

Figure 2.7.980

Farmington Reserve Master Plan Overlay Map
[IMAGE]


 

[Ord. NS-2244, 2015; Ord. NS-2227, 2014] 

Article X. Central Oregon Community College (COCC) – Special Planned District/Overlay Zone


2.7.1000 Central Oregon Community College (COCC) – Special Planned District/Overlay Zone.


2.7.1001 Purpose.

The purpose of the Central Oregon Community College Special Planned District/Overlay Zone (“district”) is to implement the Public Facilities (PF) Comprehensive Plan designation at the Awbrey Butte campus of the Central Oregon Community College (“COCC” or “College”). The district is designed to foster an innovative mixed-use area of academic, social, residential, retail and commercial uses/activities that are accessible to students, faculty, and staff and located on lands owned by the College. The district will create a variety of different academic, social, recreational, and commercial amenities that will serve the needs of the surrounding community. The development of College-owned lands within the district boundaries will provide the College with a source of financial revenue that will be utilized to provide additional educational opportunities for the benefit of the community and facilitate the long-term growth and viability of the campus. 

The standards of the district implement the PF Comprehensive Plan designation in a manner that will:

•    Promote the long-term health, vitality, and growth of the College by strengthening the on-campus living/learning opportunities through careful development and management of the Awbrey Butte Campus.

•    Provide for a financially stable College campus environment serving the educational and vocational needs of the Central Oregon community.

•    Encourage coordination between the College and the City of Bend, especially in the area of land use planning and review for campus development.

•    Accommodate planned Awbrey Butte Campus growth including but not limited to development of: educational, vocational, and mixed-use facilities on lands owned by the College; uses and/or structures associated with research programs; and uses and/or structures associated with lifelong learning, basic skill development, and university transfer education.

•    Ensure the compatibility of campus development with surrounding areas by allowing uses and outdoor spaces that promote interdisciplinary opportunities and the shared opportunities of study, housing, dining, services, entertaining, and sports.

•    Ensure the adequacy of the public facilities and infrastructure that are needed to serve development within the boundaries of the district.

•    Create additional opportunities/flexibility for COCC to develop relationships with private enterprise for the benefit of the College, its students and the community.

•    Provide for zoning and land use regulations that allow COCC to rapidly respond to opportunities and changing needs in the College environment.

•    Create zoning and land use regulations that allow COCC to utilize its Awbrey Butte Campus landholdings to generate revenues for the benefit of the campus, its students, and the Central Oregon community.

•    Develop a fully serviced campus environment that reflects an inward focus on learning and an outward focus on community. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1002 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to uses, building types and standards that are specified in the Central Oregon Community College (COCC) – Special Planned District/Overlay Zone:

Campus includes all of the lands owned by the College within the boundaries of its Awbrey Butte Campus as depicted on Figure 1.

Core Campus Area includes all of the land depicted as the “Core Campus Area” on Figure 2.

Campus Village Area includes all of the land depicted as the “Campus Village Area” on Figure 2.

Private Roads and/or Private Drives shall include all of the specific drive or road types specified in Table 2.7.1010.

Special Planned District Boundary is depicted on Figures 2 and 3.

Transportation Demand Management Techniques (TDM) is a general term that describes various measures, strategies and policies that the College has and can implement to improve performance of transportation facilities and to reduce need for additional road capacity. Methods may include but are not limited to the use of alternative modes, ride-sharing and vanpool programs, and trip-reduction ordinances. [Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1003 Applicability.

The special standards of the Central Oregon Community College – Special Planned District/Overlay Zone implement the Public Facilities (PF) Comprehensive Plan designation on lands owned by the Central Oregon Community College and zoned Public Facilities within the “Special Planned District Boundary” as depicted on Figures 2 and 3. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone shall apply. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1004 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

Table 2.7.1004.A outlines those land uses that are permitted outright and that are permitted as conditional uses within the boundaries of the Special Planned District/Overlay Zone. The table specifies different land use standards for the areas designated as the “Core Campus Area” and “Campus Village Area” as designated on Figure 2. The Core Campus Area is intended to provide for more traditional College, educational and ancillary uses. The Campus Village Area designation allows a mix of educational, vocational, residential, service and commercial uses that can serve, complement and enhance opportunities in the educational core. The Campus Village Area is intended to provide development standards that are consistent with other integrated and highly successful academic institutions around the State and country.

Table 2.7.1004.A – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	Core Campus Area	Campus Village Area

	Residential Uses

	Single-family detached housing	C*	P

	Single-family courtyard housing	C*	P

	Attached single-family townhomes	C*	P

	Two- and three-family housing (duplex and triplex)	P*	P

	Multifamily housing (more than 3 units)	P*	P

	Residence halls	P*	P

	Overnight lodging	P*	P

	Child day care facility	P*	P

	Adult day care	P*	P

	Residential care facility (6 or more residents)	C*	P

	Accessory uses and structures, including dwellings	P*	P

	Public, Institutional and General Uses

	All uses permitted in the Public Facilities (PF) Zoning District	P*	P

	Educational, vocational and related research buildings and/or facilities	P	P

	Meeting and conference facilities	P*	P

	Entertainment-related facilities	P*	P

	Roads, pathways and transportation systems whether public or privately owned	P	P

	Light industrial uses	P*	C*

	Repair services	P*	P*

	Wireless communication facilities and/or broadcasting facilities, production studio transmission facilities and necessary or supporting structures	P*/C♦	P/C♦

	Utilities (above ground)	C	C

	Parks, playgrounds, play fields, athletic facilities, sports complexes, recreational facilities, trails, natural areas, open spaces (without night lighting or amplified sound)	P*	P

	Places of worship	P*	C

	Service and Commercial Uses

	Retail, commercial and service uses that are open to the public and available to serve students, faculty, employees and other persons associated with the College1	P*	P

	Office uses	P*	P

	Food and beverage services, personal and professional services, and student shopping opportunities	P*	P

	Culinary institute and all related and accessory uses including, but not limited to, any hospitality-related service operated in connection with the culinary institute	P*	P

	Credit unions, banks and financial service institutions that are open to public use and available to serve students, faculty, employees and other persons associated with the College	P*	P

	Medical offices, health and wellness clinics that are open to public use and available to serve students, faculty, employees and other persons associated with the College	P*	P

	Related Uses

	Outdoor athletic, recreational or entertainment-related facilities with night lighting and/or amplified sound systems	C*	C*

	Accessory uses and buildings customarily used to support a permitted use or an approved conditional use, including parking lots/parking areas and service roads needed to serve permitted or conditional uses	P	P

	Outdoor storage provided such storage is set back at least 25 feet from the Campus boundary	P*	P

	Buildings containing a mix of uses permissible in this district	P*	P

	Other Uses

	Government offices and facilities (including but not limited to: administration, public safety, utilities, and similar uses)	P*	P

	Diagnostic testing, counseling and administrative offices. Meeting, office and administrative facilities for nonprofit, philanthropic, and public community service programs	P*	P

	The conversion of buildings or structures from office, commercial or retail use to classroom space or other College or educational purposes	NA	P

	Temporary activities and sales such as Christmas trees, benefit sales and activities, and other holiday products	P	P

	Arts and crafts studios	P*	P

	Accessory and secondary uses that traditionally occur on college campuses	P*	P

Key to Permitted Uses

P = Uses Permitted Outright

C = Conditional Uses subject to the standards outlined in BDC Chapter 4.4

N = Not Permitted

NA = Not applicable

*    Use shall primarily serve College students, faculty, staff, and/or employees or the intended use is associated with College activities and/or programs, or the use is accessory to a permitted use.

1    No single retail user may exceed 20,000 square feet on the first floor.

♦See BDC Chapter 3.7, Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities – Standards and Process.

 

Table 2.7.1004.B – Development Standards  

	Development Standards	Core Campus	Campus Village

	Lot Dimensions	None

	Front, Side, and Rear Yard Setback	None, except when abutting a Residential Zone. A 100-foot setback is required abutting residential zoned property (excluding rights-of-way) along the external boundary of the Campus.	None, except when adjacent to a Residential Zone. Where a residential structure abuts a lot in a Residential Zone, the yard setbacks shall be the same as the setbacks of the abutting Residential Zone. Nonresidential buildings, parking areas, drives, and private roads shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the boundary where it abuts a Residential Zone.

	Building Height	70 feet provided building is set back a minimum of 100 feet from the Campus boundary where the boundary line abuts a Residential Zoning District. Building height shall not exceed 50 feet if developed within 100 feet of the Campus boundary where the boundary line abuts a Residential Zoning District.	60 feet provided building is set back a minimum of 100 feet from the Campus boundary where the boundary line abuts a Residential Zoning District. Building height shall not exceed 50 feet if developed within 100 feet of the Campus boundary where the boundary line abuts a Residential Zoning District.

	Lot Coverage	No minimum or maximum requirement

	Architectural Design Standards	All buildings within 100 feet of the Campus boundary where the boundary line abuts a Residential Zoning District are subject to the applicable design standards of BDC 2.1.900 and 2.1.1000.

All other buildings are required to use architectural features such as: windows, pedestrian entrances, building offsets, projections, detailing, and change in materials or similar features to break up and articulate large building walls greater than 80 linear feet in length. A minimum of 15% of the horizontal building facade and a minimum of 10% of all other horizontal building elevations shall contain a variety of architectural features.

	Building Entrances	Recessed entries, canopies, and/or similar features shall be used at the entries to buildings in order to create a pedestrian scale

	Landscape Requirements	Due to the large size of the Campus, the landscaping standards of BDC Title 3 shall only apply to an area that is measured 25 feet beyond the perimeter of the footprint of proposed new development sites for buildings and/or parking lots.

	Landscape Buffer Requirement	A 25-foot landscape preservation buffer is required abutting streets along the external boundary of the Campus. A 100-foot landscape preservation buffer is required abutting residential zoned property (excluding rights-of-way) along the external Campus boundary of the Core Campus Area.

[Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1005 Parking.

In accordance with Table 3.3.300, a Parking Management Plan shall be formulated for the Core Campus Area and updated with each subsequent Site Plan Review application. The Campus Village Area may be included in this plan or parking in the Campus Village Area may be provided based on other uses in Table 3.3.300. The Parking Management Plan may specify alternative parking standards for the district that supersede and replace the standards contained in BDC Chapter 3.3. The Parking Management Plan shall also address the bicycle parking requirements of BDC Chapter 3.3. [Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1006 Access and Circulation.

Figure 4 illustrates the location of existing buildings, structures, roads, drives and trails within the boundaries of the district and provides a conceptual depiction of some of the planned future private roads and private drives within the Core Campus Area and Campus Village Area. The final design, location and approval of all private roads and private drives shall be established solely through the COCC Road/Drive Design Review process (set forth in BDC 2.7.1010) and shall not be subject to review under any other sections of the Development Code. Due to the steep topography, existing natural features and fully integrated nature of the COCC Campus, private roads and private drives are exempted from the block length and block perimeter requirements contained in BDC Chapter 3.1. Private roads and private drives are not required to be designated in Figure 4 provided they are approved through the COCC Road/Drive Design Review process. [Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1007 Transportation.

Core Campus uses shall be permitted in both the Core Campus area and the Campus Village area without a limit on the number of overall trips. The number of Core Campus “students” shall be utilized as the independent variable in trip generation calculations. Campus Village uses shall be permitted in the Campus Village area subject to the trip threshold established as a condition of zone change approval (Ordinance NS-2127).

Trip reducing mitigation measures, including but not limited to a coordinated TDM plan, may be evaluated and credited in connection with each development application. In accordance with BDC Chapter 4.2, applications for the development of Campus Village and Core Campus uses must demonstrate that transportation facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposed use. [Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1008 Development Not Requiring Site Plan Approval.

The College shall not be required to obtain site plan and design review under BDC Chapter 4.2 for any of the following development actions provided any associated structures are located outside of the setbacks identified in Table 2.7.1004.B:

•    Private roads and private drives as described in BDC 2.7.1006.

•    The construction and/or extension of pedestrian facilities, sidewalks, trails, bicycle facilities and multi-modal or transit facilities.

•    The placement and/or extension of utilities. [Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1009 Natural Resource Plan.

In conformance with the landscape conservation requirements of BDC Chapter 3.2, an inventory of significant vegetation shall be submitted along with a preservation plan for each site plan application. The natural resource inventory shall include all significant vegetation by size (DBH) and species, as well as rock outcroppings, with two-foot contours shown. [Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.1010 COCC Road/Drive Design Review.

A.    Purpose. Table 2.7.1010 specifies private road and private drive standards that are adapted to the integrated nature of the district. The standards and requirements contained in this section and Table 2.7.1010 supersede and replace any other standards and requirements set forth in the Development Code. The COCC Road/Drive Design Review process (COCC-RDR) contains the specific design standards and review process for private roads and private drives within the Core Campus Area and Campus Village Area. All private roads and private drives shall comply with the standards specified in this section.

B.    Applicability. This section applies to private roads and private drives constructed within the Core Campus Area and Campus Village Area.

C.    Review. COCC-RDR applications are reviewed under the Type II process set forth in BDC 4.1.400.

D.    COCC-RDR Submission Requirements. An application for COCC-RDR shall include the following information, to the extent determined applicable by the Development Services Director, based on the size, scale and complexity of a proposed development:

1.    A map showing the location, width and grade of the proposed road and/or drive and any proposed new connection to the existing road system. The map shall also depict surrounding areas within 100 feet of the proposed road and/or drive (hereafter the “project site”).

2.    The location and width of all public or private streets, roads and/or drives within the project site. Aerial photographs may be used for this purpose.

3.    An identification of existing natural features within the project site, including trees, which are proposed to be retained, removed or modified by the proposal.

4.    Preliminary grading and drainage plans prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered landscape architect.

E.    COCC-RDR Approval Standards. A private road or private drive within the boundaries of the district shall be approved subject only to the standards provided below:

1.    The private road or private drive is in conformance with one of the applicable drive or road type standards set forth in Table 2.7.1010.

2.    The private road or private drive meets the setbacks established in Table 2.7.1004.B.

3.    Adequate pedestrian and bicycle access is provided either in connection with the proposed road or drive or through existing or planned pedestrian/bicycle corridors located in alternative locations within the district.

4.    Lighting shall be installed at locations where the road or drive intersects with a public roadway.

5.    Fire Department approval shall be required for any road grades in excess of the standards contained in Table 2.7.1010.

6.    All drainage shall be contained on site or within approved drainage systems.

7.    Where private roads and/or private drives connect to public right-of-way, the connection point shall comply with City standards and specifications.

 

Table 2.7.1010 – COCC Core Campus Area and Campus Village Area Specifications for Private Roads and Private Drives 

	Drive or Road Type	Pavement Width**	Travel Lane Width	Grade Maximum*	Cross Slope Maximum***	Curb Reveal	Side Slopes Maximum

	Two way	20' to 28'	10' to 12'	12%	2%	0" to 6"	Cut slopes in solid rock or cemented tuff shall not exceed a slope of 0.5:1. Otherwise, cut and fill slopes shall not exceed 2:1 except as approved by the City Engineer.

	One way	8' to 15'	8' to 15'	12%	2%	0" to 6"

	Service	8' to 24'	8' to 12'	12%	2%	0" to 6"

	Fire access	20'	20'	12%	2%	0" to 6"

	Alley	15' to 20'	7.5' to 10'	12%	2%	0" to 6"

*    Grades in excess of 10 percent require Fire Department and City Engineer approval.

**    Additional paving width may be required to accommodate road grades, operations, and/or parking.

***    Cross slopes greater than two percent may be allowed subject to approval by the City Engineer.

[Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2196, 2013]


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2196, 2013; Ord. NS-2126, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]

 

Article XI. Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone


2.7.2000 Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone.


2.7.2010 Purpose.

This chapter applies to all development within the Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone. The purpose of the Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone is to promote economical, sustainable, and reasonable growth in Juniper Ridge by creating unique overlay zoning sub-districts for residential, commercial, educational and industrial uses. [Ord. NS-2152, 2010; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.2020 Implementation.

A.    The Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone consists of the area within the dashed line shown on Figure 2.7.2020, Juniper Ridge District Map.

Figure 2.7.2020

Juniper Ridge District Map
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2152, 2010; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.2030 Employment Sub-District.

A.    Purpose. The Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District is a 306-acre area that is intended to promote economical, sustainable, and reasonable growth by allowing a mix of light industrial uses, offices for research and development, corporate and regional headquarters and accessory uses to serve the needs of these primary uses. The Employment Sub-District will:

•    Provide a variety of employment opportunities.

•    Promote efficient use of the land.

•    Promote pedestrian and other multi-modal transportation options.

•    Ensure compatibility of uses within the development and with the surrounding areas.

•    Create an efficient, interconnected system of streets with standards appropriate to the intensity and type of adjacent use.

•    Create safe and attractive streetscapes that will meet emergency vehicle access requirements and enhance pedestrian and bicycle access.

B.    Applicability. The Employment Sub-District Overlay shall apply to all lands that are zoned Industrial Light (IL) and within the boundaries of the Juniper Ridge Overlay Zone depicted in Figure 2.7.2030.A. The standards of this section shall supersede those of the underlying zone unless no special standards within the sub-district are provided.

C.    Infrastructure Implementation. Development within the Employment Sub-District shall not occur unless adequate public facilities are in place to serve the property prior to occupancy.

D.    Transportation Management Association (TMA). A TMA organized to operate in a manner that is consistent with the Transportation Demand Management goals and policies in the City’s Transportation System Plan and BDC Chapter 4.7 will be developed for the Employment Sub-District. All site development review applications within the Employment Sub-District that are subject to review under BDC Chapter 4.2 shall demonstrate conformance with Employment Sub-District TMA program requirements.

E.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.7.2030.A are allowed in the Employment Sub-District, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.7.2030.A and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.7.2030.A may be allowed.

F.    Limitations on Permitted Uses. Small-scale personal and professional service uses shall be limited to an aggregate area total within the Employment Sub-District not to exceed 30,000 square feet.

G.    Determination of Similar Land Uses. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in BDC 4.1.1400, Declaratory Ruling.

Figure 2.7.2030.A

Employment Sub-District Map
[IMAGE]


 

Table 2.7.2030.A Permitted Land Uses  

	Land Use	Employment Sub-District

	Light manufacturing, fabrication, assembly and repair with incidental sales associated with a permitted use	P

	Heavy manufacturing, assembly and processing of raw materials and recycling	C

	Wholesale distribution, warehousing and storage	P

	Research and development facilities	P

	Production office (e.g., IT support centers, biotechnology, software/hardware development, broadcast and production studios/facilities.)	P

	Wholesale processing uses (e.g., dry cleaning, laundry)	C

	Food and beverage processing and packaging	P

	Medical and dental laboratories	P

	Small-scale personal and professional services

• Within a freestanding or multi-tenant building, up to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area (e.g., coffee shop/deli, dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, copy centers, banks, financial institutions, and similar uses)* shall be allowed

• Within a freestanding or multi-tenant building, up to 10,000 square feet for child care, fitness center and similar uses shall be allowed when a site has frontage and/or direct access to an arterial or collector street	P

	Corporate headquarters/regional corporate office	P

	Trade, vocational, technical, professional, business schools including university programs serving industrial needs	P

	Professional consulting services	P

	Industrial and professional equipment and supply sales	P

	Professional office accessory to a primary use, in the same building, up to 30% of the floor area of the primary use	P

	*Utilities (above ground)	P

	Public park and recreation facility (not including private open space)	C

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	Publicly owned buildings such as City Hall, County courthouse, administrative buildings, library, museum, fire station, public safety training facilities, and similar structures, but excluding correctional facilities	P

	Government facilities where the public is generally not received (e.g., public safety, utilities, school district bus facilities, public works yards, transit and transportation, and similar facilities)	P

Key to Permitted Uses

P = Permitted

C = Conditional Use

*    In conformance with BDC 2.4.800, Special Development Standards.

H.    Vehicle Trip Limit. Development within the Employment Sub-District shall be limited to a maximum of 2,220 p.m. peak hour vehicle trips that will be allocated consistent with the terms of Intergovernmental Agreement No. 27115 and phased in accordance with the following mitigation table:

 

Table 2.7.2030.B Mitigation Improvements  

	PHASE	P.M. PEAK HOUR TRIPS	MITIGATION IMPROVEMENT

	1	700	Empire Avenue/18th Street

Roundabout

	Empire Avenue/US-97

Northbound Ramp Terminal

	Empire Avenue/US-97

Southbound Ramp Terminal

Third Street to US-97

	2	600	US-97 Improvements between Nels Anderson and Bowery Lane

	3	580	18th Street Corridor Improvements

Cooley Road to Empire Avenue

	4	340	US-97 Southbound Improvements

Empire Avenue to Butler Market Road

	Purcell Street Extension

Cooley Road to Yeoman Road

1.    The Vehicle Trip Limit shall be the considered the Employment Sub-District Transportation Mitigation Plan and shall apply to all land use applications that propose development that will generate peak hour vehicle trips. A p.m. peak hour trip is defined as a trip occurring between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., as further defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual.

2.    No land use application shall be deemed complete unless it includes a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) that complies with the City of Bend standards for preparing a TIA identified in BDC Chapter 4.7, and includes an evaluation of Transportation Demand Management Measures (TDM) that will minimize peak hour vehicle trips generated by the proposed development.

3.    The City shall provide written notification to ODOT when a land use application is deemed complete at least 20 days before a decision is issued.

4.    Peak hour vehicle trip allocations are committed upon City approval of the proposed land use action and will expire consistent with BDC 4.1.1310(B).

5.    Land use applications in any phase that propose development that will generate peak hour trips that (a) exceed the peak hour trip thresholds identified in Table 2.7.2030.B, Mitigation Improvements, prior to the construction of local street improvements, or (b) prior to the execution of a Cooperative Improvement Agreement for the construction of improvements on State highway facilities, or (c) exceed the cumulative total vested peak hour vehicle trips for the phase in which the application is submitted, may be approved only if they meet the requirements of OAR 660-012-0060.

The City shall not grant site plan approval for any development proposal that exceeds a cumulative site total of 2,050 peak hour trips until all Phase 4 mitigation improvements identified in Table 2.7.2030.B, Mitigation Improvements, are constructed or agreed to be constructed in Cooperative Improvement Agreement(s) or Development Agreement(s).

I.    Development Standards.

Table 2.7.2030.C Development Standards  

	Maximum Building Height	65 feet

	Minimum Front Yard Setback	10 feet

	Maximum Front Setback on Primary Street Frontage	30 feet

	Minimum Primary Street Frontage	50 feet

	Minimum Side Yard Setback	0 feet (100 feet when abutting a Residential Zone)

	Minimum Rear Yard Setback	0 feet (100 feet when abutting a Residential Zone)

	Maximum Building Coverage	50 percent of total lot area

J.    Additional Development Standards.

1.    Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. All off-street parking or loading areas and access drives shall be paved and continually maintained.

2.    Block Length and Perimeter. Figure 2.7.2030.B depicts the interconnected, multi-modal transportation network for the Employment Sub-District. Therefore, the block length and perimeter standards of BDC 3.1.200 are not applicable in the Employment Sub-District. If during development review it is determined that the street alignments shown in Figure 2.7.2030.B cannot be met due to topography, natural features or other development-related barriers, any development approval for such areas shall provide walkways or access ways in conformance with the provisions of BDC 3.1.300, Multi-Modal Access and Circulation.

3.    Parking and Loading Setback. Where the Employment Sub-District abuts a Residential Zone, any off-street parking and loading areas shall be set back at least 30 feet from the abutting residential property line and the setback area shall be landscaped a minimum of 30 feet to provide a buffer along the adjoining residential property. Landscaping shall be maintained by the property owner and shall conform to the standards in BDC 3.2.200, Landscape Conservation, and 3.2.300, New Landscaping.

4.    Maintenance of Undeveloped Property. All undeveloped property on a developed site shall be either left in a natural state, or landscaped and continually maintained according to the requirements and standards in BDC 3.2.200, Landscape Conservation, and 3.2.300, New Landscaping.

5.    Prohibition of Nuisance Activities. All development shall be designed and constructed so that operation of the uses on the property will not create a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property or right-of-way from noise, vibration, heat, glare, dust, or odorous, toxic or noxious matter.

6.    Parking and Circulation. No vehicle circulation or parking except for access driveways shall be permitted within any minimum front yard setback area.

7.    Corner Lots and Through Lots. For buildings on lots with more than one street frontage or through lots, the minimum front yard setback standards in Table 2.7.2030.C shall be applied to all street frontages. The maximum setback standard shall be applied to only one of the frontages. Where the abutting streets are of different classifications, the maximum setback standard shall be applied to the higher classification of street.

8.    Fencing and Screening.

a.    Perimeter Fencing. Lot perimeter fencing is only permitted within the Employment Sub-District under the conditions set forth in Table 2.7.2030.D, Fencing and Screening Conditions.

b.    Standard Fencing. Standard nondecorative fencing may be installed in areas not visible from street rights-of-way or adjoining properties within the Employment Sub-District. Standard fencing also may be used as specified in Table 2.7.2030.D. A minimum quality of standard fencing shall be black vinyl-coated chain link.

c.    Upgraded Fencing. Upgraded fencing shall be provided as specified in Table 2.7.2030.D. Upgraded fencing is intended to provide limited security, discourage trespass, and provide an informative demarcation between uses (e.g., public/private, institutional/private/public, etc.). Design considerations for upgraded fencing shall include:

•    Simplicity as opposed to excessive ornamentation.

•    Low maintenance/ease of landscape maintenance on each side.

•    Respect for the design theme of established development on adjacent parcels.

•    A clear relationship to the building’s architecture.

•    Consideration of a standard design where a large property shares a common boundary with several smaller properties.

d.    Architectural Screen Walls. Architectural screen walls shall be used to screen service and loading areas; above-ground utilities such as transformers and generators, exterior material and equipment storage areas, work yards, and trash and/or recycling areas. Architectural screen walls may be used to screen other on-site amenities such as private patios and employee break areas. Architectural screen walls shall be integrated into the overall building architectural statement, employing materials and colors drawn from the building design palette. The size of an area enclosed by an architectural screen wall shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate the facility or operation that is to be screened.

e.    Fencing and Screening on Steep Slopes. Properties with more extreme variations in topography (e.g., substantial slopes adjacent to relatively flat areas) shall employ fencing and/or screening design approaches that are thoughtfully integrated with the site’s unique characteristics while fulfilling the overall functional intent of these features. Stair-step fence profiles shall be avoided.

Table 2.7.2030.D Fencing and Screening Conditions  

	Condition	Subcondition	Required Treatment (Minimum Standard)

	Property line adjacent to a public right-of-way	Improved right-of-way	Upgraded Fencing

	Unimproved right-of-way	No requirement prior to development

	Property line adjacent to the railroad line across the northwest corner of the site	 	Standard Fencing

	Property line on the west and south perimeter of Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District	Adjacent to residential zoned property	Standard Fencing

	Adjacent to commercial zoned property	Upgraded Fencing

	Adjacent to permanent open space	Upgraded Fencing

	Adjacent to public facility zoned property	Standard Fencing

	Property line shared between two abutting lots	When properties share a common property line	No fencing allowed if it interferes with shared access/parking; Upgraded Fencing if it does not interfere with shared access/parking; Architectural Screen Wall if exterior loading or storage

	Property line adjacent to a park or open space	 	Upgraded Fencing

	Property line on the east perimeter of the Employment Sub-District	Adjacent to Residential or mixed-use	Upgraded Fencing

	Adjacent to higher education land uses	Upgraded Fencing

	Fencing/screening around a loading or exterior storage area	Visible from right-of-way	Architectural Screen Wall

	Not visible from right-of-way	Standard Fencing

	Screening around a trash and/or recycling enclosure or exterior storage	 	Architectural Screen Wall

	Fencing around a secure parking lot	Visible from right-of-way	Upgraded Fencing

	Not visible from right-of-way	Standard Fencing

K.    Employment Sub-District Street Alignments. Figure 2.7.2030.B, the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District Transportation Plan Map, depicts the conceptual alignment of the Sub-District transportation network. Precise street alignments shall be determined through the development review process. Alternate alignments may be approved in accordance with subsection (J)(2) of this section, or if it is demonstrated through the development review process that equivalent or improved safety and circulation will be achieved. The final multi-use path alignment shall be established prior to either the associated land division or Site Development Review, whichever occurs first. To ensure consistency, amendments to street classifications in the TSP are incorporated into Figure 2.7.2030.B, i.e., if the TSP is amended to reclassify a collector street as an arterial, Figure 2.7.2030.B is equally amended.

L.    Employment Sub-District Street Cross-Sections. Figures 2.7.2030.C.1 and 2.7.2030.C.2 depict the typical street cross-sections in the Employment Sub-District. Alternative cross-sections that respond to site-specific circumstances may be approved by the City Engineer through the development review process.

M.    Employment Sub-District Access Standards. Due to large block sizes and large lot sizes, multiple access points to each lot in the Employment Sub-District will be permitted, including accesses to higher order transportation facilities, as long as the standards of this section are met. The following access standards supersede the vehicular access management standards of BDC Chapter 3.1.

1.    Minimum Access Spacing.

a.    Access points on local streets shall be a minimum of 10 feet apart as measured from edge of driveway to edge of driveway.

b.    Access points on collector streets shall be a minimum of 300 feet apart as measured from centerline of access to centerline of access.

c.    Access points on arterial streets shall be a minimum of 300 feet apart as measured from centerline of access to centerline of access.

2.    Additional Access Standards.

a.    Driveways onto arterials and collectors may have directional restrictions (i.e., right-in/right-out only) depending on the roadway’s characteristics, including number of lanes, queuing at nearby intersections/driveways, and locations of signals or roundabouts, and locations of conflicting accesses.

b.    Directional restrictions will be determined by the City Engineer after a review of the Transportation Impact Analysis provided by the applicant.

c.    Crossing of the multi-use path by driveways shall not be allowed unless there are no other access options for the site. If allowed, a driveway access crossing a multi-use path shall be constructed to provide shared access to adjacent property, when applicable.

d.    Driveways shall not be located within 300 feet of an intersection.

e.    Only one access is permitted per street frontage (including shared access); however, lots may have multiple street access points, so long as minimum access spacing requirements are met.

f.    The centerlines of driveways are required to align across arterials and collectors to minimize conflicting turning movements and allow for adequate turn storage.

g.    Shared access may be required, in order to comply with these access requirements. All access driveways on local truck roads shall provide shared access to adjacent property to the extent practicable.

3.    Exceptions to the Access Standards of This Section. Alternate access may be approved by the City Engineer if all of the following criteria are met:

a.    The minimum access spacing standards of this section cannot be met.

b.    Shared access with an adjoining property cannot be established.

c.    Access to the roadway at the proposed location is critical to the function of the development on the property.

d.    Operations and safety of the public road system is maintained for a minimum analysis period of 15 years as demonstrated in a Transportation Impact Analysis, including an assessment for the 95 percent queue. The queuing between the proposed driveway and an intersection shall not overlap.

e.    On arterial and collector streets, directional turn restrictions are applied.

f.    AASHTO intersection sight distances are available at the proposed access point.

Figure 2.7.2030.B

Employment Sub-District Transportation Plan Map
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.2030.C.1

Employment Sub-District Street Cross-Sections
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.2030.C.2

Employment Sub-District Street Cross-Sections
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.2030.C.3

Employment Sub-District Street Cross-Sections
[IMAGE]


N.    Employment Sub-District Natural Resource Areas. Heritage trees, significant rock outcrops, preserved open spaces and natural landscape buffers within the Employment Sub-District are identified in Figure 2.7.2030.D, Employment Sub-District Natural Resource Identification Map. Open space areas are required to be retained and no development will be allowed in them. Natural landscape buffers are required to be maintained with native landscaping or, if they are disturbed by adjacent site development, to be revegetated with native landscaping. Heritage trees and significant rock outcrops are defined in the Juniper Ridge Design Guidelines, Chapter 1.1, Key Site Attributes, and identified in Figure 2.7.2030.D. They are mapped solely with the intention of providing guidance to site design and site development, with the overall goal of preserving as many of these resources as is practicable. The City may allow one or more of the exceptions to development standards listed in BDC 3.2.200(D) (landscape conservation), if heritage trees and/or significant rock outcrops identified in Figure 2.7.2030.D are preserved by a proposed development. The identification of heritage trees in Figure 2.7.2030.D is based upon the Phase I: Juniper Ridge Ecological Site Assessment – Summary Report and Maps, prepared by Gene Hickman and Matt Shinderman, 2007.

Figure 2.7.2030.D

Employment Sub-District Natural Resource Identification Map
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2152, 2010; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.2040 Town Center Sub-District – Reserved for Future.

(This section shall be developed and codified at a future date to be determined.) [Ord. NS-2152, 2010; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.2050 Educational Sub-District – Reserved for Future.

(This section shall be developed and codified at a future date to be determined.) [Ord. NS-2152, 2010; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


2.7.2060 Residential Sub-District – Reserved for Future.

(This section shall be developed and codified at a future date to be determined.) [Ord. NS-2152, 2010; Ord. NS-2134, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]

Article XII. Stone Creek Master Planned Development 


2.7.3000 Stone Creek Master Planned Development.  Revised 11/19

[Ord. NS-2352, 2019]


2.7.3010 Applicability. Revised 11/19

The area regulated by the Stone Creek Master Plan is approximately 88 acres of land south of Reed Market Road and north of Brosterhous Road. It is bounded on the north by the Central Oregon Irrigation District main lateral, to the east by the American Lane Industrial area, to the south by Brosterhous Road and to the west by the Farmington Reserve Master Planned Development area and other residential subdivisions. Conditions of approval pertaining to the timing of required public infrastructure improvements are contained in Ordinance NS-2223. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019; amended during 11/14 supplement; Ord. NS-2223, 2014] 


2.7.3020 Purpose. Revised 11/19

The purpose of the Stone Creek Master Planned Development is to create a coordinated neighborhood with special development standards for the residential, commercial, recreational, and public institutional uses within the master plan area. The master plan development objectives are to:

•    Provide a variety and mixture of housing types and densities with compatible architectural styles in a coordinated neighborhood.

•    Identify and coordinate street and utility locations.

•    Provide a site for the construction of a public elementary school.

•    Designate neighborhood open space for construction and maintenance of a public park.

•    Establish design standards for streets, sidewalks and building locations to create streetscapes that are safe and accessible for all modes.

•    Provide an area for neighborhood commercial to reduce vehicle trips and create a mixed-use residential neighborhood.

•    Create safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle circulation and trail connections.

The plan promotes the development of a mixed-use neighborhood based on traditional planning principles with a network of connected streets, some narrower than required by Chapter 3.4, to help distribute local traffic evenly. A neighborhood park is provided to protect the ASI and provide community open space. Neighborhood commercial at the center of the neighborhood on Brentwood Avenue will reduce the use of automobiles while keeping the associated commercial traffic away from the residential areas. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019; Ord. NS-2223, 2014]


2.7.3030 Permitted Uses. Revised 11/19

All residential uses described in BDC 2.1.200 for the RM zone are permitted in the residential areas of the Stone Creek Master Planned Development area. Uses as described in BDC 2.2.300 for the CC zone are permitted in the commercial area. The public school and park are permitted uses in the areas shown on the Stone Creek Master Plan overlay map. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019; Ord. NS-2223, 2014]


2.7.3040 Development Standards. Revised 11/19

The special standards of the Stone Creek Master Plan area supersede the standards of the underlying zone where they vary. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone apply. An exception to BDC 2.1.300(H), Residential Compatibility Standards, was granted for the lots along the west boundary, south of the future extension of Rolen Avenue. 

A.    Setbacks Standards. 

Table 2.7.3040 – Setbacks  

	Use	Front	Side	Rear

	Single-Family Detached	10 feet, except garages must be 20 feet	5 feet	5 feet

	Duplex/Triplex	10 feet, except garages must be 20 feet	5 feet	5 feet

	Multifamily	10 feet, except garages must be 20 feet	5 feet	5 feet

	Single-Family Attached (Townhomes)	5 feet, except garages must be 20 feet	0 feet	0 feet

	Neighborhood Commercial	10 feet	5 feet, when abutting residential	0 feet

	Other Conditional Uses per BDC 2.1.200	10 feet	0 feet	0 feet

B.    Building Height. Building height requirements are based on the districts in Figure 2.7.3075.A as follows:

1.    Single-Family Residential District, duplex and triplex dwellings: 35 feet.

2.    Multifamily Residential District: 45 feet.

3.    School site: 45 feet.

4.    Commercial District: 35 feet with additional 10 feet for residential above commercial.

5.    Park and community amenities: 35 feet.

C.    Building Mass and Scale. There is no minimum or maximum floor area ratio requirement. All single-family dwellings, duplexes and triplexes have a maximum lot coverage of 60 percent. Multifamily housing, commercial and public uses have no maximum lot coverage.

D.    Lot Area and Dimensions.

1.    Single-family detached and attached units must meet the lot area and dimension requirements for the RM zone contained in BDC Table 2.1.500.

2.    The minimum lot area for duplex units is 4,000 square feet, and 5,500 square feet for triplex units. Both duplex and triplex units must have a minimum lot width of 30 feet and a minimum lot depth of 80 feet.

3.    Two detached dwelling units are allowed on lots greater than 6,000 square feet.

4.    There are no minimum lot area, width, or depth requirements for the Multifamily Residential District, Commercial District, or School, Park or Rec Center sites. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019; Ord. NS-2223, 2014] 


2.7.3050 Single-Family District. Revised 11/19

Development within the Single-Family District is limited to detached or attached (townhome) single-family dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes, with no more than three dwelling units on a single lot. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019]


2.7.3055 Multifamily District. Revised 11/19

Multifamily housing may be located on platted lots, as zero lot line products, or as units in a condominium or apartment development with shared use of common facilities such as driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, entryways, pedestrian access corridors, open space and lawn areas. Multifamily housing need not have frontage on a public road so long as permanent legal access established through a nonrevocable easement, with provisions for maintenance, is provided to each dwelling unit. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019; Ord. NS-2223, 2014. Formerly 2.7.3050]


2.7.3060 Public/Community Use Districts. Revised 11/19

There are three public or community use districts within the Stone Creek Master Planned Development, as shown in Figure 2.7.3075.A. One is designated for a public neighborhood park, one for a community recreation facility, and the third is the site of the Silver Rail Elementary School. No other uses are permitted in these districts. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019; Ord. NS-2223, 2014] 


2.7.3065 Commercial District. Revised 11/19

Uses allowed in the Commercial District are those listed in Table 2.2.300 for the CC zone. [Ord. NS-2352, 2019]


2.7.3070 Housing Mix and Density. Revised 11/19

The Stone Creek Master Planned area includes 87.7 acres of total land area. The north 48 acres are zoned RM. The ‎RM zoned area was developed with Silver Rail Elementary School and the neighborhood park, leaving 30 ‎developable acres of RM zoned land. The south half of the plan area is 39.5 acres, of which 1.65 acres are zoned ‎CC and 0.65 were added to the neighborhood park, leaving 37.2 acres of developable RS land. The density ‎averaged over the master plan development area results in a minimum of 555 dwelling units, and maximum of ‎‎925 dwelling units.‎

The master plan area provides for a mix of housing types as two- and three-family housing as allowed in the Single-‎Family District Zone, in compliance with BDC 2.7.3040(D), and incorporates attached single-family ‎townhomes, and/or multifamily residential housing units in the Multifamily District and Commercial District.‎ [Ord. NS-2352, 2019]


2.7.3075 Street and Pedestrian Standards. Revised 11/19

Street and pedestrian standards must be consistent with the requirements of this code, except as set forth below:

A.    Street Section 1 (Whitetail and Stone Creek Streets) – Neighborhood Collector. Street Section 1 will be used on the primary north-south streets that connect Brosterhous Road to the south, Brentwood Avenue in the center of the site, and the multifamily area at the north edge of the site along the canal. These streets will consist of 60 feet of public right-of-way with 10-foot vehicle travel lanes, six-foot bike lanes, a seven-plus-foot landscape strip, and six-foot-wide sidewalks.


[IMAGE]


B.    Street Section 2A/2B (Brentwood) – Collector. Brentwood Avenue, designated on the City’s TSP as a major collector road, connects the residential neighborhood to the west and is expected to extend beyond the site to the industrial area to the east in the future. On the Stone Creek site, Brentwood will connect the park, elementary school, and north-south streets, and will have an 80-foot right-of-way for its entirety through the site. Two street sections will be used for Brentwood Avenue. Both Sections 2A and 2B will have 11-foot vehicle travel lanes, six-foot bike lanes, and eight-foot-wide sidewalks. Section 2A will have an eight-foot-wide parking strip for parallel parking. Section 2B will have wider landscape strips. Landscape strips between the curb and sidewalk will vary from 11 to 15 feet in width.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


 

C.    Street Section 3 – Local Residential. The secondary east-west streets in the residential areas of the neighborhood will be standard, local residential streets consisting of 60 feet of public right-of-way with eight-foot vehicle travel lanes, eight-foot-wide on-street parking, a nine-foot-wide landscape strip, and five-foot-wide sidewalks. 


[IMAGE]


D.    Street Section 4 (Brosterhous Rd) – Collector. Brosterhous Road is an existing City collector street located along the southern boundary of the site. The portion of this street adjacent to the Stone Creek Master Plan area consists of 80 feet of public right-of-way which will be improved to current City collector street standards with 11-foot-wide vehicle travel lanes and a 12-foot-wide eastbound left turn lane onto Whitetail Street, six-foot bike lanes, 11-plus-foot-wide landscape strips, and five-foot-wide sidewalks.


[IMAGE]


E.    Street Trees. Street trees must be provided along all streets in conformance with BDC 3.2.400, Street Trees. 

Figure 2.7.3075.A
[IMAGE]


 

Figure 2.7.3075.B
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2352, 2019; Ord. NS-2223, 2014. Formerly 2.7.3070] 

Article XIII. Wildflower Master Planned Development


2.7.3100 Wildflower Master Planned Development.


2.7.3110 Applicability.

The area regulated by the Wildflower Master Plan is approximately 33 acres of land east of SE 15th Street, west of the Pinewood Natural Area, and south of the future extension of SE Wilson Avenue. The area contains two mapped Upland Areas of Special Interest (ASI). Conditions of approval pertaining to the timing of required public infrastructure improvements are contained in the ordinance codified in this article. [Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3115 Purpose.

The purpose of the Wildflower Overlay Zone and Districts is to implement the Wildflower Master Development Plan and the Bend Comprehensive Plan policies and to create overlay standards for the residential and commercial areas within the Wildflower Master Development Plan boundaries. The overlay zone standards and districts will:

•    Provide housing types consistent with the RM Zone.

•    Protect ASIs and trees.

•    Locate higher density housing adjacent to the ASIs and 15th Street.

•    Create opportunities for community commercial and small scale businesses in selected locations to foster a mixed-use residential neighborhood.

•    Promote pedestrian and other multi-modal transportation options, including key trail connections and separated sidewalks.

•    Create an interconnected system of private and public streets with standards appropriate to the enclave nature of the site.

•    Create safe and attractive streetscapes that will meet emergency access requirements and enhance pedestrian and bicycle access. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3125 Districts.

The special standards of the Wildflower overlay districts shall supersede the standards of the underlying zone unless as noted in this chapter. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone shall apply.

Figure 2.7.3125

Wildflower Master Planned Development Districts
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3130 Wildflower Glen Housing District.

The purpose of the Wildflower Glen Housing District is to provide a transitional area between existing residential development and proposed development. This area will include a variety of housing types. Smaller lots with greater lot coverage will allow for preservation of trees in open space areas. This area is primarily on the eastern portion of the Wildflower MPD and adjacent to existing single-family homes.

A.    Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be as contained in BDC Table 2.1.200 for the Residential Medium Density Zone (RM) or otherwise allowed in the RM Zone, except the area south of Bronzewood Avenue which is restricted to uses permitted in the RS Zone.

B.    Development Standards. The lot size and development standards of the RM Zone shall apply to all uses, except the area south of Bronzewood Avenue which is subject to the RS Zone lot sizes and development standards.

C.    Density. The maximum density is 21.7 units per acre. [Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3135 Wildflower Hills Multifamily Housing District.

The purpose of the Wildflower Hills Housing District is to provide higher density housing development, three attached units and greater, adjacent the two ASIs in order to take benefit of the topography, shielding, and buffering effect of the ASIs and commercial node. Townhomes, apartments, and other forms of attached housing will allow a diversity of housing types and a mix of residential density.

A.    Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be as contained in BDC Table 2.1.200 for the Residential Medium Density Zone (RM). In addition to these uses, the following uses are also permitted:

1.    Community buildings and recreational facilities.

2.    Live-work units.

3.    Ground floor service commercial when more than 10 upper story residential units are developed within the same structure.

B.    Development Standards. The lot size and development standards of the RM Zone shall apply except as listed below:

1.    Building Height. The maximum building height is 55 feet.

2.    Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage.

C.    Density. The maximum density is 42 units per acre, which includes the density transfer from the protected ASIs. [Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3140 Wildflower Plaza Mixed Employment (ME) District.

The purpose of the Wildflower Plaza ME District is to provide a service commercial area for nearby residents. Residential units may be developed primarily on upper stories of commercial structures. The topography in this area makes understory parking possible in certain areas. The nearby ASIs and commercial node areas provide a shielding and buffering effect on the higher density development in the Wildflower Hills Multifamily Housing District.

A.    Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be as contained in BDC Table 2.3.200 for the Mixed Employment District (ME), with the following exceptions and additional uses:

1.    No drive-through windows allowed except for coffee huts with a maximum size of 100 square feet.

2.    Animal clinics, fully enclosed, may be allowed for small animals; no large farm animals.

3.    Temporary activities such as farmer’s markets, specialty events, art walks, festivals, and holiday events on private property or in plazas.

B.    Development Standards. The lot size and development standards of the ME Zone shall apply except as listed below:

1.    Building Height. The maximum building height is 55 feet.

2.    Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage.

C.    Density. There is no minimum or maximum density for the Wildflower Plaza ME District. [Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3145 Site Plan and Design Review.

Type II site plan and design review is required for most development as specified under BDC Chapter 4.2, except as specified in this section. Type I minimum development standards review is required for ADUs, duplexes, triplexes, or townhomes in the Wildflower Master Planned Development. Type II site plan review is required for cottage housing if a Type II tentative plan for individual cottage lots is not proposed or required.

A.    Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units must meet the standards contained in BDC 3.6.200(B).

B.    Duplexes and Triplexes. Duplexes and triplexes must meet the standards contained in BDC 3.6.200(H).

C.    Townhomes. Townhomes must meet the standards contained in BDC 3.6.200(D).

D.    Cottage Housing. Cottage housing must meet the standards contained in BDC 4.5.500. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2250, 2015]


2.7.3150 Street and Pedestrian Standards.

The Wildflower Master Planned Development has limited access constrained by two ASIs, topographical constraints to the west, the Pinewood Natural Area to the east, and existing development to the north and south. Internal roads will be private, constructed to City standards and specifications, with public access consistent with BDC 3.4.200 Table D. Sidewalks will be provided on both sides of the street, separated from the roadway where feasible to provide a buffer between the curb and sidewalk. Street and pedestrian standards shall be consistent with the requirements of this code as set forth below, except that variations may be approved through the tentative plan review and/or site plan review processes to allow for meandering of sidewalks and variation in landscape buffer widths where necessary to develop drainage swales and/or preserve existing topography and trees.

A.    Private Road Standards.

1.    Residential – No Parking. Two-way travel road 24 feet in width, with no on-street parking, and standard curbing. Sidewalks will be a minimum of five feet in width on both sides of the street, with a five-foot-wide landscape buffer between the curb and sidewalk. Sidewalk location may meander, with a variable width landscape buffer to fit the need given trees, topography, drainage, and driveway access. The overall width of the street tract and public access easements may vary depending on the width of the landscape buffers.
[IMAGE]


2.    Residential with Parking on One Side. Two-way travel road 28 feet in width, with parking on one side, and standard curbing. Sidewalks will be a minimum of five feet in width on both sides of the street, with a five-foot-wide landscape buffer between the curb and sidewalk. Sidewalk location may meander, with a variable width landscape buffer to fit the need given trees, topography, drainage, and driveway access. The overall width of the street tract and public access easements may vary depending on the width of the landscape buffers.
[IMAGE]


3.    Commercial. Two-way travel road 24 to 44 feet in width with alternate sections varying from no parking to parking on one or both sides of the street, with standard curbing. Sidewalks will be a minimum of five feet in width on both sides of the street, with a five-foot-wide landscape buffer between the curb and sidewalk. Sidewalk location may meander, with a variable width landscape buffer to fit the need given trees, topography, drainage, on-street parking, and driveway access. The overall width of the street tract and public access easements may vary depending on the width of the landscape buffers and parking.
[IMAGE]


B.    Public Street Standards.

1.    Bronzewood Drive within the Wildflower Master Planned Development shall be dedicated as a 60-foot public right-of-way, built to City local residential street standards and specifications. A raised pedestrian crossing shall be constructed to City standards for the Larkspur Trail, including the appropriate striping and signage.

2.    Fifteenth Street is an existing arterial street with bicycle lanes. Right-of-way shall be dedicated along the west boundary of the Wildflower Master Planned Development to provide 50 feet from centerline of the street, with additional right-of-way as needed to construct the roundabout at 15th and Wilson. Sidewalks shall be constructed at the property line with a minimum width of six feet and a standard landscape buffer provided between the curb and sidewalk in conformance with City arterial street standards.

C.    Connector Trail. The connector trail between the Coyner and Larkspur Trails shall be constructed from Ponderosa Park at the 15th Street/Wilson Avenue intersection to the existing BPRD Larkspur Trail located to the east in the Pinewood Natural Area. The final alignment and timing of the construction of this trail will be determined through the land division and/or site plan review process, in coordination with the City and BPRD. In locations where the connector trail is integrated into the street system, the minimum sidewalk width shall be eight feet. Where the trail is separated from the sidewalk system, the trail shall be constructed to BPRD standards and shall be located within a 20-foot-wide public access easement dedicated to BPRD. [Ord. NS-2250, 2015]

Article XIV. Bend Central District


2.7.3200 Bend Central District (BCD).


2.7.3205 Bend Central District Purpose. Revised 4/20

A.    The Bend Central District is intended to implement the goals and objectives for the creative redevelopment of the central Third Street Corridor and surrounding areas west to the Parkway and east including 4th Street as indicated below:

1.    Provide for a wide range of residential, commercial and office uses throughout the BCD that result in a walkable, vibrant, diverse mixed-use district, with an emphasis on commercial uses at street level on designated main streets.

2.    Provide a variety of residential development types and greater density of development, with a transition area adjacent to the existing residential neighborhood east of 4th Street.

3.    Provide for development that is supportive of transit by encouraging a pedestrian-friendly environment.

4.    Provide development and design standards that support the goals of the BCD.

5.    Limit development of low-intensity uses while allowing continuation of existing industrial and manufacturing uses.

6.    Provide reduced parking standards and encourage alternative parking arrangements.

B.    The Bend Central District is made up of four subdistricts, as established by Figure 2.7.3205, each with distinctly different characteristics. Subdistricts that recognize and support these characteristics are established as follows:

1.    1st/2nd Street Subdistrict. Applies to properties in the vicinity of 1st and 2nd Streets within the BCD and is intended to provide for a mix of office, higher density residential, live/work and small-scale retail uses while also allowing for continuation of existing light industrial/manufacturing uses in the area.

2.    3rd Street Subdistrict. Applies to properties in the vicinity of 3rd Street between Revere and Franklin Streets and is intended to provide a range of mixed uses including large-scale commercial, retail and residential uses.

3.    4th Street Subdistrict. Applies to properties in the vicinity of 4th Street within the BCD and is intended to provide a transition between the more intense central area and existing residential neighborhoods to the east.

4.    South Subdistrict. Applies to properties south of Franklin Avenue along and between the railroad and 4th Street and is intended to provide a range of mixed uses including high density multifamily and office space above ground floor retail/service uses.

Figure 2.7.3205 Subdistrict Map
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2271, 2016. Formerly 2.7.3200]


2.7.3207 Main Streets. Revised 4/20

The BCD establishes main streets as shown on Figure 2.7.3207, Main Streets. The purposes of main streets are to:

A.    Provide focal streets for mixed-use and commercial activity;

B.    Create vibrant pedestrian environments with human-scaled commercial character; and

C.    Encourage the formation of solid blocks of commercial-ready buildings for a walkable mixed-use district.

Figure 2.7.3207 Main Streets
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2367, 2020]


2.7.3210 Applicability. Revised 4/20

A.    Applicability. In addition to the provisions of the underlying zone, the standards and requirements of this section apply to lands within the BCD boundary as depicted on Figure 2.7.3205. These provisions modify existing standards of the Bend Development Code by applying requirements, limiting allowable uses, or allowing exceptions to general regulations. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of the BCD and those of the underlying zone or other portions of the Development Code, the provisions of this district will control. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3220 Land Uses. Revised 4/20

A.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.7.3220 are allowed in BCD subdistricts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are listed in Table 2.7.3220 and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.7.3220 may be permitted or conditionally allowed. The land uses identified with a “C” in Table 2.7.3220 require conditional use permit approval prior to development, in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.4. Land uses identified with an “L” in Table 2.7.3220 are allowed with limitations in accordance with subsection (D) of this section.

B.    Existing Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that are not in conformance with the provisions in this section but that were lawfully established within the BCD prior to the adoption of this code are considered a permitted use. Expansion or enlargement will be subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review. For sites with no existing structures, new structures may only be constructed for uses allowed in Table 2.7.3220. Conditions of prior approvals will continue to apply unless modified in conformance with BDC 4.1.1325, Modification of Approval.

C.    Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar land use determinations must be made in conformance with the procedures in BDC 4.1.1400, Declaratory Ruling.

Table 2.7.3220 

Permitted Uses in the Bend Central District by Subdistrict  

	Land Use	1st/2nd Street	3rd Street	4th Street	South

	Residential

	*Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)	P	P	P	P

	Attached Single-Family Townhomes	P	P	P	P

	Multifamily Residential	P	P	P	P

	Live/Work Dwelling Unit	L (see subsection (D)(1) of this section)	L (see subsection (D)(1) of this section)	L (see subsection (D)(1) of this section)	L (see subsection (D)(1) of this section)

	Residential as Part of Mixed-Use Development	P	P	P	P

	Commercial

	Retail Sales and Service	P	P	P	P

	Retail Sales and Service (Auto Dependent*)	N	N	N	N

	Retail Sales and Service (Auto Oriented*)	N	C	N	N

	*Medical Marijuana Dispensary and Marijuana Retailer	P	P	P	P

	*Marijuana Wholesale (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	P	P	C	C

	*Marijuana Testing, Research and Development Facilities	P	P	P	P

	Restaurants/Food and Beverage Services	 	 	 	 

	– with drive-through*	N	C	N	N

	– without drive-through	P	P	P	P

	Offices and Clinics	P	P	P	P

	Production Businesses (e.g., IT support centers, biotechnology, software/hardware development, broadcast and production studios)	P	P	P	P

	Conference Centers/Meeting Facility	P	P	N	P

	Lodging (bed and breakfast inns, vacation rentals, boarding houses)	P	P	P	P

	*Short-Term Rentals	P	P	P	P

	Hotel/Motels	P	P	C	C

	Commercial and Public Parking, structure	P	P	C	P

	Commercial and Public Parking, surface lot	P	P	P	P

	Commercial Storage	 	 	 	 

	– enclosed in building and on an upper story	C	C	P	N

	– not enclosed in building	N	N	N	N

	– enclosed in building on ground floor (i.e., mini-storage)	N	N	N	N

	Entertainment and Recreation	 	 	 	 

	– enclosed in building (e.g., theater)	P	P	N	P

	– not enclosed (e.g., amusement)	C	C	N	C

	Wholesale Sales (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	P	P	C	C

	Hospital	C	C	C	C

	Public and Institutional

	Government – point of service intended to serve the entire City (e.g., City Hall, main library, main post office, main Department of Motor Vehicles service center)	P	P	P	P

	Government – branch service intended to serve a portion of the City	P	P	P	P

	Government – limited point of service (e.g., public works yards, vehicle storage, etc.)	N	N	N	N

	Parks and Open Space	P	P	P	P

	Schools	P	P	P	P

	Institutions of Higher Education	P	P	P	P

	Child Care Facility	P	P	P	P

	Clubs and Places of Worship	P	P	P	P

	*Utilities (above ground)	P	P	P	P

	Industrial	 	 	 	 

	Manufacturing and Production	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)	N	N	N

	Warehouse	L (see subsection (D)(3) of this section)	N	N	N

	Transportation, Freight and Distribution	C	N	N	N

	Industrial Service (e.g., cleaning, repair)	P	N	N	N

	*Marijuana Grow Sites and Marijuana Producing when Designated as Mixed-Employment, Industrial General or Industrial Light on the Bend Comprehensive Plan	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)	N	N	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)

	*Marijuana Processing of Cannabinoid Concentrates and Cannabinoid Products When Designated as Commercial Limited, Mixed-Employment, Industrial General or Industrial Light on the Bend Comprehensive Plan	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)

	*Marijuana Processing of Cannabinoid Extracts When Designated as Mixed-Employment, Industrial General or Industrial Light on the Bend Comprehensive Plan	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)	N	N	L (see subsection (D)(2) of this section)

	Miscellaneous

	Small Scale Alternative Energy Systems (i.e., rooftop wind turbine or solar panels)	P	P	P	P

	*Small Hydroelectric Facility	P	P	P	P

	Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

Key to Permitted Uses

P = Permitted

N = Not Permitted

C = Conditional Use

L = Permitted with limitations, subject to subsection (D) of this section.

*    Special standards for certain uses subject to BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

D.    Limitations. The following limitations apply to those uses identified as “L” in Table 2.7.3220:

1.    Detached live/work dwelling units are prohibited.

2.    Manufacturing, Production and Industrial Services. Uses must minimize potential external effects as follows:

a.    All operations must be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.

b.    Potential nuisances such as noise, odor, electrical disturbances and other public health nuisances are subject to BC Chapter 13.45.

c.    Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, such as ventilators and ducts, must be contained within a completely enclosed structure that may include louvers, latticework, or other similar features. This screening requirement does not apply to roof-mounted solar energy systems or wind energy systems.

3.    Warehousing. Warehousing must be accessory/secondary to a primary permitted use (it may not be a single use). [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3230 Development Standards. Revised 4/20

A.    The following table provides numerical development standards within the BCD. Additional development standards are contained in subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section.

Table 2.7.3230 

Development Standards in the Bend Central District by Subdistrict  

	Standards	1st/2nd Street	3rd Street	4th Street	South

	Minimum lot area	No minimum	No minimum	No minimum	No minimum

	Lot width	15 feet	15 feet	15 feet	15 feet

	Minimum front setback (see subsection (B)(1) of this section)	None	5 feet1	None	None

	Maximum front setback (see subsection (B)(1) of this section)	10 feet	15 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Rear and side setback	None	None	None	None

	Maximum building height (see subsection (C) of this section)	65 feet to 85 feet	65 feet to 85 feet	45 feet	65 feet to 85 feet

1.    The first five feet of setback abutting 3rd Street (the five feet immediately behind the property line) must be a dedicated public access easement and used as additional sidewalk area.

B.    Setbacks. Setback standards apply to any new buildings and any building expansion, including primary structures and accessory structures.

1.    Front Setbacks.

a.    For buildings on sites with more than one frontage or through lots, the maximum front setbacks in Table 2.7.3230 apply as follows:

i.    For corner lots with two frontages, the maximum setback applies to both street frontages.

ii.    For through lots with two frontages, the maximum setback applies to only one of the frontages; provided, that where the abutting streets are of different street classification, the maximum setback applies to the street with the higher classification or a main street as identified in Figure 2.7.3207.

iii.    For properties with three or more frontages, the maximum setback applies to two contiguous frontages. Where the streets are of different street classifications, one of the maximum setbacks must apply to the street with the highest classification or a main street as identified in Figure 2.7.3207.

b.    The maximum setback standard may be increased as necessary to accommodate an approved usable public space with pedestrian amenities (e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, plaza, outdoor dining area or landscaped area with seating) between the building and front property line.

c.    For new buildings on main streets as identified in Figure 2.7.3207, Main Street Map, the front building facade must be located at the minimum setback for at least 50 percent of the front building facade on the main streets.

d.    Building entries may be recessed from the facade up to eight feet in depth.

e.    Fences (except if less than 3.5 feet in height for outdoor patios and dwelling units), storage and parking are not allowed in the front setback.

f.    Awnings, marquees, balconies, overhangs, fabric tensile structures, building appendages, or other projections may extend into the front setback and public access easement.

C.    Building Height.

1.    In the 1st/2nd Street, 3rd Street and South Subdistricts, buildings may exceed the 65-foot height to a maximum of 85 feet in height; provided, that at least 10 percent of the residential units are at affordable rates in conformance with BDC 3.6.200(C).

2.    Equipment used for small-scale alternative energy production does not count towards maximum building heights.

D.    Buffering. A five-foot-wide landscape buffer is required along the side and rear property lines between nonresidential uses and any adjacent residential zones that are located outside of the BCD. The buffer must provide landscaping to screen parking, service and delivery areas and walls without windows or entries. The buffer may contain passive outdoor seating but must not contain trash receptacles or storage of equipment, mechanical equipment, materials, vehicles, etc. The landscaping standards in BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, provide other buffering requirements where applicable.

E.    BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses. BDC 3.6.200(D), Single-Family Attached Townhomes, and 3.6.200(I), Residential Uses within Commercial Districts, do not apply within the BCD.

F.    Multifamily is subject to the provisions in BDC 2.1.1000 with the following exception:

1.    The common open space requirement in BDC 2.1.1000(B)(1) does not apply to any property with a residential building located within one-quarter mile of a public park. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3240 Design Standards. Revised 4/20

A.    Development in the BCD is subject to the following design standards. These standards are in addition to the regulations of BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review, but replace the design standards of the underlying zoning district and the standards in BDC 3.6.200(D), Single-Family Attached Townhomes, and 3.6.200(I), Residential Uses within Commercial Districts.

1.    Building and Entry Orientation.

a.    Primary Entrance. Each building must provide a primary building entrance oriented to at least one street or to a street-oriented plaza.

b.    Buildings located on a main street identified in Figure 2.7.3207, Main Streets, must provide a minimum of one entrance every 60 feet onto the main street building frontage(s).

2.    Facade Height Minimum.

a.    For buildings located on a main street identified in Figure 2.7.3207, Main Streets, the minimum height for the facade(s) facing the main street(s) is 24 feet.

b.    The minimum height for a facade not facing a main street is 15 feet.

3.    Transparency.

a.    On main streets identified in Figure 2.7.3207, Main Streets, facades that face the main street must include transparency/glazing (i.e., glass windows and/or glass doors) totaling a minimum of 40 percent of the ground level wall area and 20 percent on the upper level(s) wall area, as shown in Figure 2.7.3240.A. Ground level wall area includes the exterior wall area up to 10 feet above the finished grade.

b.    Facades that face a non-main street must include transparency/glazing (i.e., glass windows and/or glass doors) totaling a minimum of 25 percent of the ground level wall area and 20 percent on the upper level(s) wall area, as shown in Figure 2.7.3240.B. Ground level wall area includes the exterior wall area up to 10 feet above the finished grade.

Figure 2.7.3240.A – Main Street Facade
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.3240.B – Non-Main Street Facade
[IMAGE]


4.    Building Articulation. One or more of the following facade treatments must be incorporated on each level of all street-facing facades:

a.    Building offsets (projections or recesses) at least two feet deep and six feet wide;

b.    Upper level balconies (projecting or recessed) at least six feet wide;

c.    Building canopies, awnings, pergolas, architectural sun shade structures, or similar weather protection (minimum projection of four feet for overhead weather protection when located on the ground level and over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space);

d.    Transparency greater than the minimum required by subsection (A)(3) of this section;

e.    Recessed building entries at least six feet wide;

f.    Use of masonry material (i.e., brick, brick veneer, stone, concrete, or stucco) for a minimum of 75 percent of the total wall area of the street-facing facade level as measured from floor-to-floor height, not including windows; and/or

g.    On upper levels, use of two or more facade materials and/or facade colors.

Figure 2.7.3240.C – Illustration of Use of Architectural Features
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3245 Commercial-Ready Space. Revised 4/20

A.    The ground floor of buildings that front main streets identified in Figure 2.7.3207, Main Streets, must be developed as either commercial or commercial-ready space by complying with the following:

1.    The entire ground floor space must be constructed to accommodate nonresidential uses.

2.    If residential uses are provided immediately above the ground floor level (i.e., second floor residential), horizontal occupancy separation must be provided to accommodate future commercial occupancies as required by the Oregon Structure Specialty Code at the time of construction.

3.    The ground floor must have an interior height of not less than 12 feet measured from the entry level finished floor to the bottom of the structural members of the floor above.

B.    Exemption. Parking located within a structure is exempt from commercial-ready space standards. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020]


2.7.3250 Parking. Revised 4/20

A.    In the BCD, the following parking requirements supersede parking requirements in BDC Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces, and in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses. Unless otherwise noted here, other sections of BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking, apply.

1.    Required Off-Street Parking. The minimum number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces is established below. The number of parking spaces provided by any particular use in ground surface parking lots must not exceed the required minimum number of spaces provided by Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces, by more than 50 percent. Spaces provided on-street, or within the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or under-structure parking, or in multi-level parking above or below surface lots, do not apply toward the maximum number of allowable spaces. Parking spaces provided through “shared parking” also do not apply toward the maximum number.

a.    Residential Uses.

i.    Single-family attached townhomes: one space per dwelling unit.

ii.    Live/work dwelling unit: one space per live-work dwelling unit.

iii.    Residential uses in a mixed-use development, multifamily and commercial-ready space used as residential: one-half space per dwelling unit.

iv.    Tandem parking is permitted when the spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit.

b.    Nonresidential uses: one space per 1,000 square feet of floor area.

i.    Exception. Hotels/motels and entertainment uses may use the off-street parking requirements in BDC Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Parking Spaces.

2.    Parking Reductions.

a.    Mixed-Use Developments. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or property with no single use occupying more than 95 percent of the total square feet of the building, the minimum off-street parking may be 75 percent of the sum of the requirements for all uses.

b.    The amount of off-street parking required for nonresidential uses may be reduced by up to 10 percent in exchange for providing on-site public open space/green space at the following ratio: one vehicle parking space per 500 square feet of public open space/green space.

c.    The amount of off-street parking required may be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space abutting the development, up to 100 percent of the required off-street parking.

d.    The amount of off-street parking may be reduced to zero for a maximum of 10,000 square feet per floor. When using this parking reduction, it must be calculated prior to any other reductions.

e.    These reductions are in addition to any reductions taken under BDC 3.3.300(D).

3.    Parking Standards.

a.    Parking on the ground floor within a structure must be designed so that parked vehicles are screened from view at street level.

b.    Parking is allowed on the side and rear of buildings. If located on the side, the parking area may not exceed 50 percent of the total lineal frontage of the site and must be set back 10 feet from the front property line or three feet behind the front building facade, whichever is greater. For corner lots, the parking area may not exceed 50 percent of the total lineal frontage for all front property lines and frontages.

c.    Parking and maneuvering areas including driveways are prohibited between the street and the front of the building. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3260 Special Street Standards. Revised 4/20

A.    The BCD has special street standards for streets inside the district. The intent of the special street standards is to develop complete streets that enable safe travel for all modes of travel including transit, motorists, pedestrians, cyclists and freight users. Where the existing street does not meet the standard right-of-way widths for locals, collectors, and arterials, dedication to increase the public right-of-way and improvements to meet the special street standards are required. The following special street standards supersede the standards in BDC 3.4.200(F):

1.    Figure 2.7.3260.A applies to 2nd Street north and south of Greenwood Avenue, 4th Street south of Greenwood Avenue and to all local streets in the BCD. If the right-of-way abutting a development site has a curb-to-curb (i.e., pavement) width narrower than 36 feet wide, the curb-to-curb width must be widened to 36 feet.

a.    Exceptions.

i.    Any development site on a local street with frontage equal to or less than 40 percent of the block length that has an existing 30-foot-wide curb-to-curb may remain 30 feet wide and use the cross-section provided for in Figure 2.7.3260.B. Dedication of right-of-way is required.

ii.    Any portion of the 2nd Street right-of-way within the BCD that has an existing 40-foot-wide curb-to-curb width may remain 40 feet wide and use the 40-foot-wide curb-to-curb cross-section provided for in Figure 2.7.3260.C.

Figure 2.7.3260.A
[IMAGE]


Note: Sharrows are not required on local streets.

Figure 2.7.3260.B
[IMAGE]


2.    Figure 2.7.3260.C applies to 4th Street north of Greenwood Avenue.

Figure 2.7.3260.C
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3270 Low Impact Stormwater Management. Revised 4/20

A.    The use of low impact development (LID) techniques to manage stormwater on site must be consistent with the City’s Central Oregon Stormwater Manual and must include at least one of the following techniques:

1.    Use of on-site pervious paving materials to minimize impervious surfaces allowed within off-street and on-street parking areas and other areas within a development site.

2.    Provision of an eco-roof or rooftop garden.

3.    Use of drywells.

4.    Provision of parking integrated into building footprint (above or below grade).

5.    Provision of rain gardens and bioretention areas on site to filter stormwater runoff.

6.    Shared stormwater facilities between adjacent properties. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]


2.7.3280 Landscaping. Revised 4/20

A.    The landscaping standards of BDC Chapter 3.2 apply to the BCD except as noted in this section.

B.    The minimum required landscaping must be at least five percent of the gross lot area.

C.    Green roofs and rooftop gardens may be counted toward meeting up to 100 percent of the landscaping requirement.

D.    Landscaping in the public right-of-way (for example, street trees and bioswales) may be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirement.

E.    Landscaping should be planted adjacent to the curb line to create a streetscape as illustrated in Figures 2.7.3240.C and 2.7.3260. [Ord. NS-2367, 2020; Ord. NS-2271, 2016]

Article XV. Shilo Master Planned Development (Repealed by Ord. NS-2351)

Article XVI. River Vale Master Planned Development


2.7.3400 River Vale Master Planned Development.


2.7.3410 Applicability.

The area regulated by the River Vale Master Plan is approximately 37.4 acres of land located on the east side of the Deschutes River, at the west end of River Rim Drive. It is bounded on the north by the River Rim Park Site; to the west by the Deschutes River and private land; to the south by an upland area of special interest, a river corridor area of special interest, and private land; and to the east by River Rim PUD. [Ord. NS-2294, 2017]


2.7.3420 Purpose.

The purpose of this article is to create the River Vale Master Planned Development. In addition, the master planned development creates overlay development standards that will supersede the development standards of the underlying zoning district within the master plan boundaries. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone shall apply. [Ord. NS-2294, 2017]


2.7.3430 Development Standards.

A.    Building Setbacks.

1.    Front Yard Setbacks. A minimum front yard setback of 10 feet is required; provided, that the garage is set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line.

2.    Rear Yard Setback. The minimum rear yard is five feet.

3.    Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard is five feet.

B.    Lot Area and Dimensions.

1.    Lot Size. The minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet.

2.    Lot Width. The minimum lot width is 70 feet.

3.    Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth is 100 feet.

C.    Density. The density range is two to 2.2 units/gross acre.

D.    Lot Coverage.

1.    For lots over 15,000 square feet, the maximum lot coverage is 35 percent.

2.    For lots under 15,000 square feet, the maximum lot coverage is:

a.    Fifty percent for single-story homes.

b.    Thirty-five percent for all other uses. [Ord. NS-2294, 2017]


2.7.3440 Street Standards.

The River Vale Master Planned Development has limited access; it is constrained by areas of special interest, topographical features to the west, and existing development to the north and the east. Internal streets will be local public streets within 50 feet of right-of-way as shown in Figure 2.7.3440.

A.    River Vale Master Plan Public Street Standards. Two-way road 28 feet in width, with eight-foot-wide parking bays on one side, and standard curbing. Sidewalks will be at least five feet in width on both sides of the street. Sidewalk location may meander to fit the need given trees, topography, drainage, and housing access.

Figure 2.7.3440

River Vale Master Plan Street Standards
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2294, 2017]

Article XVII. Oregon State University – Cascades Overlay Zone


2.7.3500 Oregon State University – Cascades.


2.7.3510 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    The purpose of the Oregon State University – Cascades (OSU-C) Overlay Zone is to establish the OSU-C Master Plan and implement the relevant Bend Comprehensive Plan policies regarding the Century Drive Area opportunity area. The overlay standards will:



1.    Provide areas within the overlay district for a four-year, 5,000-student university and graduate school.

2.    Identify areas within the overlay district for traditional mixed-use development.

3.    Provide transportation options for students, staff and employees and reduce reliance on the automobile.

4.    Provide opportunities for a variety of housing options, including traditional student dormitories, staff housing, and multifamily housing available to the community.

5.    Encourage pedestrian-friendly development that is supportive of transit.

6.    Create an economically successful mixed-use center.

7.    Provide opportunities for university-related research and development.

B.    The area regulated by the OSU-C Overlay Zone is approximately 128 acres of land and includes the areas on Figure 2.7.3520, Campus Districts. [Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3520 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to uses, buildings types and standards that are specific to the OSU-C Overlay Zone:

A.    “OSU-C campus” means the area identified as the “OSU-C Campus” on Figure 2.7.3520, which includes the Innovation District, Core Campus District, Recreation District and Residential District.

B.    “Innovation District” means the area identified as the “Innovation District” on Figure 2.7.3520.

C.    “Core Campus District” means the area identified as the “Core Campus District” on Figure 2.7.3520. The Core Campus District includes the existing 10-acre campus approved in 2014 under PZ 14-0210.

D.    “Recreation District” means the area identified as the “Recreation District” on Figure 2.7.3520.

E.    “Residential District” means the area identified as the “Residential District” on Figure 2.7.3520.
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3530 Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses.

A.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. All permitted uses in the MU Zone are permitted uses in the OSU-C Overlay Zone. All conditional uses in the MU Zone are conditional uses in the OSU-C Overlay Zone.

B.    Accessory Uses. In addition to accessory uses permitted in the MU Zone, the following accessory uses are permitted in the OSU-C Overlay:

1.    Central Utility Plant;

2.    Alternative energy system(s) to serve university energy needs;

3.    Stormwater and wastewater management systems/facilities;

4.    Parks, playgrounds, play fields, athletic facilities, sports complexes, recreational facilities, trails, natural areas, open spaces;

5.    Uses and structures that are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use or an approved conditional use, including, but not limited to, parking lots/parking areas and service roads needed to serve permitted or conditional uses;

6.    Outdoor storage provided such storage is set back at least 25 feet from the OSU-C campus boundary and is screened from the public right-of-way;

7.    Facilities yard (maintenance vehicles, equipment and similar uses);

8.    Public safety facilities. [Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3540 Special Development Standards.

A.    Applicability. The special development standards of the OSU-C Overlay Zone supersede the standards of the underlying zone and BDC Title 3 where they vary. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone apply.

B.    Maximum Front Yard Setback. There is no maximum front setback; however, where a building is set back more than 10 feet from a public or private right-of-way, one or more of the following treatments must be included in the setback area between the building and the street:

1.    Sidewalks or multi-use paths 10 feet or wider;

2.    Improved plazas and pedestrian areas;

3.    Outdoor dining and/or gathering areas;

4.    Specialty landscaping, including water treatment-oriented landscaping;

5.    Native landscaping, woodland forest areas;

6.    Traditional campus greens, quadrangle or park areas; and

7.    Parking and maneuvering areas as allowed by BDC 2.7.3550(B).

C.    Architectural Standards. The street-walls that will not be required to meet the architectural standards of BDC 2.3.500 are depicted in Figure 2.7.3540.A.


[IMAGE]


D.    Block Lengths. Block length and perimeters within the OSU-C Overlay Zone are generally depicted on Figure 2.7.3540.B.

E.    Vehicular Access Management. Vehicular access to the City’s street system is permitted in the general locations depicted on Figure 2.7.3540.B.


[IMAGE]


F.    Landscape Requirements. Parking lots that will serve a dual purpose for energy generation with photovoltaic arrays will not be required to meet the landscaping requirement of BDC Chapter 3.2. [Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3550 Parking and Loading.

A.    Parking Location. The required number of vehicle parking spaces must comply with the standards of BDC Table 3.3.300, or as modified by the approved Transportation Parking Demand Management Program contained in Ordinance NS-2309. The general locations of possible parking areas as depicted in Figure 2.7.3550.A must comply with the following:

1.    Parking in the Core Campus District may be provided in the Core Campus District, the Recreation District or a combination of both.

2.    Parking in the Innovation District may be provided in the Innovation District or in the eastern portion of the Core Campus District.

3.    Parking in any other district must be located in the same district consistent with the requirements of BDC Chapter 3.3.


[IMAGE]


B.    Parking and Maneuvering Areas. Parking and maneuvering areas located between the street and the building are only permitted in the general locations shown on Figure 2.7.3550.B.


[IMAGE]


C.    Bicycle Parking Standards.

1.    Location and Timing. The required number of bicycle parking spaces may be located in areas subject to a prior site plan review approval provided that the applicant demonstrates that the alternate location will better serve the OSU-C campus population.

D.    Loading and Service Standards. Loading and service areas are permitted in the locations generally depicted on Figure 2.7.3550.C.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3560 Special Street Standards.

A.    Figure 2.7.3560.A depicts the street type, street location and alignment within the OSU-C Overlay Zone. The associated typical street cross sections are below.

1.    Primary campus street sections must comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4, or be selected from the typical sections 1.1 to 1.5, as shown below.

2.    Secondary campus street sections must comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4, or be selected from the typical sections 2.1 to 2.3, as shown below.

3.    Shared use campus street sections must comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4, or meet the standards of typical section 3.1 shown below.

4.    Controlled access drive sections must comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4, or meet the standards of typical section 4.1 shown below. Gates, bollards or barriers restricting vehicular access may be allowed upon City review.


[IMAGE]


B.    Any City street standard adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permits a lesser street standard to be applied citywide, may be applied in the OSU-C Overlay Zone.

C.    Local Streets. Local streets within the OSU-C Overlay Zone may be public or private streets. All private streets must comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4, or as set forth in Figure 2.7.3560.A and the associated typical sections.


[IMAGE]


TYPICAL STREET SECTION N.T.S PRIMARY CAMPUS STREET (PRIVATE)


[IMAGE]


TYPICAL STREET SECTION N.T.S SECONDARY CAMPUS STREET (PRIVATE)


[IMAGE]


TYPICAL STREET SECTION N.T.S SHARED USE CAMPUS STREET (PRIVATE)


[IMAGE]


TYPICAL STREET SECTION N.T.S CONTROLLED ACCESS DRIVE (PRIVATE)

[Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3570 Transportation Mitigation Plan.

A.    Applicability. The following Transportation Mitigation Plan applies to all development within the Oregon State University – Cascades Overlay Zone. The Transportation Mitigation Plan is adopted and implemented pursuant to BDC 4.7.600.D(1).

B.    Alternate Transportation Design Standards. Transportation facilities within the Oregon State University – Cascades Overlay Zone shall comply with the standards set forth in BDC 2.7.3560 and Figure 2.7.3560.A.

C.    Development Limitations. In order to ensure consistency with the traffic impact analysis prepared for the Oregon State University – Cascades Master Plan and to mitigate impacts to the City’s transportation system, the following traffic generating uses within the Oregon State University – Cascades Overlay Zone are limited to the thresholds in Table 2.7.3570.D.

D. Transportation Mitigation. The following transportation mitigation measures must be constructed pursuant to the phasing schedule in Table 2.7.3570.D prior to Certification of Occupancy for any building in the phase.

Table 2.7.3570.D  

	Phase	Proposed buildings (with traffic impact)	Proposed buildings (no traffic impact)	Mitigation requirements

	Phase 1A	•    55,000 gsf academic building

•    55,000 gsf of Innovation District facilities	 	•    Non-mountable single lane roundabout at SW Colorado Avenue and SW Columbia Street

•    Portion of a 10-foot-wide sidewalk and curb on south side of Simpson Avenue between the Mt. Washington roundabout east to the existing sidewalk fronting 339 SW Century Drive (portions of the sidewalk may be pushed to future phases as long as the existing path remains functional)

•    Dedication of right-of-way (ROW) along Simpson Avenue to provide 50 feet of ROW from the ROW centerline

•    Westbound left-turn lane at SW Simpson Avenue and OSU-C main entrance

•    Marked pedestrian crossing with refuge island at SW Simpson Avenue and main OSU-C entrance

	Phase 1B	 	•    22,500 gsf student success center (phase one of building)

•    166-bed student residence

	Phase 2	•    55,000 gsf academic building

•    40,000 assembly building

•    142,000 gsf of Innovation District facilities plus middle market housing (72 units)	•    249-bed student residences

•    Central utility plant

•    40,000 gsf recreation facility (phase one of building)	•    Non-mountable single lane roundabout at SW Columbia Street and SW Simpson Avenue (if not already constructed by others)

•    Mountable single lane roundabout at SW Century Drive and OSU-C main entrance

•    Sidewalk connection on the south side of SW Simpson Avenue between SW Columbia Street and the Safeway site at 320 SW Century Drive

•    Taylor Drive from Century Drive to the site

•    Westbound left-turn lane at SW Simpson Avenue and 15th Street

•    Pedestrian crossing at SW Simpson Avenue and SW 15th Street

	Phase

3	•    110,000 gsf of additional academic space

•    52,800 gsf early learning center

•    42,000 gsf of Innovation District facilities plus middle market housing (42 units)	•    18,000 gsf dining facility

•    student residences with 265 additional beds	•    Southbound left-turn lane at SW Mt. Washington Drive and OSU-C entrance

•    Marked pedestrian crossing of SW Mt. Washington Drive at OSU-C access point

•    Marked pedestrian crossing of SW Simpson Avenue at West OSU-C access

•    10-foot sidewalk along east side of Mt. Washington from existing sidewalk at Chandler Ave to the Simpson roundabout

•    Curb along property frontage on Mt. Washington from existing curb south of Metolious intersection to existing curb at Chandler Avenue

•    Dedication of ROW along Mt. Washington to provide 50 feet of ROW from the ROW centerline

•    Remainder of a 10-foot-wide sidewalk on south side of Simpson Avenue if not already constructed

	Phase 4A	•    110,000 gsf of additional academic space

•    55,000 gsf expansion of recreation facility (phase two of building)

•    141,000 gsf of Innovation District facilities plus middle market housing (187 units)	•    35,000 gsf student success center (phase two of building)

•    661-bed student residences	•    Southbound left-turn lane at SW Mt. Washington Drive and SW Metolius Drive

•    Marked pedestrian crossings on SW Mt. Washington Drive at Metolius Drive access point

	Phase 4B	•    45 units of middle market housing

•    30,000 gsf mixed-use partner	•    30,000 gsf of research space

•    345-bed student residences

E.    Modifications to Transportation Mitigation Plan. If the applicant proposes modifications to the OSU – Cascades Master Plan pursuant to BDC 4.5.100(F) which result in an increase of more than 15 percent in the aggregate square footage of the traffic impact producing buildings, or an increase of more than 15 percent in the number of residential units identified in Table 2.7.3570.D, the site plan review application for such building must include a supplemental traffic analysis utilizing the transportation impact analysis prepared for the OSU – Cascades Master Plan to determine whether the increase in building square footage or residential units would require one or more off-site operational improvements identified in Table 2.7.3570.D to be constructed prior to the time identified in Table 2.7.3570.D. If the supplemental traffic analysis determines that the mitigation requirements identified in Table 2.7.3570.D are required prior to the time identified in Table 2.7.3570.D, the applicant shall construct the mitigation requirements at the time identified in the supplemental traffic analysis. [Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3580 Transportation and Parking Demand Management Plan.

A.    Applicability. The following Transportation and Parking Demand Management Plan (TPDM Plan) applies to all development within the Oregon State University – Cascades Overlay Zone.

B.    Trip and Parking Reduction Measures. The TPDM Plan must include the measures set forth in Table 2.7.3580.B, and may include any measures identified in Table 4.8.500, Trip and Parking Reduction Measures, if such additional measures are adopted through site plan approvals, consistent with BDC 4.8.800.

Table 2.7.3580.B 

	Facility Provision Measures	Parking Reduction

	Provide on-site showers and lockers free of charge.	5%

	Provide enclosed bike lockers and/or fenced, covered bike storage areas and/or a designated bike storage area inside a building.	5%

	Ongoing Incentive Measures	 

	Project is located within one-quarter mile of a transit facility and employer participates in CET’s Group Bus Program.	5%

	Provide a bike-share program or free use of bikes on site that is available to all tenants/employees of the site.	5%

C.    Ongoing Participation, Monitoring and Reporting. The applicant is required to commit to ongoing participation in the TPDM plan in its deeds, tenant leases, codes, covenants and restrictions and is subject to ongoing monitoring and tracking of the activities undertaken to implement the approved measures and their results. The applicant shall submit an annual report to the City no later than August 30 of each year, which shall include the following information:

1.    Evidence that the parking reduction measures identified in Table 2.7.3580.B or other parking reduction measures approved pursuant to BDC 4.8.800 were in place or operational during the prior 12-month period.

2.    A description of any voluntary parking reduction measures identified in Table 4.8.500 in place or operational during the prior 12-month period.

3.    The average utilization of parking spaces located in the Campus and Recreation Districts during fall, winter and spring academic terms for the prior 12-month period. For purposes of reporting, counts shall be taken on a weekly basis between the weekday hours of 12:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.

If the average utilization of parking spaces exceeds 93 percent during fall, winter or spring term during any 12-month reporting period, the City shall have the discretion to require the applicant to provide additional parking spaces in the Recreation District concurrent with the next site plan application filed by the applicant. The number of additional parking spaces required during subsequent site plan review must be equal to the number of parking spaces required to reduce the average utilization of parking spaces to 90 percent, based on the most recent reporting year. [Ord. NS-2309, 2018]


2.7.3590 Future Capacity Reservation.

A.    The OSU-Cascades Master Plan reserves infrastructure capacity (sewer, water, and transportation) through and including 2034, for all site plan review applications filed pursuant to the phasing plan through 2034. Site plan review applications submitted after 2034 will be subject to new utility and transportation analyses.

B.    Student Population. The OSU-Cascades campus is designed to accommodate a 5,000 student on-campus population. Concurrent with submission of site plan applications prior to December 31, 2034, for the final two academic buildings, the applicant shall demonstrate that the current on-campus student population, together with the on-campus student population to be supported by the final academic buildings, will not exceed 5,000 students. If the combined student population exceeds 5,000 students, the site plan applications shall include traffic impact, water and sewer analyses accounting for any combined student population in excess of 5,000 students. [Ord. NS-2309, 2018]

Article XVIII. 15th Street School Overlay Zone


2.7.3600 15th Street School Overlay Zone.


2.7.3610 Purpose.

The purpose of the 15th Street School Master Planned Development is to create standards specific to the siting of a high school and middle school on one campus. The standards: identify areas within the overlay district for a high school, middle school, and mixed high school/middle school program; provide special regulations and standards to properly site a large educational facility; and encourage multi-modal connectivity and transit. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3620 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to uses, building types and standards that are specific to the 15th Street School Overlay Zone:

15th Street School Site means the area identified as the “15th Street School Site” on Figure 2.7.3630.A, which includes the High School Site and the Middle School/Blended Program Site.

High School Site means the area identified as the “Phase One – High School” on Figure 2.7.3630.B.

Middle School/Blended Program Site means the area identified as the “Phase Two – Middle School” on Figure 2.7.3630.B. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3630 Applicability.

A.    The 15th Street School Master Planned Development is identified on the City’s official Zoning Map. In addition to the provisions of the underlying zones, the standards and regulations of this section apply to lands within the 15th Street School Master Planned Development as shown on Figure 2.7.3630.A. These provisions modify existing standards of this code by applying requirements or allowing exceptions to general regulations. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of the 15th Street School Master Planned Development and those of the underlying zone or other portions of this code, the provisions of this Master Planned Development control. Where the Master Planned Development contains no specific regulations, those of the underlying zoning district apply.

Figure 2.7.3630.A
[IMAGE]


B.    The phasing of development will be consistent with Figure 2.7.3630.B. Phase One is south of the new collector street and Phase Two is north of the new collector street.

Figure 2.7.3630.B
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3640 Permitted and Conditional Uses.

A.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. The land uses listed in the underlying zoning district as permitted or conditional uses are permitted or conditionally permitted in the 15th Street School Overlay Zone. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3650 Development Standards.

A.    New development must be consistent with the provisions of this title except as provided below. The standards below control over any conflicting standards in this title.

	Standard	15th Street School Overlay Zone

	Lot Area	No requirement

	Lot Width	No requirement

	Lot Depth	No requirement

	Front Setback	Minimum 20 feet (no maximum setback)

	Side and Rear Setback	None, except when abutting a residential use in a City Residential Zone, then the side or rear setback to a building or parking area is 20 feet

	Building Height	50 feet, except gyms, theatres and auditoriums – 70 feet

	Lighting Height*	Football/track lighting – 70 feet

Other field lighting – 50 feet

Parking lot – 25 feet

	Lot Coverage	No maximum requirement

	Block Length and Perimeters	No requirement

	Fences	Perimeter fences – 8 feet

Field fences – 20 feet with netting up to 40 feet

*Lighting must meet the outdoor lighting standards of BDC Chapter 3.5.

B.    Parking areas abutting a residentially designated property must provide a minimum of a 20-foot landscaped/native buffer between the parking area and the abutting property line of the residentially designated property. This buffer area must be left native or appropriately landscaped to provide a buffer for the abutting residential district.

C.    All service, repair, processing, or storage on property adjacent to a Residential District must be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the Residential District by a sight-obscuring fence or wall. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3660 Design Standards.

A.    Design Standards. In addition to the applicable provisions of BDC Chapter 4.2, all buildings constructed within the 15th Street School Overlay Zone must be reviewed for conformance with the standards in subsections (A)(1) through (7) of this section unless otherwise specified in this code.

1.    Building Mass. Building elevations viewed from public streets must be constructed using a combination of architectural features, such as windows, pedestrian entrances, building offsets, projections, recesses, detailing, a change in materials or similar features, to break up large building facades and walls greater than 50 feet in length. A minimum of 15 percent of the horizontal building facade facing a street must contain a variety of architectural features.

2.    Pedestrian-Scale Building Entrances. Recessed entries, canopies, and/or similar features must be used at the entries to buildings in order to create a pedestrian scale.

3.    The predominant building materials should be characteristic of Central Oregon such as brick, wood, native stone and tinted/textured concrete masonry units and/or glass products.

4.    Roofs should be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a building, add visual interest and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. Variations within one architectural style are highly encouraged. Visible rooflines and roofs that project over the exterior wall of a building enough to cast a shadow on the ground are highly encouraged. Architectural methods must be used to conceal flat rooftops. Overhanging eaves, sloped roofs, parapet walls that have variations vertically or horizontally with decorative features, and multiple roof elements are highly encouraged.

5.    Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, art work or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches or other features located in areas accessible to the public may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirements of BDC Chapter 3.2.

6.    Exterior colors must be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors such as neon, highly reflective metallic or fluorescent for the facade and/or roof of the building is prohibited except as approved for building trim.

7.    Outdoor and rooftop mechanical equipment and trash cans/dumpsters must be architecturally screened from view. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning units must have a noise attenuating barrier to protect adjacent Residential Districts from mechanical noise. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3670 Access, Landscaping and Parking.

A.    New development must be consistent with the provisions of BDC Title 3 except as provided below. The standards below control over any conflicting standards in BDC Title 3.

B.    Access Circulation and Lot Design (BDC Chapter 3.1). Notwithstanding BDC 3.1.200(E) and 3.1.400(F)(1) through (5), the access points allowed for the 15th Street School Overlay Zone will be as shown on Figure 2.7.3670.A:

Figure 2.7.3670.A
[IMAGE]


1.    An entrance on 15th Street to the High School Site (no left out).

2.    An entrance to the Middle School/Blended Program Site on 15th Street if a traffic analysis at the time of Middle School Site plan review application shows that the entrance will operate in conformance with applicable City of Bend standards.

3.    A right-in only driveway access on Knott Road into the parking lot.

4.    Driveway accesses from the new collector street to the middle school, blended program, and small parking lot on the west side of the collector street. Driveway access location to be determined at the time of Middle School Site plan review application.

5.    A private local road in the southwest of the High School Site connecting from the new collector street to Knott Road.

6.    Driveway accesses from the private road to the high school bus loop/west parking lot, three entrances to the high school parking lot (right-in only at the southern parking lot if within 200 feet of Knott Road), and to the small parking areas in the western portion of the site, if constructed.

C.    Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls (BDC Chapter 3.2). Notwithstanding BDC 3.2.500, fences around ballfields may be up to 20 feet with netting up to 40 feet in order to contain balls on site.

D.    Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking (BDC Chapter 3.3).

1.    Notwithstanding BDC 3.3.300(C)(1) and (2), parking may be located within the front yard setbacks of the private local street.

2.    Ten percent of the vehicle parking spaces must be reserved for carpool, vanpool or carshare vehicles and located in the most desirable on-site location.

3.    Twice as many covered, secured bike parking racks as required by BDC Chapter 3.3 must be provided. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3680 Special Street Standards.

A.    Figure 2.7.3680.A depicts the street type, tentative street location and alignment within the 15th Street School Overlay District. Figure 2.7.3680.A-1 depicts the associated typical street cross-section. Minor changes to the precise street alignment, applicable street cross-section, and pedestrian/bicycle connectivity at intersections may occur at site plan submittal and will not require modification to the Master Plan approval.

B.    Any City street standard adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permits a lesser street standard to be applied Citywide, may be applied in the 15th Street School Overlay Zone.

C.    Local streets within the 15th Street School Overlay Zone may be public or private streets. All private streets must comply with the standards for private streets found in BDC Chapter 3.4, or as set forth in Figure 2.7.3680.A-1.

Figure 2.7.3680.A
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.3680.A-1
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]
Figure 2.7.3680.A-1

[Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.3690 Transportation Mitigation Plan.

A.    Applicability. The following Transportation Mitigation Plan applies to all development within the 15th Street School Overlay Zone. The Transportation Mitigation Plan is adopted and implemented pursuant to BDC 4.7.600(D)(1).

B.    Alternate Transportation Design Standards. Transportation facilities within the 15th Street School Overlay Zone must comply with the standards set forth in BDC 2.7.3680 and Figures 2.7.3680.A and 2.7.3680.A-1.

C.    Transportation Mitigation. The following transportation mitigation measures must be constructed pursuant to the phasing schedule in Table 2.7.3690 prior to certificate of occupancy for any building in the phase.

Table 2.7.3690  

	Phase	Proposed Development	Mitigation Requirements

	Phase 1	High school, associated fields, athletic buildings, parking and accessory uses in the area identified as Phase 1.	New Collector Street:

1.    Dedicate minimum 70-foot right-of-way and construct new collector street to modified collector standards (see Figures 2.7.3680.A and A-1) from 15th Street to western property boundary.

2a.    Acquire and dedicate minimum 70-foot right-of-way and construct new collector street to modified collector standards from western property boundary to Brosterhous Road. Install advanced warning sign on Brosterhous Road. 

OR

2b.    Dedicate and coordinate with the City to acquire right-of-way and construct single-lane roundabout at Knott Road and Brosterhous Road.

3.    Construct 6-foot sidewalk along the south side and east side of the new collector street and new local street, from 15th Street to Knott Road.

4.    Construct 10-foot-wide multi-use asphalt path along the north side and west side of the new collector street and local street, from 15th Street to Knott Road.

5.    Install painted and signed crosswalk between the High School and Future Middle School/Blended Program Site on the new collector street. 

	 	 	15th Street:

6.    Dedicate approximately 10 feet of right-of-way to achieve 50 feet of right-of-way from the centerline along entire frontage of 15th Street.

7.    Dedicate right-of-way for a future roundabout at 15th Street and the new collector street.

8.    Construct 15th Street along entire frontage to arterial standards (see Figures 2.7.3680.A and A-1).

9.    Dedicate and coordinate with the City to acquire right-of-way and construct a single-lane roundabout at Knott Road and 15th Street.

10.    Construct a striped pedestrian crossing with center refuge island on 15th Street on the south side of Humber Lane.

11.    Restrict to right-in, right-out, left-in access from High School Site to 15th Street, with a “pork chop” to prevent left-out turning movement.

12.    Identify and construct a transit bus stop location to PROWAG standards under a right-of-way permit.

Knott Road:

13.    Dedicate sufficient right-of-way to achieve 50 feet of right-of-way from centerline along entire frontage of Knott Road.

14.    Restrict access to parking lot on Knott Road to right-in only.

15.    Construct a 10-foot multi-use asphalt path along the north side of Knott Road for the length of the frontage.

New Private Local Street:

16.    Construct a local street connecting Knott Road to the new collector street (see Figures 2.7.3680.A and A-1).

	 	 	17.    Provide driveway access from the local road to the high school parking area, restricting to right-in access only if within 200 feet of Knott Road.

Other:

18.    Construct multi-use path parallel to the railroad tracks from the north property line to the new collector street to connect to Alpenglow Park path.

19.    Construct luminaires at all 15th Street, Knott Road intersections and striped pedestrian crossings.

	Phase 1a	Parking west of new collector – may be constructed with Phase 1 or Phase 2.	Install painted and signed crosswalk between the high school and additional parking west of the new collector street.

	Phase 2 

At Phase 2 site plan review, the following transportation mitigation items may be revised if requested by the school district and approved by the City to take into account future developments and traffic impacts from the middle school and blended program. 	Middle school and blended program, fields, athletic buildings, parking and accessory uses.	1.    Construct a connection from the Bend Parks and Recreation parking lot into the middle school parking lot. An entrance across from Humber Lane may be allowed if access restrictions ensure safe traffic flow as determined during transportation analysis during Middle School site plan land use review.

2.    Construct and coordinate with the City to acquire a single-lane roundabout at 15th Street and the new collector street, unless it is already constructed.

3.    Dedicate and coordinate with the City to acquire right-of-way and construct single-lane roundabout at Knott Road and Brosterhous Road, if not completed in Phase 1.

4.    Construct Knott Road frontage to arterial standards.

[Ord. NS-2311, 2018]


2.7.36100 Future Capacity Reservation.

The 15th Street School Master Plan reserves infrastructure capacity (sewer, water, and transportation) through and including December 31, 2027, for all site plan review applications filed through December 31, 2027. Site plan review applications submitted after December 31, 2027, will be subject to new utility and transportation analyses and must demonstrate that adequate capacity exists at the time of such application. [Ord. NS-2311, 2018]

Article XIX. Discovery West Master Planned Development


2.7.3700 Discovery West Master Planned Development.


2.7.3710 Purpose.

The purpose of the Discovery West Master Planned Development is to implement Bend Comprehensive Plan policies regarding the West UGB Expansion Area (Master Plan Area 1 under Chapter 11 of the Bend Comprehensive Plan), and to create overlay development standards for the Residential, Commercial and Employment Districts within the Discovery West Master Plan area. The development standards will:

A.    Provide a variety of housing types and employment opportunities.

B.    Locate higher density housing and employment lands adjacent to collector and arterial streets or public parks.

C.    Create opportunities for live/work townhomes and small-scale businesses in selected locations to foster a mixed-use residential neighborhood.

D.    Promote pedestrian and other multi-modal transportation options.

E.    Ensure compatibility of uses within the development and with the surrounding area.

F.    Create an interconnected system of streets with standards appropriate to the intensity and type of adjacent land use.

G.    Create safe and attractive streetscapes that will meet emergency access requirements and enhance pedestrian and bicycle access and safety.

H.    Implement the relevant policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan:

1.    The central planning concepts are to: provide a limited westward expansion that complements the pattern of complete communities that began with NorthWest Crossing with the existing concentration of schools, parks, commercial and employment lands; and creates a transect from higher densities along Skyline Ranch Road to lower density and open space along the western edge in this area which approaches National Forest land and park open spaces, in order to provide buffers for wildlife and wildfire.

2.    Establishing appropriate development regulations to implement the transect concept; develop measures to make the development and structures fire resistant; and implement RL plan designation densities within this area while providing for a mix of housing types and clustering developed areas to provide for open space preservation.

3.    Provide up to 650 housing units, including a minimum of nine percent single-family attached units (minimum of 54 to 60) and a minimum of 21 percent multifamily and duplex/triplex units (minimum 128 to 142 units). The minimum required units (total and by housing type) is 90 percent of the specified maximum, or 585 total dwelling units. [Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3720 Applicability.

The Discovery West Master Planned Development standards apply to the property identified in Figure 2.7.3720, further identified as West Area Master Plan Area 1 in BCP Chapter 11. The special standards of the Master Plan supersede the standards of the underlying zone. Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone apply. The final determination of the zone or district boundary will be established at the time of subdivision platting and right-of-way dedication. 

Figure 2.7.3720 Discovery West Master Planned Development.
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3730 Districts.

Figure 2.7.3730 Districts.
[IMAGE]


A.    Large Lot Residential District.

1.    Purpose. The purpose of the Large Lot Residential District is to implement the low-density single-family residential lot component of the west side transect as identified in the Bend Comprehensive Plan. The increased setbacks in this district are intended to serve as greater buffers for wildlife passage and greater separation between structures for increased wildfire resilience.

2.    Density. The Large Lot Residential District will accommodate approximately 50 single-family residential lots.

B.    Standard Lot Residential District.

1.    Purpose. The purpose of the Standard Lot Residential District is to allow higher density detached single-family lots on smaller lots than otherwise permitted in the underlying Low-Density Residential Zone (RL) zone to off-set the larger lots and lower density necessary for the Large Lot Residential District which implements the transect concept.

2.    Density. The Standard Lot Residential District is intended to accommodate approximately 400 detached single-family residential lots.

C.    Residential Mixed-Use District.

1.    Purpose. The Residential Mixed-Use District is applied in locations adjacent to collector or arterial streets, Commercial Limited or Mixed Employment zones, or public parks to satisfy BCP Policy by allowing a variety of housing types, higher density residential uses, and live/work housing to form the highest density residential component of the transect along with some limited small-scale commercial opportunities in the live/work townhomes.

2.    Density. The Residential Mixed-Use District will accommodate at least 54 to 60 attached single-family units and at least 128 to 142 multifamily, duplex, or triplex residential units as required by BCP Policy 11-104.

D.    Commercial/Mixed Employment District.

1.    Purpose and Applicability. The Commercial/Mixed Employment District applies to all land zoned Commercial Limited and Mixed Employment within the Discovery West Master Planned Development. The purpose of this district is to establish smaller scale commercial and employment uses than might otherwise be found in the CL and ME zones by limiting building height on lots abutting Skyliners Road. The Commercial/Mixed Employment District will also limit direct vehicular access to Skyliners Road.

E.    Definitions. The following definitions apply to uses, building types and standards that are specific to the Discovery West Master Planned Development:

Attached single-family as used in Bend Comprehensive Plan Policy 11-104, and as applicable to the Discovery West Master Planned Development, refers to townhomes, live-work townhomes, and any type of cluster housing development (both mews and cottages).

Cluster housing development refers to detached single-family cottages or attached mews houses in a cluster around a central shared open space. Cottages or mews houses must be located on platted lots or as condominium units.

Cottage means a detached dwelling unit in a cluster housing development.

Live/work townhome means a residential townhome in which a business may be operated on the ground floor. A live/work dwelling is allowed instead of, or in addition to, home business as defined by this code.

Mews house means an attached dwelling unit in a cluster housing development, with common walls on one or both side lot lines.

Transect as used herein refers to a gradient from higher densities along Skyline Ranch Road to lower density and open space along the western edge in this area which approaches National Forest land and park open spaces, in order to provide buffers for wildlife and wildfire, pursuant to BCP Policy 11- 101. [Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3740 Review Procedures.

The following review procedures are applicable to uses within the Discovery West Master Planned Development:

A.    Design Review. Townhomes, live/work townhomes, cluster housing, duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes located on lots specifically approved as such, are subject only to design review through the Discovery West Architectural and Landscape Review Committee.

B.    Site Plan/Design Review. Multifamily development greater than four units and buildings in the Commercial/Mixed Employment District will not be subject to the provisions of BDC 4.2.600, Design Review, but will be subject to BDC 4.2.500, Site Plan Review, and design review through the Discovery West Architectural an Landscape Review Committee.

C.    Conditional Use Permit. Conditionally permitted uses require a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.4. [Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3750 Large Lot Residential District.

A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    Detached single-family dwelling.

2.    Accessory uses and structures.

3.    Accessory dwelling unit.

4.    Family childcare home (16 or fewer children).

5.    Neighborhood, community, and regional parks.

6.    Home business (Class A, Class B) subject to the provisions of BDC 3.6.200(N).

7.    Duplexes and triplexes on lots specifically designated for development as such on an approved subdivision tentative plan.

B.    Height Standards. The height standards of the RL Zone apply.

C.    Lot Area and Dimensions. The lot area and dimensions of the RL Zone apply.

D.    Lot Coverage. The lot coverage standards of the RL Zone apply.

E.    Setbacks. The setbacks of the RL Zone apply, with exception that a 20-foot side yard setback is required as a wildfire protection measure. [Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3760 Standard Lot Residential District.

A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    Detached single-family dwelling.

2.    Accessory uses and structures.

3.    Accessory dwelling unit.

4.    Family childcare home (16 or fewer children).

5.    Neighborhood, community, and regional parks.

6.    Home business (Class A, Class B) subject to the provisions of BDC 3.6.200(N).

7.    Duplexes and triplexes on lots specifically designated for development as such on an approved subdivision tentative plan.

B.    Height Standards. The height standards of the RS Zone apply.

C.    Lot Area and Dimensions. The lot area and dimensions of the RS Zone apply.

D.    Lot Coverage. The lot coverage standards of the RS Zone apply.

E.    Setbacks. The setbacks of the RS Zone apply, with exception of the following special side setbacks:

Table 2.7.3760 Side Setbacks in the Standard Lot Residential District 

	Setback	Lot Width (frontage)

Less than 65 feet	Lot Width (frontage)

65 feet or greater

	Side	7.5 feet	10 feet

[Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3770 Residential Mixed-Use District.

A.    Permitted Uses.

1.    All uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the Standard Lot Residential District.

2.    Multifamily housing.

3.    Attached single-family/townhome.

4.    Live/work townhome subject to the provisions of this district.

5.    Cluster housing development.

B.    Setbacks. The setbacks of the RM Zone apply unless otherwise specified in the special use standards below (e.g., zero setback for common walls of townhome or mews houses).

C.    Height Standards. The following height standards apply in the Residential Mixed-Use District:

Table 2.7.3770 Height Standards in the Residential Mixed-Use District 

	Use	Building Height

	Single-family detached	30 feet

	Townhome, live-work townhome, duplex, triplex	35 feet

	Multifamily housing	45 feet

	Cluster housing – Cottage	25 feet

	Cluster housing – Mews	35 feet

D.    Lot Area and Dimensions. Except as otherwise specified in this section, the standards of the RM Zone apply.

E.    Lot Coverage. The lot coverage standards of the RM Zone apply to detached single-family dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes. There is no lot coverage limitation for other uses in the Residential Mixed-Use District.

F.    Platting Lots for Specific Uses. The following standards apply for the Residential Mixed-Use District:

1.    The tentative plan application for a subdivision phase in the Residential Mixed-Use District must specify the housing type and a minimum and maximum number of residential units intended for each lot.

2.    A deed restriction must be recorded with each lot in the RMUD intended for duplex, triplex, multifamily or attached single-family housing specifying a minimum and maximum range of housing units to ensure BCP Policy 11-104 is satisfied as to the type and total number of housing units specified for the West UGB Expansion Area Master Plan Area 1.

G.    Special Standards for Live/Work Townhomes.

1.    The location of lots where live/work dwellings may be sited must be specified in the tentative plan application for that development phase.

2.    The commercial or office portion of the building may not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the entire building, excluding any garage.

3.    Vehicle and bicycle parking must be in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. No more than four off-street parking spaces must be provided for each live/work townhome.

4.    No outside storage of materials or goods related to the work occupation or business is permitted.

5.    If the business is open to the public, public access must be through the work area front door and the business may not be open to clients or the public before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.

6.    The following commercial uses are allowed in live/work townhomes:

a.    Offices and clinics;

b.    Childcare facility (13 or more children);

c.    Food and beverage services less than 2,000 square feet (with or without alcohol) excluding automobile-dependent and automobile-oriented, drive-in, and drive-through uses;

d.    Laundromats and dry cleaners;

e.    Retail goods and services;

f.    Personal services (e.g., barber shops, salons, similar uses);

g.    Repair services, conducted entirely within building; excluding vehicle repair, small engine repair and similar services;

h.    Home business (Class A, B and C) subject to the provisions of BDC 3.6.200(N).

H.    Special Standards for Cluster Housing Developments. Cluster housing development provides an alternative housing type to satisfy the attached single-family housing requirement of BCP Policy. The cluster housing development type supports the following principles:

•    The development standards for cottage and mews houses fosters the creation of a small community within the larger overall Discovery West Master Planned Development.

•     The site is designed with a coherent concept in mind, including shared functional open space, off-street parking areas, access within the site and from the site, and consistent landscaping;

•     A cluster housing development must have a homeowners’ association for the ownership and management of shared open space and any common parking areas.

1.    General Development Requirements.

a.    There is no minimum lot size for cluster housing developments;

b.    Cottages or mews houses must be located on platted lots or as units in a condominium development and may share use of common facilities such as, but not limited to, a party room, tool shed, garden, workshop and parking areas;

c.    New lots created as a part of a cluster housing development within Discovery West are not required to have frontage on either a public or private street;

d.    Setbacks. A minimum setback of 10 feet and a maximum of 20 feet is required from any property line abutting a street. A minimum setback of five feet is required abutting all other outer boundaries of the cluster housing development;

e.    Interior Separation. There must be a minimum separation of 10 feet between all buildings with the exception of the common wall of attached mews houses;

f.    Accessory structures, garages or carports must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from property lines fronting a public street;

g.    Rear yard setbacks must be a minimum of five feet to the outer boundary of the cluster housing development.

2.    Size Limitations.

a.    The total floor area of each cottage unit may not exceed 1,200 square feet, and the total floor area for each mews dwelling unit may not exceed 1,600 square feet. Attached garages are not included in the calculation of total floor area.

b.    Cottage and mews areas that do not count toward the total floor area calculation are:

i.    Architectural projections, such as bay windows or fireplaces;

ii.    Attached roofed porches;

iii.    Detached garages or carports;

iv.    Spaces with a ceiling height of six feet or less measured to the exterior walls, such as in a second-floor area under the slope of the roof, or storage space under the main floor.

c.    The maximum main floor area for cottages is 1,000 square feet. For the purposes of this calculation, the area of interior stairway may be allocated between floors served.

d.    Cottages must have a roofed porch at least 80 square feet in size with a minimum dimension of six feet on any side.

3.    Required Open Space.

a.    Shared Open Space.

i.    Shared open space must provide a centrally located, focal area for the cluster housing development.

ii.    Shared open space must total a minimum of 500 square feet per cottage or mews lot when all shared open space areas are combined.

iii.    Shared open space must abut at least 50 percent of the cottage or mews lots.

iv.    Each cottage or mews lot must be connected to the shared open space by a pedestrian pathway.

v.    Each cottage or mews lot must be within 75 feet of shared open space.

vi.    Common parking areas are not counted in the shared open space area requirements.

b.    Private Open Space.

i.    Each unit must have a minimum of 300 square feet of private, contiguous, usable open space with no dimension less than 10 feet adjacent to each dwelling unit, for the exclusive use of the cottage or mews resident.

ii.    The private open space must be located on slopes of less than 10 percent.

4.    Parking.

a.    A minimum of one parking space and a maximum of two parking spaces are required for each cottage or mews dwelling unit.

b.    A parking area is a location for two or more contiguous vehicle spaces not within a garage or carport. Any common parking area must be located in the cluster housing development. [Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3780 Commercial/Mixed Employment District.

A.    Development Standards. The development standards of the underlying zone apply within the Commercial/Mixed Employment District, with the exception of the additional limitations below for lots with frontage on Skyliners Road.

1.    Height Limitation. For lots that abut Skyliners Road, the maximum building height is 35 feet.

2.    Site Access. No vehicular access driveways are allowed onto Skyliners Road. [Ord. NS-2338, 2019]


2.7.3790 Special Street Standards.

Figure 2.7.3790.A depicts the street type, tentative street location and alignment in the Discovery West Master Planned Development. Table 2.7.3790 defines the standards to correspond to the street type shown in Figure 2.7.3790.A. The precise street alignment will be established through the approval of tentative subdivision plans. These street types and standards will be applied to the Discovery West Master Planned Development as illustrated except when an alternate standard is permitted under this section or through the tentative plan approval process.

Any City street standard adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permits a lesser street standard, may be applied to the Discovery West Master Planned Development during the subdivision review process.

Figure 2.7.3790.A Discovery West Street and Circulation Plan
[IMAGE]


Table 2.7.3790 Discovery West Street Types and Standards with Cross Sections
[IMAGE]
 

*Performance standards for Local Residential Street “B”

1.    Average daily traffic volume on do not exceed 300 ADT.

2.    The street is connected to a grid street pattern at both block ends.

3.    Blocks must have dedicated public alley access constructed to Discovery West standards.

4.    “No Parking” zones must be established 55 feet from the centerline of intersecting local streets.

5.    For block lengths exceeding 300 feet, “No Parking” zones must be established on both sides of the street spaced no greater than 250 feet apart. Each zone must be a minimum of 30 feet in length.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 2.7.3790.B Discovery West Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation Plan
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2338, 2019]

Article XX. Shevlin West Master Planned Development


2.7.3800 Shevlin West Master Planned Development.


2.7.3810 Purpose. Revised 2/20

A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Shevlin West Master Planned Development is to implement the Bend Comprehensive Plan policies for the West UGB Expansion Area (Master Plan Area 4 under Chapter 11 of the Bend Comprehensive Plan), and to create overlay development standards for the area. The development standards will implement the following relevant policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan:

•    Establish appropriate development regulations to implement the transect concept; develop measures to make the development and structures fire resistant; and implement RL plan designation densities for the master plan area within this area, while also providing open space and required infrastructure.

•    Provide up to 116 housing units, in accordance with policy 11-104 for Master Plan Area 4. [Ord. NS-2357, 2019]


2.7.3820 Applicability. Revised 2/20

The Shevlin West Master Planned Development standards apply to the property identified in Figure 2.7.3820.A, generally identified as the West Area Master Plan Area 4 in Chapter 11 of the Bend Comprehensive Plan. The special development standards of the Master Plan supersede the standards of the underlying zone. Where no special development standards are provided, the applicable standards of the underlying zone apply. The final determination of the zone or district boundary will be established at the time of subdivision platting and right-of-way dedication.

Figure 2.7.3820.A Master Plan Area 4 (Shevlin West)
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2357, 2019]


2.7.3830 Permitted and Conditional Uses. Revised 2/20

A.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. The land uses listed in the underlying zoning district as permitted or conditional uses are permitted or conditionally permitted in Shevlin West Master Planned Development. [Ord. NS-2357, 2019]


2.7.3890 Special Development Standards. Revised 2/20

A.    Permitted Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet.

B.    Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width is 70 feet.

C.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage is 42 percent.

D.    Block Lengths. Block length and perimeters are generally depicted on Figure 2.7.3890.B. The block length and perimeter standards of BDC 3.1.200 are not applicable in the Shevlin West Master Planned Development.

Figure 2.7.3890.B Shevlin West Block Lengths
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2357, 2019]

Article XXI. Petrosa Master Planned Development


2.7.3900 Petrosa Master Planned Development.


2.7.3910 Purpose. Revised 4/20

The purpose of the Petrosa Master Planned Development is to implement the policies in Chapter 11, Growth Management, of the Bend Comprehensive Plan (BCP) regarding the Northeast Edge (Butler Market Village) Expansion Area, and to create a new, creative, innovative, and complete community that sets the stage for future urban growth within the Expansion Area. The development standards will:

A.    Create the opportunity for a complete community, with housing in close proximity to employment and commercial services that are scaled to serve the frequent needs of neighborhood and area residents.

B.    Provide a mix of housing types for owners and renters of multiple lifestyles and income levels – including workforce housing – with higher density abutting collector or arterial streets, commercial lands, and/or open space.

C.    Implement BCP Policy 11-59 by ensuring capacity for a minimum of 1,100 housing units within the Expansion Area, including at least 110 single-family attached housing units and at least 440 multifamily and duplex/triplex housing units.

D.    Establish an interconnected street system consistent with the Transportation System Plan with cross-sections appropriate to the characteristics of adjacent land uses, and opportunities for connections to adjacent land both inside and outside the UGB.

E.    Create safe, attractive, and efficient pedestrian routes and other multi-modal transportation options.

F.    Provide a site for the construction of a public elementary school.

G.    Preserve open space for construction and maintenance of a public park and trail system, multiple pocket parks, and other community amenities.

H.    Establish a commercial center abutting higher-order streets that provides employment, goods, and services to the new community and existing neighborhoods.

I.    Incentivize the creation of plazas, courtyards, and other community amenities in the commercial center that form a distinct urban character and promote social interactions among residents and visitors. [Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3920 Applicability. Revised 4/20

The Petrosa Master Planned Development standards apply to the property identified in Figure 2.7.3920, a portion of the Northeast Edge (Butler Market Village) Expansion Area in BCP Chapter 11. The special standards of the Master Plan supersede the standards of the underlying zone. The standards in the underlying zone only apply where referenced or where no special standards exist. The final determination of the zone or district boundary will be established at the time of subdivision platting and right-of-way dedication.

Figure 2.7.3920
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3930 Definitions. Revised 4/20

A.    Fourplex means a type of housing with four attached dwelling units on one lot or parcel. For permitting purposes, units may be attached vertically or horizontally.

B.    Live/work townhome means a residential townhome in which a business may be operated.

C.    Lot line, front means the property line abutting a street or open space tract.

1.    Primary front lot line means the shortest front lot line abutting a street or open space. If there is more than one such lot line of equal length, then the applicant or property owner must choose which lot line is to be the primary front lot line.

2.    Secondary front lot line means all other front lot lines except the primary front lot line. [Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3940 Review Procedures. Revised 4/20

The following review procedures are applicable to uses and structures within the Petrosa Master Planned Development:

A.    Design Review. Single-family dwellings, live/work townhomes, duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes are subject only to design review through the Petrosa Architectural Review Committee and BDC 4.2.400, Minimum Development Standards. BDC 4.2.500, Site Plan Review, and BDC 4.2.600, Design Review, do not apply. These uses that meet the standards of BDC 4.2.400(3) are exempt from BDC 4.2.400, Minimum Development Standards Review.

B.    Site Plan/Design Review. Multifamily developments with five or more units and buildings in the Commercial District are subject only to design review through the Petrosa Architectural Review Committee and BDC 4.2.500, Site Plan Review. BDC 2.2.600, Commercial Design Review, and BDC 4.2.600, Design Review, do not apply. [Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3950 Residential Zoning Districts. Revised 4/20

A.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.7.3950 are permitted in the Residential Districts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.7.3950, land uses that are incidental and subordinate to a permitted use, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.7.3950 may be permitted.

Table 2.7.3950 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	RS	RM	RH

	Residential

	Single-Family Detached Housing	P	P	N

	*Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)	P	P	P

	*Attached Single-Family Townhomes	P	P	P

	Live/Work Townhomes	N	N	P

	Duplexes, Triplexes, Fourplexes	P	P	P

	**Cottage Developments	P	P	P

	Residential Care Home (5 or fewer residents)	P	P	P

	Adult Day Care	P	P	P

	*Residential Care Facility (6 or more residents)	N	P	P

	Family Childcare Home (16 or fewer children)	P	P	P

	Multifamily Residential (5 or more units)	N	P	P

	Mixed-Use Residential Development, including food and beverage services, retail goods and services, and personal services	N	N	P

	*Home Business (Class A/Class B)	P	P	P

	*Accessory Uses And Structures	P	P	P

	*Public and Institutional

	Parks	P	P	P

	Recreational Facilities	P	P	P

	***Schools	P	P	P

	Miscellaneous Uses

	*Short-Term Rental	P	P	P

*    Subject to special standards as described in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

**    Subject to BDC 4.5.500.

***    Schools are permitted in the RS, RM, and RH Districts, subject to the provisions of BDC 2.6.300, Public Facilities Zoning District (PF).

B.    Setbacks.

	 	Primary Front	Secondary Front	Rear*	Side

	RS, RM, and RH	10 ft.*	8 ft.*	5 ft.**/***	4 ft.**, except 8 ft. when side abuts an alley

*    Garages and/or carports must maintain a minimum front setback of 20 feet.

**    When multifamily buildings containing five or more units or nonresidential uses abut a detached single-family dwelling on land designated RS, any side or rear setback abutting the RS land must increase one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 20 feet. Where a fractional number results, the number may be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

***    Garages and/or carports that access an alley must have a driveway with a minimum length of 18 feet.

1.    Setback Exceptions.

a.    Residential compatibility standards do not apply.

b.    Attached Single-Family (Townhomes). Interior side setbacks are zero feet.

c.    Architectural Features. The following architectural features are allowed to encroach into the front, side and rear setbacks by no more than two feet provided a minimum setback of three feet is provided from the property line: eaves, chimneys including fireplace enclosures and chimney chases, bay windows up to eight feet in width, window wells, and similar architectural features.

d.    Front Setback Encroachments. The following may encroach into the front setback:

i.    An unenclosed covered or uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches may be set back a minimum of six feet from the front property line, as long as it does not encroach into any easement. No portion of the structure may encroach closer than six feet to the front property line including the architectural features in subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section.

ii.    As shown in Figure 2.1.300, side entry garages that access a street must have a driveway with a minimum length of 20 feet from the front and side property lines.

iii.    Stairs, ramps and landings that are not roofed or enclosed above or below the steps may be in the front setback when they follow the grade.

e.    Side and Rear Setback Encroachments. The following may encroach into side and rear setbacks:

i.    An uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop located above finished grade with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches must be set back a minimum of 18 inches from the side and rear property lines, as long as it does not encroach into an easement.

ii.    Uncovered patios at finished grade are exempt from setbacks as long as it does not encroach into an easement.

C.    Floor area ratio does not apply to any uses in the residential zones.

D.    Lot Area and Dimensions. Lot areas and lot dimension standards for residential uses are listed in the following table. For other uses permitted in each zone, the lot area and dimensions are subject to the type of residential structure being occupied. For lot area and dimensions exceptions for affordable housing, see BDC 3.6.200(C).

Lot Areas and Dimensions in Petrosa Residential Districts by Housing Type and Zone 

	Residential Use	Zone	Lot Area	Lot Width/Depth

	Single-Family Detached Housing	RS	Minimum area: 2,800 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 30 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 75 ft.

	RM	Minimum area: 2,500 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 30 ft. at the front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RH	Not applicable	Not applicable

	Duplexes, Triplexes, and Fourplexes	RS	Minimum areas –

Duplex: 5,000 sq. ft.

Triplex: 7,500 sq. ft.

Fourplex: 10,000 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 40 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM	None	Minimum width: 30 ft. at the front property line

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RH	None

	Single-Family Attached Housing (Townhomes)	RS	Minimum area: 2,000 sq. ft. for each unit	Minimum width: 20 ft. at front property line for interior townhome lots and 24 ft. at front property line for exterior townhome lots

Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM	Minimum area: 1,600 sq. ft. for each unit

	RH	Minimum area: 1,200 sq. ft. for each unit

	Multifamily Housing (5+ Units)	RS	Not applicable	Minimum width: 30 ft. at front property line Minimum lot depth: 50 ft.

	RM, RH	None

1.    Exceptions.

a.    Bulb of a cul-de-sac or knuckle corner minimum width: 30 ft. at the front property line;

b.    Corner lots or lots where a side lot line abut an alley must be at least four feet more in width than the minimum lot width required in the zone.

c.    Frontage on a public street, private street, or open space tract is required. Lots fronting open space tracts must take access from a rear alley, and the property line fronting open space must be considered a front property line.

d.    Other exceptions permitted in the underlying residential district are also permitted.

E.    Residential Density. The Petrosa Master Planned Development implements BCP Policy 11-59 by ensuring capacity for a minimum of 1,100 housing units within the Northeast Edge Expansion Area and including at least 110 single-family attached housing units and at least 440 multifamily and duplex/triplex housing units within the Master Plan boundary itself. Therefore, minimum and maximum densities for each zone do not apply.

F.    Maximum Lot Coverage. The following maximum lot coverage standards apply to all development within the residential districts as follows:

Residential Lot Coverage 

	Residential Zone	Lot Coverage

	Standard Density Residential (RS)	50% for lots with 2+ story homes

55% for lots with single-story homes

	Medium Density Residential (RM)	50% for lots with 2+ story homes

55% for lots with single-story homes

60% for lots with attached single-family townhomes, duplexes, triplexes and multifamily

	High Density Residential (RH)	None

G.    Building Height. The following building heights apply to all development within the Residential District:

1.    Buildings within the RS District may be no more than 30 feet in height.

2.    Buildings within the RM District may be no more than 45 feet in height, except single-family homes may be no more than 35 feet in height.

3.    Buildings within the RH District may be no more than 55 feet in height.

H.    Architectural Design Standards. All buildings are subject only to the architectural and/or design standards of the Petrosa Architectural Review Committee.

I.    Multifamily Residential Districts (RM, RH). In addition to the required setbacks, a minimum of 10 percent of the site area must be designated and permanently reserved as usable common open space in multiple-family developments of 20 dwelling units or more. The minimum required usable common open space must be reduced to five percent of site area when the development is located within one-quarter mile walking distance of a public park along an accessible, maintained trail or sidewalk.

J.    Additional Standards for Live/Work Townhomes.

1.    The commercial or office portion of the building may not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the entire building, excluding any garage.

2.    Vehicle and bicycle parking must be in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. No more than four off-street parking spaces are required for each live/work townhome.

3.    If the business is open to the public, public access must be through the commercial area front door and the business may not be open to clients or the public before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.

4.    The following commercial uses are allowed in live/work townhomes:

a.    Offices and clinics;

b.    Child care facility (13 or more children);

c.    Retail goods and services;

d.    Personal services (e.g., barber shops, salons, similar uses);

e.    Repair services, conducted entirely within building; excluding vehicle repair, small engine repair and similar services;

f.    Home business (Class A and B) subject to the provisions of BDC 3.6.200(N).

K.    Additional Standards for Duplexes, Triplexes and Fourplexes. Duplex and triplex development must comply with the following standards, which replace the standards in BDC 3.6.200(H):

1.    Driveway approaches must comply with the following standards:

a.    The total width of all driveway approaches must not exceed 32 feet per frontage. For lots or parcels with more than one frontage, see subsection (K)(1)(c) of this section.

b.    Driveway approaches may be separated when located on a local street. If approaches are separated, they must be separated by a minimum of seven feet.

c.    In addition, lots or parcels with more than one frontage must comply with the following:

i.    Lots or parcels must access the street with the lowest classification.

ii.    Lots or parcels with frontages only on collectors and/or arterial streets may have one driveway approach. The City Engineer will determine which frontage may have one driveway approach when lots or parcels only have frontages on collector streets or only on arterial streets.

iii.    Lots or parcels with frontages only on local streets must comply with the following:

(A)    Duplexes may have two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage or one maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach per frontage.

(B)    Triplexes may have three driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage or two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage and one maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach on one other frontage.

(C)    Fourplexes may have four driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage or two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage and one maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach on one other frontage.

d.    Clear vision standards do not apply between driveway approaches for duplexes and triplexes on local streets. All other standards in BDC 3.1.500, Clear Vision Areas, apply.

e.    For lots or parcels abutting an alley, access may be required to be taken from the alley in accordance with BDC 3.1.400(F)(3).

L.    Additional Standards for Residential Mixed-Use Development.

1.    Automobile-dependent and automobile-oriented, drive-in, and drive-through uses are not permitted.

2.    Building Setbacks. All new mixed-use buildings must have a maximum front yard building setback of 20 feet, notwithstanding the underlying zone requirements.

3.    Hours of Operation. Commercial uses must not exceed the following hours of operation: 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

4.    Parking. Off-street parking is optional for commercial uses located where on-street parking is available adjacent to the mixed-use site, except for food and beverage service uses. Parking for food and beverage service uses is subject to the standards in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. Off-street parking for commercial uses is subject to the following standards:

a.    Off-street parking, driveways and other vehicular use and circulation areas must not be placed between a building and the street.

b.    Where off-street parking is adjacent to a street, the parking and maneuvering area must be separated from the right-of-way by a three-foot minimum landscape planter.

c.    In no instance may there be more than six off-street parking spaces per site.

M.    Other Design Standards.

1.    On-site surface water drainage may be addressed in the following ways. Alternatives may be approved by the City Engineer:

a.    Roof drainage originating from residential properties may be conveyed to a public street and/or public storm drain collection and disposal system by subsurface piping, or curb weepholes.

b.    Roof and surface drainage originating from residential properties may be conveyed to a private storm drain collection and disposal system located in a private tract or easement. The City may allow for private drainage systems in the public right-of-way if deemed appropriate by the City and maintenance agreements are executed between the homeowners association and the City.

c.    Roof drainage originating from residential properties may be commingled with drainage originating from public streets, private streets, and/or alleys and conveyed to a non-UIC system located within a private tract to be owned by a homeowners association with a maintenance agreement between the homeowners association and the City outlining operational and maintenance responsibilities. The City may allow for commingled drainage to be conveyed to a non-UIC system located in the public right-of-way if deemed appropriate by the City and maintenance agreements are executed between the homeowners association and the City.

d.    Private drainage facilities must be contained within the same or previous subdivision phase, or a stormwater easement must be provided for the stormwater facilities.

e.    Stormwater easements must be provided for public drainage facilities located on private property.

f.    An owners association must be responsible for installing and maintaining any required landscaping in private facilities located in a private tract.

g.    A stormwater maintenance agreement must be signed with the City prior to final plat of the subdivision phase.

2.    Outdoor lighting must be subject only to the standards of, and review by, the Petrosa Architectural Review Committee. [Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3960 Commercial General. Revised 4/20

A.    Where no special standards are provided, the applicable standards of the CG Zone apply.

B.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.7.3960 are permitted in the Commercial General District, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.7.3960, land uses that are incidental and subordinate to a permitted use, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.7.3960 may be permitted.

Table 2.7.3960 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Land Use	CG

	*Residential Use as Part of a Mixed-Use Development	P

	Live/Work Townhomes	P

	Retail Sales and Service	P

	Restaurants/Food and Beverage Services	P

	Offices and Clinics	P

	Production Office	P

	Convention Center/Meeting Rooms	P

	Lodging (e.g., hotels, motels, *bed and breakfast inns, *short-term rentals, hostels)	P

	Hospitals	P

	Commercial and Public Parking	P

	Commercial Storage	P

	Entertainment and Recreation	P

	Day Care	P

	Redemption Center	P

	Wholesale Sales (more than 75% of sales are wholesale)	P

	Veterinary Clinic (small animal)	P

	*Mixed-Use Commercial (residential with commercial/civic/industrial)

Mixed-use developments must be subject to the use limitations prescribed for the respective individual uses	P

	Government (point of service, branch service)	P

	Parks and Open Space	P

	Schools	P

	Institution of Higher Education	P

	*Clubs and Places of Worship	P

	*Utilities (above ground)	P

	*Manufacturing and Production less than 5,000 sq. ft. with retail outlet	P

	Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities	See BDC Ch. 3.7

*    Subject to special standards as described in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

C.    Height Bonus. Inclusion of the features listed below allow additional building height as an incentive for certain uses or site design that provide a public or community benefit. For each feature incorporated into a project, in addition to any such features otherwise required, a 10-foot height bonus will be granted. This height bonus is in addition to existing exceptions for inclusion of residential uses in BDC 2.2.400(B) and incentives for affordable housing in BDC 3.6.200(C). Height bonuses, exceptions, and other incentives can be combined so long as the building height does not exceed 75 feet.

1.    Usable Open Space or Plaza. For each square foot of open space or plaza provided for public use, three square feet of building footprint is eligible for a 10-foot height bonus. For example, establishing a 2,000-square-foot plaza would allow 10 additional feet of height over 6,000 square feet of floor area or 20 additional feet over 3,000 square feet of floor area. To qualify for this bonus, the following requirements must be met:

a.    The open space or plaza must be at least 2,000 square feet in area and located in the CG Zone within the Petrosa Master Planned Development.

b.    Plazas must be at least 10 feet in width with a building facade on at least one side.

c.    No more than 33 percent of the area of any plaza may include outdoor seating, displays, or other uses associated with abutting businesses.

d.    Open space and plazas must provide portable or permanent seating – in addition to any associated with abutting businesses – such as cafe tables, benches, movable chairs, or edges along landscape planters or other design elements.

e.    Open spaces and plazas must be open to the public from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., at a minimum, and hours must be indicated on signage permitted under BC Chapter 9.50.

2.    Pedestrian Cover. Canopy covering at least 50 percent of the linear footage of abutting public sidewalk or other pedestrian facilities. The canopy must be a permanent architectural element projecting out from the building over a pedestrian facility. The canopy must project out from the building at least five feet. Canopy coverage of at least 80 percent grants a 20-foot height bonus.

D.    Additional Standards for Live/Work Townhomes. In the CG Zone, live/work townhomes must be located within 200 feet of an RH zone and meet the requirements in BDC 2.7.3950(J). [Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3970 Special Street Standards. Revised 4/20

A.    Figure 2.7.3970 depicts the street type, tentative street location and alignment in the Petrosa Master Planned Development and the standards to correspond to each street type. The precise street alignment will be established through the approval of tentative subdivision plans. The Petrosa Master Planned Development Street Type Plan and the Petrosa Master Planned Development Street Standards, Figure 2.7.3970, will be applied to the Petrosa Master Planned Development as illustrated except when an alternate standard is permitted under this section or through the tentative plan approval process.

B.    Any City street standard adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permits a lesser street standard, may be applied to the Petrosa Master Planned Development during the subdivision review process.

Figure 2.7.3970 Petrosa Street Type Plan and Standards
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3980 Transportation Mitigation Plan. Revised 4/20

A.    Applicability. The following Transportation Mitigation Plan applies to all development within the Petrosa Master Planned District. The Transportation Mitigation Plan is adopted and implemented pursuant to BDC 4.7.600(D)(1).

B.    Alternate Transportation Design Standards. Transportation facilities within the Petrosa Master Planned District must comply with the standards set forth in BDC 2.7.3970 and Figure 2.7.3970.

C.    Transportation Mitigation. The following transportation mitigation measures must be constructed pursuant to the deadlines set forth in Table 2.7.3980 below.



Table 2.7.3980  

	Mitigation Requirements	Trigger

	Construct frontage improvements and dedicate right-of-way with each RS and RM residential phase, RH developments and commercial developments.	Prior to final plat of the RS and RM residential phases and prior to occupancy of the first building of the RH and commercial developments.

	If RH-1 develops prior to Residential Phase 6, the future Yeoman Road frontage improvements along RH-1 must be bonded for and constructed with Residential Phase 6.

	Construct a single-lane roundabout at the intersection of Butler Market Road and Deschutes Market Road.	Prior to final plat of 1st residential phase or occupancy of 1st building of RH developments or commercial developments, whichever comes first.

	Dedicated right-of-way for the roundabout at the intersection of Butler Market and Eagle Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 1.

	Realign Eagle Road with the southern approach. Construct a westbound left-turn lane bay on Butler Market Road and install stop sign control on north-south approaches, if a roundabout is not previously constructed.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 1.

	Coordinate with BPRD and construct a multi-use pathway along the NUID canal frontage of each abutting phase.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 1, 3, 4 and 6.

	Construct an enhanced pedestrian crossing with a raised median south of the southernmost proposed driveway location along Deschutes Market Road.	Prior to occupancy of the first building of RH-1.

	Dedicate right-of-way for a future roundabout at the Deschutes Market Road and Yeoman Road intersection.

	Provide a slope easement along Yeoman Road for the future Yeoman extension bridge.

	Construct a secondary fire access to Deschutes Market Road.	Prior to final plat of a Residential Phase, if a Residential Phase precedes the commercial site.

	Construct a single-lane roundabout at the intersection of Butler Market Road and Eagle Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 2 or prior to the 325th northern PM peak hour trip, whichever comes first.

	Establish an enhanced pedestrian crossing for the future school and trail system across Eagle Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 4.

	Install left-turn lane on Butler Market Road at new intersection and extend eastward the multi-use pathway on Petrosa Avenue.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 5.

	Extend Yeoman Road, including a multi-use pathway, from Deschutes Market Road to Eagle Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 6 and if not already complete.

	Accommodate a multi-use trail crossing the southern Deschutes Market Road / Yeoman Road roundabout approach.

	Construct Eagle Road to Yeoman Road.

	Provide right-of-way for a future roundabout at the Eagle Road and Yeoman Road intersection.

	Construct the NUID Canal bridge crossing, east of Deschutes Market Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 6 or Phase 7 or prior to occupancy of the school, whichever occurs first.

	Construct a single-lane roundabout at the intersection of Deschutes Market Road and Yeoman Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 6 or Phase 7, or prior to occupancy of the school or prior to the 335th Phased (Phases 1 – 8) housing unit, whichever comes first.

	Construct Yeoman Road from Deschutes Market Road to and through the school frontage.	Prior to occupancy of the school if prior to final plat of Residential Phase 6.

	Construct Eagle Road to Yeoman Road.	Prior to occupancy of the school if the school develops prior to final plat of any of the residential phases along future Eagle Road.

	Construct Yeoman Road from Purcell Boulevard to 18th Street to a modified City of Bend collector standard cross-section per BDC 2.7.3790.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 6 or Phase 7, or prior to occupancy of the school or prior to the 335th Phased (Phases 1 – 8) housing unit, whichever comes first.

	Construct stop-controlled intersection improvements at Yeoman Road and 18th Street.

	Construct a pathway connection from the northern Pine Nursery Park entrance to the existing sidewalk to the west along Yeoman Road.

	Extend Yeoman Road from Deschutes Market Road to Butler Market Road.	Prior to final plat of Residential Phase 7 and if not already complete.

	Construct a multi-use pathway from Deschutes Market Road to Butler Market Road.

	Reconfigure the Butler Market Road and Yeoman Road intersection by adding eastbound and westbound left-turn lanes.

	Provide right-of-way for a future roundabout at the Butler Market Road and Yeoman Road intersection.

	Modify control and/or reconfigure the Butler Market Road and Hamby Road intersection to only stop eastbound travel.

	Provide a Cascades East Transit stop along the southern commercial frontage along Butler Market Road.	Prior to occupancy of the first building of the commercial development.

	Construct an enhanced pedestrian crossing on Deschutes Market Road south of the existing Deschutes Market Road bridge.

	Construct sidewalks from the Butler Market Road and Deschutes Market intersection to the Butler Market Road and NE 27th Street intersection to complete the sidewalk system and provide area connections to the retail area and the future elementary school.

	Install school speed zone signs in accordance with the MUTCD and City of Bend Standards and Specifications.	Prior to occupancy of the school.

	Extend the east-west multi-use pathway along the southern and western school frontages.

	Construct Yeoman Road to and through from Deschutes Market Road to the eastern property line.

	Construct Eagle Road to Yeoman Road.

	Provide right-of-way for a future roundabout at the Eagle Road and Yeoman Road intersection.

	Reconstruct all County roads that are on site and contiguous to the properties to City of Bend Standards and Specifications as each phase of each property develops per BDC 4.9.600(8).	General Requirement.

	Construct all local and higher classification streets, private or public, to City of Bend Standards and Specifications as each phase of each property develops.	General Requirement.

	Construct Eagle Road to a modified City of Bend Collector standards with a multi-use pathway on the east side per BDC 2.7.3790.	General Requirement.

	Construct Yeoman Road to a modified City of Bend Collector standard cross-section per BDC 2.7.3790.	General Requirement.

	Provide a secondary emergency access at each residential phase.	General Requirement.

	All property owners must pay the Transportation System Development Charge (TSDC) assessed by the City at the time of development.	General Requirement.

[Ord. NS-2363, 2020]


2.7.3990 Future Capacity Reservation. Revised 4/20

A.    The Petrosa Master Plan reserves infrastructure capacity (sewer, water, and transportation) through and including March 6, 2035, for all site plan review and subdivision applications filed pursuant to the phasing plan through March 6, 2035. Site plan review and subdivision applications submitted after March 6, 2035, will be subject to new utility and transportation analyses. [Ord. NS-2363, 2020]

Article XXII. Treeline Master Planned Development


2.7.4000 Treeline Master Planned Development.


2.7.4010 Purpose. Revised 4/20

The purpose of the Treeline Master Planned Development is to implement the policies in Chapter 11, Growth Management of the Bend Comprehensive Plan (BCP) regarding the West Expansion Area, and to create appropriate development standards for the residential uses within the Treeline Master Plan area. The development standards will:

A.    Provide a variety of housing types and densities in a coordinated neighborhood.

B.    Implement BCP Policy 11-104 by providing capacity for up to 65 housing units within Master Plan Area 2, including at least 12 single-family attached units. The minimum required units (total and by housing type) is 90 percent of the specified maximum.

C.    Ensure compatibility of uses within the master plan and the surrounding area.

D.    Create a transect where lower densities along the urban growth boundary transition to standard densities adjacent to existing neighborhoods.

E.    Preserve open space in order to provide buffers for wildlife and wildfire.

F.    Establish an interconnected street system consistent with the Transportation System Plan with cross-sections appropriate to the characteristics of adjacent land uses.

G.    Create safe, attractive, and efficient pedestrian routes and other multi-modal transportation options. [Ord. NS-2365, 2020]


2.7.4020 Applicability. Revised 4/20

The Treeline Master Planned Development standards apply to the property identified in Figure 2.7.4020, a portion of the West Expansion Area in BCP Chapter 11. The special standards of the Master Plan supersede the standards of the underlying zone. Where no special standards exist, the standards of the underlying zoning district apply. The final determination of the overlay zone or district boundary will be established at the time of subdivision platting and right-of-way dedication. [Ord. NS-2365, 2020]


2.7.4030 Districts. Revised 4/20

A.    Low Density Residential District. The purpose of the Low Density Residential (RL) District is to implement the low-density single-family residential lot component of the west side transect as identified in the BCP. Open space, lot sizes, and setbacks in this District are intended to minimize impacts on wildlife and reduce the risk of wildfire.

B.    Standard Lot Overlay. The purpose of the Standard Lot Overlay (SLO) is to allow standard density single-family homes on smaller lots than otherwise permitted in the underlying RL zone in order to meet the unit and housing mix requirements in BCP Policy 11-104. This district allows attached and detached single-family homes and will accommodate at least 12 attached single-family units as required by BCP Policy.

Figure 2.7.4020 – Treeline Master Plan
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2365, 2020]


2.7.4040 Review Procedures. Revised 4/20

The following review procedures are applicable to uses and structures within the Treeline Master Planned Development:

A.    Design Review. Single-family dwellings are subject only to design review through the Treeline Architectural Review Committee. The following uses are exempt from minimum development standards review with existing full utility and full street frontage infrastructure:

1.    Single-family detached housing.

2.    Attached single-family townhomes with vehicular access from an alley. [Ord. NS-2365, 2020]


2.7.4050 Residential Zoning Districts. Revised 4/20

A.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.7.4050 are permitted in the residential districts, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.7.4050, land uses that are incidental and subordinate to a permitted use, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.7.4050 may be permitted.

Table 2.7.4050 – Permitted and Conditional Uses 

	Land Use	RL	SLO

	Single-Family Detached Housing	P	P

	*Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)	P	P

	*Attached Single-Family Townhomes	N	P

	Family Childcare Home (16 or fewer children)	P	P

	*Home Business (Class A/Class B)	P	P

	*Accessory Uses and Structures	P	P

	Parks	P	P

	Recreational Facilities	P	P

	*Short-Term Rental	P	P

*    Subject to special standards as described in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

B.    Setbacks.

	 	Front*	Rear*	Side

	RL	20 ft.	20 ft.	10 ft.

	SLO	10 ft., except garages and/or carports must be set back 20 ft.	10 ft.	5 ft.

*    On corner lots, one front setback may be subject to side setback requirements and rear setbacks may be subject to side setback requirements. Garages and/or carports must maintain a minimum front setback of 20 feet.

1.    Setback Exceptions.

a.    Residential compatibility standards do not apply.

b.    Attached Single-Family (Townhomes). Interior side setbacks are zero feet.

c.    Architectural Features. The following architectural features are allowed to encroach into the front, side and rear setbacks by no more than two feet provided a minimum setback of three feet is provided from the property line: eaves, chimneys including fireplace enclosures and chimney chases, bay windows up to eight feet in width, window wells, and similar architectural features.

d.    Front Setback Encroachments. The following may encroach into the front setback:

i.    An unenclosed covered or uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches may be set back a minimum of six feet from the front property line, as long as it does not encroach into any easement. No portion of the structure may encroach closer than six feet to the front property line including the architectural features in subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section.

ii.    As shown in Figure 2.1.300, side entry garages that access a street must have a driveway with a minimum length of 20 feet from the front and side property lines. Garages that access an alley must have a driveway with a minimum length of 18 feet.

iii.    Stairs, ramps and landings that are not roofed or enclosed above or below the steps may be in the front setback when they follow the grade.

e.    Side and Rear Setback Encroachments. The following may encroach into side and rear setbacks:

i.    An uncovered porch, patio, deck or stoop located above finished grade with a maximum floor height not exceeding 18 inches must be set back a minimum of 18 inches from the side and rear property lines, as long as it does not encroach into any easement.

ii.    Uncovered patios at finished grade are exempt from setbacks as long as it does not encroach into any easement.

C.    Floor area ratio (FAR) does not apply to any use.

D.    Lot Area and Dimensions. Lot areas and lot dimension standards for residential uses are listed in the following table:

Lot Areas and Dimensions by Housing Type and Zone/Overlay 

	Residential Use	Zone/ Overlay	Lot Area	Lot Width/Depth

	Single-Family Detached Housing	RL	Minimum area: 10,000 sq. ft.	Minimum lot width: 100 ft.

Minimum lot depth: 100 ft.

	SLO	Minimum area: 4,000 sq. ft.	Minimum width: 40 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 75 ft.

	Single-Family Attached Housing (Townhomes)	SLO	Minimum area: 4,000 sq. ft. for each unit	Minimum width: 40 ft. at front property line

Minimum lot depth: 100 ft.

1.    Exceptions:

a.    Lots that abut the bulb of a cul-de-sac or knuckle corner: minimum width 30 feet at the front property line.

b.    Corner lots must be at least five feet wider than the minimum lot width required in the zone or overlay.

c.    Other exceptions permitted in the underlying Residential District are also permitted.

E.    Residential Density. The Treeline Master Planned Development implements BCP Policy 11-104 by providing capacity for up to 65 housing units within Master Plan Area 2, including at least 12 single-family attached units. The minimum required units (total and by housing type) is 90 percent of the specified maximum.

F.    Maximum Lot Coverage. The following maximum lot coverage standards apply to all development within the residential districts as follows:

Residential Lot Coverage 

	Zone/Overlay	Maximum Lot Coverage

	Low Density Residential (RL)	35%

	Standard Lot Overlay (SLO)	45% for lots with two-story homes

50% for lots with single-story homes

G.    Maximum building height: 30 feet.

H.    On-Site Surface Water Drainage.

1.    On-site surface water drainage may be addressed in the following ways. Alternatives may be approved by the City Engineer:

a.    Roof drainage originating from residential properties may be conveyed to a public street and/or public storm drain collection and disposal system by subsurface piping, or curb weepholes.

b.    Roof and surface drainage originating from residential properties may be conveyed to a private storm drain collection and disposal system located in a private tract or easement. The City may allow for private drainage systems in the public right-of-way if deemed appropriate by the City and maintenance agreements are executed between the homeowners association and the City.

c.    Roof drainage originating from residential properties may be commingled with drainage originating from public streets, private streets, and/or alleys and conveyed to a non-UIC system located within a private tract to be owned by a homeowners association with a maintenance agreement between the homeowners association and the City outlining operational and maintenance responsibilities. The City may allow for commingled drainage to be conveyed to a non-UIC system located in the public right-of-way if deemed appropriate by the City and maintenance agreements are executed between the homeowners association and the City.

d.    Private drainage facilities must be contained within the same or previous subdivision phase, or a stormwater easement must be provided for the stormwater facilities.

e.    Stormwater easements must be provided for public drainage facilities located on private property.

f.    An owners association must be responsible for installing and maintaining any required landscaping in private facilities located in a private tract.

g.    A storm water maintenance agreement must be signed with the City prior to final plat of the subdivision phase. [Ord. NS-2365, 2020]


2.7.4060 Special Street Standards. Revised 4/20

A.    Figure 2.7.4060 depicts the street type, tentative street location and alignment in the Treeline Master Planned Development. Table 2.7.4060 defines the standards to correspond to the street type shown in Figure 2.7.4060. The precise street alignment will be established through the approval of tentative subdivision plans. The Treeline Master Planned Development Street Type Plan, Figure 2.7.4060, and the Treeline Street Master Planned Development Standards, Table 2.7.4060, will be applied to the Treeline Master Planned Development as illustrated except when an alternate standard is permitted under this section or through the tentative plan approval process.

B.    Due to topography, natural features, and existing development, block length and perimeter maximums do not apply to streets located or aligned in general conformance with Figure 2.7.4060, Treeline Street and Circulation Plan.

C.    Any City street standard adopted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permits a lesser street standard, may be applied to the Treeline Master Planned Development during the subdivision review process.

Figure 2.7.4060 – Treeline Street and Circulation Plan
[IMAGE]


Table 2.7.4060 – Treeline Street Standards
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2365, 2020]


Chapter 2.8 URBANIZABLE AREA DISTRICT (UA)

Sections:

2.8.100    Purpose and Applicability.

2.8.200    Permitted Land Use.

2.8.300    Lot Area and Dimensions.

2.8.400    Additional Provisions.


2.8.100 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    Purpose. The Urbanizable Area (UA) District is intended to preserve large areas of undeveloped or rural land for future urban development prior to annexation. The UA District promotes the livability, stability, safety and improvement of the City of Bend by allowing orderly development consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

B.    Applicability. The provisions of the UA District apply to all land inside the Urban Growth Boundary but outside the City limits, except for the land withdrawn from the City of Bend by the County by City Resolution 2459.

The UA District will automatically be removed upon annexation to the City and the zoning that implements the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation for the property will apply.

C.    Area and Master Planning. The City has the authority to process area plans under BDC Chapters 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, and 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments (Type IV process) and master plans under BDC Chapters 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives and 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments (Type III process) in the UA District prior to annexation. However, development of the property with the uses authorized by the area or master plan may only occur after annexation. [Ord. NS-2293, 2017]


2.8.200 Permitted Land Use.

A.    Permitted Uses. The land uses listed in Table 2.8.200 are permitted in the UA District when allowed in the zoning district that implements the underlying Bend Comprehensive Plan designation, except as otherwise specified in this section, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Only land uses that are specifically listed in Table 2.8.200, land uses that are incidental and subordinate to a permitted use, and land uses that are approved as “similar” to those in Table 2.8.200 may be permitted.

B.    Determination of Similar Land Use. Similar use determinations shall be made in conformance with the procedures in BDC 4.1.1400, Declaratory Ruling, or as part of a development application.

Table 2.8.200 – Permitted Land Uses  

	Land Use	UA District

	Residential	 

	Single-family detached dwelling	P

	*Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)	P

	*Manufactured homes on individual lots	P

	Residential care home (5 or fewer residents)	P

	Adult day care	P

	Family childcare home (16 or fewer children)	P





Table 2.8.200 – Permitted Land Uses  

	Land Use	UA District

	*Home occupation (Type I/Type II)	P/C

	*Public and Institutional	 

	*Utilities (above ground)	C

	*Miscellaneous Uses	 

	*Bed and breakfast inn	C

	** Farm use	P

	Farm stand	P

	** Agricultural building or equine facility	P

	** Forest use in compliance with an approved Forest Management Plan	P

See BDC 2.8.400(D)

	*Plant nursery	C

	*Small hydroelectric facility	P

	Wireless and broadcast communication facilities	See BDC Chapter 3.7

	**Expansion, alteration or replacement of a lawfully permitted building and use as of July 21, 2017	P/C

See BDC 2.8.400(C)

	*Temporary Uses	See BDC 3.6.400

	(*)(**)Accessory uses and structures for uses in BDC Table 2.8.200 and (*)(**) accessory uses and structures for existing lawfully permitted buildings and uses as of July 21, 2017	P

Key to Permitted Uses

P = Permitted, subject to BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures

N = Not Permitted

C = Conditional Use, subject to permit standards in BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits

*    Subject to special standards as described BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

**    Use is permitted regardless of the underlying zoning district that implements the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation until annexed into the City of Bend.

[Ord. NS-2293, 2017]


2.8.300 Lot Area and Dimensions.

Lot area and lot dimension standards are listed in Table 2.8.300.

Table 2.8.300 – Lot Area and Dimensions  

	Standard	UA District

	Minimum Lot Size	20 acres

	Maximum Lot Coverage	15% on lots 1 acre or larger

	35% for lots less than 1 acre

	Minimum Front Setback	20 feet

	Minimum Side Setback	10 feet

	Minimum Rear Setback	20 feet

	Maximum Building Height	Maximum height permitted in the zoning district that implements the underlying Bend Comprehensive Plan designation

[Ord. NS-2293, 2017]


2.8.400 Additional Provisions.

A.    Detached single-family dwellings, accessory buildings and accessory dwelling units must be sited to allow the future division and/or more intensive use of the property. Additional development restrictions that limit the location of buildings and on-site sewage disposal facilities may be applied where necessary to reserve land for future urban development.

B.    Frontage improvements must be built to City standards and specifications when required under BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

C.    An expansion or enlargement of 50 percent or less of a lawfully permitted building and/or use as of July 21, 2017, must comply with BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review. For an expansion or enlargement greater than 50 percent, the conditional use criteria, standards and conditions within BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits, also apply.

D.    Significant Tree Standards.

1.    The following significant tree standards are applicable to properties without an approved City of Bend development application, including single-family residential lots or parcels greater than one acre in size:

a.    All deciduous trees measuring six inches or greater and coniferous trees measuring 10 inches or greater as measured four feet above the ground (known as DBH, “diameter at breast height”) must be retained on site unless exempted in subsection (D)(3) of this section.

b.    Grading, operation of vehicles and heavy equipment, and storage of supplies and construction materials are prohibited within the significant trees area, except as approved in writing by the City for installation of utilities or streets. Such approval shall only be granted after the City concludes in writing that there is no other reasonable alternative to avoid the protected area, and any required mitigation is provided in conformance with BDC 1.3.300(C), Mitigation for the Removal of Vegetation. The written approval shall include the specific facts that support the conclusion.

2.    Properties with an approved City of Bend development application are not subject to the standards of subsection (D)(1) of this section; however, trees shall be preserved as specified in the development approval and in compliance with BDC 3.2.200, Landscape Conservation.

3.    Exemptions. The mitigation standards in BDC 1.3.300(C) do not apply in the following situations:

a.    Dead, Diseased, and/or Hazardous Trees. Significant trees that are dead or diseased, or pose a hazard to personal safety, property or the health of other trees, may be removed if the Planning Director approves a report and recommendation from a certified arborist or other qualified professional. Prior to tree removal, the applicant must provide a report from a certified arborist or other qualified professional to determine whether the subject tree is diseased or poses a hazard, and any possible treatment to avoid removal, except as provided by subsection (D)(3)(b) of this section.

b.    Emergencies. Significant trees may be removed in the event of an emergency without development approval pursuant to BDC Title 4, when the trees pose an immediate threat to life or safety, as determined by the Planning Director or designee based on a certified arborist’s report submitted to the City.

E.    Prior to tentative approval of any land division, the general location of streets and water and sewer lines must be illustrated on abutting vacant land and developable land. This illustration is not binding on the abutting properties.

F.    Deschutes County is responsible for permits and inspections for on-site sewage treatment and dispersal systems for properties in the UA District.

G.    Sign District 5 in BC Chapter 9.50, Signs, applies to all properties in the UA District until they are annexed into the City of Bend.

H.    Deschutes County is considered an affected party and will be notified of all quasi-judicial and legislative development applications. [Ord. NS-2293, 2017]


Title 3 DESIGN STANDARDS Revised 1/19 Revised 4/19 Revised 9/19

Chapters:

3.0    Development Standards Administration

3.1    Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation Revised 1/19

3.2    Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls

3.3    Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking

3.4    Public Improvement Standards Revised 9/19

3.5    Other Design Standards

3.6    Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses Revised 1/19

3.7    Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities – Standards and Process Revised 4/19


Chapter 3.0 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

3.0.100    Applicability.

3.0.200    Types of Development Standards.


3.0.100 Applicability.

All developments within the City must comply with the provisions of this code. Some developments, such as major projects requiring land division and/or site design review approval, may require detailed findings demonstrating compliance with each chapter of the code. For smaller, less complex projects, fewer code provisions may apply. Though some projects will not require land use or development permit approval, they are still required to comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.0.200 Types of Development Standards.

The City’s development design standards are contained in BDC Titles 2 and 3. It is important to review both titles, and all relevant code sections within the titles, to determine which standards apply. The City may prepare checklists to assist property owners and applicants in determining which sections apply.

A.    BDC Title 2. Each land use district in BDC Title 2 provides design standards that are specifically tailored to the district. For example, each land use district contains minimum lot sizes, yard setbacks, and building design guidelines that may be different than those provided in another district, due to differences in land use, building types, and compatibility issues.

B.    BDC Title 3. The development standards contained within the following sections apply throughout the City, for all land use types except where noted:

BDC Chapter 3.0, Development Standards Administration.

BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

BDC Chapter 3.4, Public Improvement Standards.

BDC Chapter 3.5, Other Design Standards.

BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards for Certain Uses.

BDC Chapter 3.7, Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities – Standards and Process. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 3.1 LOT, PARCEL AND BLOCK DESIGN, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION Revised 1/19

Sections:

3.1.100    Purpose.

3.1.200    Lot, Parcel and Block Design.

3.1.300    Multi-Modal Access and Circulation.

3.1.400    Vehicular Access Management. Revised 1/19

3.1.500    Clear Vision Areas.


3.1.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to guide the development of livable neighborhoods by ensuring safe and efficient access and connectivity for a multi-modal transportation system.

This chapter provides specific requirements for the construction of public streets and on-site and off-site multi-modal circulation that meets the requirements of this code, accessibility regulations, furthers the orderly layout of land, protects community character, and conserves natural resources by promoting well-designed road and access systems. [Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.1.200 Lot, Parcel and Block Design.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create orderly development as the City grows and redevelops. The size, width, topography and orientation of lots or parcels shall be appropriate for the location of the land division and for the type of development and use contemplated.

B.    Applicability. New development shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable sections of this code.

C.    General Requirements for Lots and Parcels.

1.    Depth and width of new lots or parcels must meet the minimum standards specified for the zoning district. Where no minimum standards are specified, the depth and width must be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.

2.    On steep slopes, increased lot or parcel sizes may be required to avoid excessive cuts, fills and steep driveways.

3.    On tracts containing watercourses or rock outcroppings, increased lot or parcel sizes may be required to allow adequate room for development and protection of the topographic or natural feature.

4.    Each lot or parcel must abut upon a street other than an alley for the minimum width required for lots or parcels in the zone, except:

a.    For lots or parcels fronting on the bulb of a cul-de-sac, the minimum frontage is 30 feet, except for townhomes;

b.    For approved flag lots or parcels, the minimum frontage is 15 feet;

c.    For lots or parcels in zero lot line developments, the minimum frontage is 20 feet; and

d.    In zones where a minimum frontage width is not specified, the minimum frontage is 50 feet.

5.    All side lot or parcel lines shall be at right angles to the street lines or radial to curved streets for at least one-half the lot or parcel depth wherever practical.

6.    Corner lots or parcels shall be at least five feet more in width than the minimum lot width required in the zone.

7.    All permanent utility service to lots or parcels shall be provided from underground facilities. The developer shall be responsible for complying with requirements of this section, and shall:

a.    Make all necessary arrangements with the utility companies and other persons or corporations affected by the installation of such underground utilities and facilities in accordance with rules and regulations of the Public Utility Commission of the State of Oregon.

b.    All underground utilities and public facilities installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets.

D.    Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks. To promote efficient multi-modal circulation along parallel and connecting streets throughout the City, developments shall produce complete blocks bounded by a connecting network of streets, in accordance with the following standards:

1.    New development shall construct and extend planned streets (arterials, collectors and locals) in their proper projection to create continuous through streets and provide the desirable pattern of orderly developed streets and blocks. Streets shall be developed within a framework that is established in the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan and any applicable Special Area Plan, Refinement Plan, Master Neighborhood Development Plan or other adopted or approved development plan. Where such plans do not provide specific block length and perimeter standards, the requirements listed below shall apply:

2.    Block lengths and perimeters shall not exceed the following standards as measured from centerline to centerline of through intersecting streets.

a.    Six hundred sixty feet block length and 2,000 feet block perimeter in all Residential Zones;

b.    Four hundred feet block length and 1,500 feet block perimeter in the Central Business District, Convenience Commercial, Mixed-Use Riverfront and Professional Office Districts;

c.    Six hundred sixty feet block length and 2,640 feet block perimeter for all other Commercial, Industrial and Mixed Employment Districts;

d.    An exception may be granted to the maximum block length and/or block perimeter by the Review Authority if the applicant can demonstrate that the block length and/or block perimeter cannot be satisfied due to topography, natural features, existing development or other barriers, or it is unreasonable to meet such standards based on the existing pattern of development, or other relevant factors. When an exception is granted, the Review Authority may require the land division or site plan to provide blocks divided by one or more access corridors in conformance with the provisions of BDC 3.1.300, Multi-Modal Access and Circulation. Access corridors shall be located to minimize out-of-direction travel by pedestrians and bicyclists and shall meet all applicable accessibility standards.

3.    New street connections to arterials and collectors shall be governed by BDC 3.1.400, Vehicular Access Management.

4.    Except as otherwise provided in an approved Master Planned Development, private streets, where allowed by this code, shall be constructed to public standards and shall contain a public access easement along the length and width of the private facility if required to satisfy the block length and perimeter standards.

E.    New Lot and Parcel Access. In order to protect the operations and safety of arterial and collector roadways, access management is required during lot and parcel development. New lots and parcels created through land division that have frontage onto an arterial or collector street shall provide alternative options for access as indicated below:

1.    Residential lots or parcels not intended for multifamily housing shall provide alley access to the individual lots fronting onto the arterial or collector.

a.    Exception to Residential Alleys. The Review Authority may determine that an alley is impractical due to physical or topographical constraints. In this situation, double frontage lots may be permitted.

2.    Nonresidential and multifamily housing lots or parcels shall provide other access alternatives to the individual lots that abut the arterial or collector street.

a.    Double frontage lots or parcels of adequate depth to accommodate the future use may be permitted. The creation of double frontage lots does not relieve the property owner from their responsibilities to construct and maintain the sidewalk and park strip on the nonaccess side.

b.    When a lot or parcel has frontage onto two or more streets, access shall be provided first from the street with the lowest classification.

3.    The land division shall also provide for local street grid connections to the arterial and collector street in accordance with the block length and perimeter standards of this section. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.1.300 Multi-Modal Access and Circulation.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure safe, accessible, direct and convenient multi-modal circulation by developing an on-street and off-street system of access corridors and public sidewalks throughout the City.

B.    On-Site Pedestrian Facilities. For all developments except single-family, duplex dwellings on their own lot or parcel, and shared courts, pedestrian access and connectivity must meet the following standards:

1.    Pedestrian ways must:

a.    Connect all building entrances within the development to one another.

b.    Connect all parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities, common areas (as applicable), and abutting development to the building’s entrances and exits.

c.    Extend throughout the development site, and connect to all future phases of development, abutting trails, public parks and open space areas whenever possible as described in subsection (C) of this section, Off-Site Multi-Modal Facilities.

d.    Connect or stub to abutting streets and private property, in intervals no greater than the block perimeter standards.

e.    Provide pedestrian facilities within developments that are safe, accessible, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all abutting streets, based on the following:

i.    Convenient and Direct. A route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for users.

ii.    Safe. Bicycling and pedestrian routes that are free from hazards and safely designed by ensuring no hidden corners, sight-obscuring fences, dense vegetation or other unsafe conditions.

iii.    Accessible. All pedestrian access routes must comply with all applicable accessibility requirements.

iv.    Primary Entrance Connection. A pedestrian access route must be constructed to connect the primary entrance of each building to the abutting streets. For commercial, industrial, mixed-use, public, and institutional building entrances, the primary entrance is the main public entrance to the building. In the case where no public entrance exists, connections must be provided to each employee entrance. For multifamily and triplex dwellings, the primary entrance is the front door (i.e., oriented toward the street). For buildings in which each unit does not have its own exterior entrance, the primary entrance may be a lobby, courtyard or breezeway which serves as a common entrance for more than one dwelling and be accessible.

2.    On-Site Pedestrian Facility Development Standards. On-site pedestrian facilities shall meet the following standards:

a.    On-site pedestrian walkways shall have a minimum width of five feet.

b.    Pedestrian walkways shall be lighted in conformance with BDC 3.5.200, Outdoor Lighting Standards.

c.    Switchback paths shall be required where necessary to meet the City’s adopted accessibility requirements and City of Bend Standards and Specifications. Accessible alternate routes such as ramps and/or lifts shall be provided when required.

d.    The City may require landscaping adjacent to a pedestrian walkway for screening and the privacy of adjoining properties. The specific landscaping requirements shall balance the neighbors’ privacy with the public safety need for surveillance of users of the public walkway. Tall, sight-obscuring fences or dense landscaping thick enough to conceal hazards are prohibited.

e.    Vehicle/Walkway Separation. Where walkways are parallel and abut a driveway or street (public or private), they shall be raised six inches and curbed, or separated from the driveway/street by a five-foot minimum landscaped strip. Special designs may be permitted if this five-foot separation cannot be achieved.

f.    Housing/Walkway Separation. Pedestrian walkways shall be separated a minimum of five feet from all residential living areas on the ground floor, except at building entrances. Separation is measured from the walkway edge to the closest dwelling unit. The separation area shall be landscaped in conformance with the provisions of BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. No walkway/building separation is required for commercial, industrial, public, or institutional uses.

g.    Walkway Surface. Walkway surfaces shall be concrete and conform to accessibility requirements. Asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other durable surface that makes a smooth surface texture, and conforms to accessibility requirements, may be allowed as determined by the City. Multi-use paths and trails (i.e., for bicycles and pedestrians) shall be the same materials. (See also BDC 3.4.200, Transportation Improvement Standards.)

h.    Additional standards for walkway design can be found in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

3.    Exception. The City may determine that a pedestrian facility is impractical due to:

a.    Physical or topographic conditions (e.g., highways, railroads, extremely steep slopes, sensitive lands, and similar physical constraints);

b.    Buildings or other existing development on adjacent properties that physically prevent a connection now or in the future, considering the potential for redevelopment; and

c.    Sites where the provisions of recorded leases, easements, covenants, restrictions, or other agreements recorded as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code prohibit the connection.

4.    Developments subject to development review shall construct sidewalks within and abutting the subject property along public and private streets.

C.    Off-Site Multi-Modal Facilities.

1.    Developments subject to development and having an access corridor alignment shown on the City of Bend Urban Area Bicycle and Pedestrian System Plan shall dedicate either right-of way or an access easement to the public for a primary or connector multi-use as outlined below.

a.    Primary multi-use paths shall be in the alignment shown on the City of Bend Urban Area Bicycle and Pedestrian System Plan to the greatest degree practical unless, with consideration of recommendations from the Bend Park and Recreation District, an alternate alignment is approved by the City through the development review process.

b.    Connector multi-use paths may be required for pedestrians and bicycles at or near mid-block where the block length exceeds the maximum length required by BDC 3.1.200, Lot, Parcel and Block Design. Connector multi-use paths may also be required where cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets are permitted, to connect to other streets, and/or to other developments.

c.    Primary and Connector Multi-Use Path Dedication and Construction. Primary and Connector multi-use path alignments shall be dedicated and constructed in accordance with the City’s Design Standards and Construction Specifications. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.1.400 Vehicular Access Management. Revised 1/19

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to present standards and procedures for evaluating and managing vehicular access and circulation during development review to maintain adequate safety and operational performance standards and to preserve the functional classification of roadways as required by the City’s Transportation System Plan (TSP) and this code by:

•    Providing reasonable access to individual properties via adequately spaced local streets and alleys;

•    Providing a multi-modal transportation system;

•    Protecting the rights of individuals to reasonable access to private property; and

•    Ensuring safe and efficient travel for all.

B.    Applicability. This section shall apply to vehicular access for all properties that abut public and private streets.

C.    Approval of Access Required. Proposals for new access shall comply with the following procedures:

1.    Permission to access City streets shall be subject to review and approval by the City based on the standards contained in this chapter and the provisions of BDC Chapter 3.4, Public Improvement Standards. Access will be evaluated and determined as a component of the development review process.

2.    Permits for access to State highways shall be subject to review and approval by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) based upon ODOT’s adopted standards, except when ODOT has delegated this responsibility to the City or Deschutes County. In that case, the City or County shall determine whether access is granted based on the City or County’s adopted standards.

3.    Permits for access to County highways shall be subject to review and approval by Deschutes County based upon Deschutes County’s adopted standards, except where the County has delegated this responsibility to the City, in which case the City shall determine whether access is granted based on the City’s adopted standards.

D.    Traffic Study Requirements. A transportation impact analysis (TIA) may be required under BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis, for certain types and intensities of development proposals and to determine access restrictions of driveways onto arterial and collector roadways.

E.    Conditions of Approval. To ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system, the City may require the closing, consolidation, or relocation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways and cross access routes), development of frontage or backage streets, installation of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation measures that comply with this code, the City’s Standards and Specifications, and are approved by the City.

F.    Access Management Requirements. Access to the street system must meet the following standards:

1.    Lots and parcels in all zones and all uses may have one access point, except as authorized in BDC 3.1.400(F)(4). When a property has more than one permitted street access, the City Engineer may require existing accesses to be closed and replaced with curbing, sidewalks/pathways, and landscaping, in accordance with the provisions of this code and the City standards and specifications.

2.    If a lot or parcel has frontage on two or more streets of different street classifications, the property must access the street with the lowest classification.

3.    For lots or parcels abutting an alley, access may be required to be taken from the alley. Outside of the Downtown Wall Street/Bond Street couplet, the City Engineer may determine that an alley is not an adequate roadway for primary access if both of the following criteria are met:

a.    The alley does not provide adequate or sufficient access to the proposed development; and

b.    Access to the higher classification roadway will be safe.

4.    Additional Access Points.

a.    Single-family detached dwellings may have an additional access point in compliance with the following:

i.    Corner lots or parcels at the intersection of two local streets may have one access point per frontage. The accesses must be the maximum distance achievable from the intersection and not adversely impact traffic or safety or the City Engineer may determine a second access is not allowed.

ii.    Lots or parcels on a local street that are not corner lots and have a frontage of 80 feet or wider may have two access points. The accesses must be separated by a minimum of 10 feet as measured between the edge of the approaches. The second access must not adversely impact the operations of the transportation system.

iii.    Alley access may be allowed when the lot or parcel has an existing permitted street access. If the required on-site parking is provided off the alley, the City Engineer may require the street access to be closed and replaced with curbing, sidewalks/pathways, and landscaping, in accordance with the provisions of this code and the City standards and specifications.

b.    Single-family attached townhomes, duplexes and triplexes, see BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses. 

c.    All Other Uses. An additional access point may be allowed when it is demonstrated that the additional access improves on-site circulation, and does not adversely impact the operations of the transportation system. If the second access point is only available to an arterial or collector roadway, the City may require one or more of these conditions of approval:

i.    Locating the access the maximum distance achievable from an intersection or from the closest driveway(s) on the same side of the street;

ii.    Right-in/right-out access may be required within 300 feet of a signalized intersection or roundabout. If adequate 95 percent queuing and turn pocket transition lengths are determined not to exceed the proposed point of entry, the City Engineer may grant access exceptions;

iii.    Establishing a shared access with an adjoining property when possible; and/or

iv.    Establishing a cross access easement with an adjoining property when possible.

5.    Access Spacing Requirements. The maximum distance achievable between two driveways or a driveway and an intersection shall be provided. Access spacing shall accommodate City of Bend Standards and Specifications for curb reveal between driveway apron wings.

6.    Access Operations Requirements. Backing from an access onto a public street shall not be permitted except for single-family, duplex or triplex dwellings backing onto a local street or for any use when backing into an alley if adequate backing distance is provided. The design of driveways and on-site maneuvering and loading areas shall include the anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles, in order to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation.

7.    Driveways shall be designed and located to provide a vehicle in the driveway with an unobstructed view of the roadway for a sufficient distance as required by City Standards and Specifications or the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) policy on intersection sight distance requirements as determined by the City.

8.    Driveway widths, designs, and materials shall comply with City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

G.    Shared Access. For traffic safety and access management purposes, the number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets shall be minimized by the use of shared driveways with adjoining lots where feasible. The City may require shared driveways as a condition of development approval in accordance with the following standards:

1.    Shared Driveways and Frontage Streets. Shared driveways and frontage streets are encouraged, and may be required to consolidate access onto a collector or arterial street. When shared driveways or frontage streets are required, they shall be stubbed to adjacent developable land to indicate future extension. For the purpose of this code, stub means that a driveway or street temporarily ends at the property line, and shall be extended in the future as the adjacent property develops, and developable means that a property is either vacant or it is likely to redevelop.

2.    Access Easements. Access easements for the benefit of affected properties shall be recorded for all shared driveways, including walkways, at the time of final plat approval or as a condition of development approval.

3.    Cross Access. Cross access is encouraged, and may be required between contiguous sites in the Public Facilities, Mixed-Use, Commercial and Industrial Zones and for multifamily housing developments in the Residential Zones in order to provide for direct circulation between sites and uses for pedestrians, bicyclists and drivers and to enable compliance with the collector and arterial access management requirements of this chapter.

H.    Driveway Widths. Driveway openings (or curb cuts) must be the minimum width necessary to provide the required number of vehicle travel lanes (10 feet minimum width for each travel lane). When obtaining access to off-street parking areas backing onto a public street is not permitted except for single-family, duplex or triplex dwellings backing onto a local street or when backing into an alley for all uses if adequate backing distance is provided. The following standards provide adequate site access, minimize surface water runoff, and avoid conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians:

1.    Single-family detached dwelling units must have a minimum driveway opening width of 10 feet, and a maximum width of 24 feet. Wider driveways may be necessary to accommodate approved paved recreational vehicle pads; however, the driveway opening or connection to the street cannot be wider than 24 feet. For townhomes, see BDC 3.6.200(D), Single-Family Attached Townhomes, and for duplexes and triplexes, see BDC 3.6.200(H), Duplex and Triplex Development.

2.    Multifamily developments must have a minimum driveway opening width of 20 feet, and a maximum width of 30 feet. The dimension may exceed 30 feet if the City Engineer determines that more than two lanes are required based on the number of trips generated or the need for turning lanes.

3.    Other Uses. Access widths for all other uses must be based on 10 feet of width for every travel lane, except that driveways providing direct access to parking spaces must conform to the parking area standards in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking. Driveway aprons serving industrial uses and heavy commercial uses may be as wide as 35 feet.

4.    Driveway Aprons. Driveway aprons must be installed between the street and the private drive. Driveway apron design and location must conform to City of Bend Standards and Specifications and the City’s adopted accessibility standards for sidewalks and walkways.

I.    Fire Access and Parking Area Turn-around. A fire equipment access drive shall be provided for any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of a building that is located more than 150 feet from an existing public street or approved fire equipment access drive as measured around the building. Parking areas shall provide adequate aisles or turn-around areas for service and delivery vehicles so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner (except for single-family dwellings and alleys that provide adequate backing width).

J.    Vertical Clearances. Driveways, private streets, aisles, turn-around areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six inches for their entire length and width.

K.    Barricades. Except as otherwise provided in an approved Master Planned Development, gates, barricades or other devices intended to prevent vehicular and/or pedestrian access shall not be installed across any approved driveway or private street that provides access to multiple properties except when required by the City to restrict vehicle access to an arterial or collector street.

L.    Construction. The following development and maintenance standards shall apply to all driveways and private streets. The City of Bend Standards and Specifications document shall prevail in the case of conflicting rules related to the design and construction of public infrastructure.

1.    Surface Options. Driveways, required parking areas, aisles, and turn-arounds may be paved with asphalt, concrete or comparable surfacing or a durable nonpaving material (e.g., grass-crete, eco-stone) may be used to reduce surface water runoff and to protect water and air quality. Gravel is not allowed.

2.    Surface Water Management. When an impervious surface is used, all driveways, parking areas, aisles and turn-arounds shall have on-site collection or infiltration of surface waters to prevent the flow of stormwater onto public rights-of-way and abutting property. Surface water facilities shall be constructed in conformance with City specifications. Durable nonpaving materials (e.g., grass-crete, eco-stone) are encouraged to facilitate on-site infiltration of stormwater. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.1.500 Clear Vision Areas.

A.    Purpose. Clear vision areas are established to ensure that obstructions do not infringe on the sight lines needed by motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and others approaching potential conflict points at intersections.

B.    Applicability. In all zones except the CB Zone, clear vision areas as described below and illustrated in Figure 3.1.500.A must be established at the intersection of two streets, an alley and a street, a driveway and a street or a street and a railroad right-of-way in order to provide adequate vision of conflicting traffic movements as well as street signs. These standards are applicable to public and private streets, alleys and mid-block lanes, and driveways.

C.    The following standards apply to clear vision areas:

1.    The clear vision area is in the shape of a triangle and extends across the corner of private property to the face of curb at the street or alley as shown in Figure 3.1.500.A. The two legs of the clear vision triangle are each measured from the point of intersection of the two corner lot lines, special setback lines, or access easement lines. Where lot lines have rounded corners, the lot lines are extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. Measurements along a driveway are taken at the edge of pavement.

Figure 3.1.500.A
[IMAGE]


2.    The following measurements define the clear vision areas:

Table 3.1.500.B 

	Intersection at a Street and the following:	Minimum Distance of Triangle Side

	Street	15 feet

	Alley	10 feet

	Driveway 	10 feet

	Railroad	15 feet

3.    Unless exempted below, there must be no fence, wall, vehicular parking, sign, building, structure, or any other obstruction to vision within the clear vision area between the height of two feet and eight feet above the top of the curb. In cut sections, embankments must be graded to comply with these requirements. Shrubs or foliage must not exceed two feet in height. Existing trees must be limbed to a minimum of eight feet above the top of curb or 12 feet above adjacent bike lanes. New trees are not permitted within the clear vision area.

a.    Exemptions.

i.    Street sign, post or pole (e.g., power, signal, or luminaire pole).

ii.    Any private post or pole eight inches or less in diameter (width or length).

4.    Driveway approaches and driveways are not permitted within the clear vision area. On-street parking is not permitted within 20 feet of an accessible ramp or within 10 feet of a driveway approach.

5.    Additional clear vision areas may be required as directed by the City Engineer.

D.    The City Engineer may modify the clear vision area requirements upon written request by the applicant if, in the City Engineer’s determination, the construction within this triangle will not adversely impact traffic or pedestrian safety. Reasons for the modification(s) are limited to special circumstances such as the existence of available right-of-way in excess of City standards, curb extensions, or unique traffic flow (one way). [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 3.2 LANDSCAPING, STREET TREES, FENCES AND WALLS

Sections:

3.2.100    Purpose.

3.2.200    Landscape Conservation.

3.2.300    New Landscaping.

3.2.400    Street Trees.

3.2.500    Fences and Retaining Walls.


3.2.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote community health, safety and welfare by protecting natural vegetation, and setting development standards for landscaping, street trees, fences and walls. Together, these elements of the natural and built environment contribute to the visual quality, environmental health and character of the community. Trees provide climate control through shading during summer months and wind screening during winter. Trees reduce stormwater runoff and are a valuable component of the City’s infrastructure. Trees and other plants also buffer pedestrians from traffic. Walls, fences, trees and other landscape materials provide vital screening and buffering between land uses. Landscaped areas help to control surface water drainage by capturing rainwater within their canopies and can improve air and water quality. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.2.200 Landscape Conservation.

Landscape Conservation prevents the indiscriminate removal of significant trees and other vegetation, including vegetation associated with streams, wetlands and other protected natural resource areas. This section cross-references BDC 2.7.600 and 2.7.700, which regulate development of areas of special interest.

The purpose of this section is to incorporate significant native vegetation into the landscapes of development. The use of existing mature, native vegetation within developments is a preferred alternative to removal of vegetation and re-planting. Mature landscaping provides summer shade and wind breaks, allows for water conservation due to larger plants having established root systems, and assists with erosion control within disturbed construction sites.

A.    Applicability. The standards in this section shall apply to all development sites containing significant vegetation, as defined below, except for residential development on Residential District lots that were created through a subdivision or partition plat filed with Deschutes County prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code.

B.    Significant Vegetation. Significant vegetation means individual trees with a specific trunk diameter as measured four feet above the ground (known as DBH, “diameter at breast height”); shall be inventoried during the site design process and protected during construction unless otherwise approved for removal through the site plan review process. For the purpose of this section, deciduous trees measuring six inches or greater and coniferous trees measuring 10 inches or greater shall be considered significant vegetation.

C.    Mapping and Protection Required. A Tree Protection Plan shall be prepared and submitted with the development application. Significant vegetation shall be inventoried and mapped as required by BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review, BDC 2.7.600, Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ), and 2.7.700, Upland Areas of Special Interest Overlay Zone. Trees shall be mapped individually and identified by species and size (DBH). A protection area shall be defined around the edge of all branches (drip-line) of each tree (drip-lines may overlap between trees) or stand of trees. The City also may require an inventory, survey, or assessment prepared by a qualified professional when necessary to determine tree health, vegetation boundaries, building setbacks, and other protection or mitigation requirements.

D.    Protection Standards. Significant trees identified as meeting the criteria in subsection (B) of this section shall be retained unless approved by the City to be removed for development. Preservation shall be considered impracticable when it would prevent development of public streets, public utilities, needed housing or land uses permitted by the applicable land use district. The term prevent in this standard means that the development cannot be designed to avoid the significant tree(s). An inability to achieve maximum permitted density by complying with this subsection shall not in itself be considered to prevent development. Building envelopes commensurate with the lot coverage standard of the zone shall be depicted on the Tree Protection Plan. Trees outside the envelope shall be protected unless they prevent development. In instances where applying exceptions to certain development standards would make tree preservation practical, the City may allow one or more of the following exceptions to the development standards when individual trees with a DBH of 24 inches or larger or stands of trees that are in good health as determined by a qualified professional, are preserved by a proposed development with an approved tree preservation plan:

•    Reductions of setbacks up to 25 percent.

•    Reduction of required on-site parking up to 10 percent.

•    Increased lot coverage up to 15 percent.

•    Reduced landscape coverage up to five percent.

1.    Protection of Significant Trees. The applicant must submit a Tree Protection Plan on a site plan map, drawn to scale, that includes the following provisions where appropriate:

a.    Inventory of Significant Vegetation. Depict all significant vegetation by DBH and species, showing property lines, two-foot contours and rock outcroppings.

b.    Building Envelopes. The developer shall depict the buildable area of a lot that is consistent with the lot coverage area of the zone.

c.    Barriers. The developer shall depict protection barriers on the site plan and locate and mark with flagging and/or signs all construction roads, parking places for workers, and areas for the storage of building materials, gravel and soil; stake out the exact locations of all utility trenches; erect physical barriers around all trees to be retained or groups of trees around the work site. Barriers that extend beyond the drip-line of the tree are preferred.

d.    Soil Compaction. The Tree Protection Plan shall depict typical details of methods for protecting the critical root zone. If barriers are not feasible to keep away vehicles and foot traffic, use six to eight inches of wood chips spread over the root zone or bridge root area overlaid by plates of steel or other suitable material.

e.    Grade Changes. If a grade change is unavoidable, retaining walls shall be used to protect the root system.

f.    Severing Roots. Avoid cutting anchoring roots if possible. Tunneling for smaller household utility lines may be an option for tree preservation. When root cuts are unavoidable, the cuts shall be made with a pruning saw.

g.    Above-Ground Injuries to Trees. Do not use trees for posting signs, electrical wires and pulleys. Keep trees free of nails, screws, and other fastening devices. Prevent trunk injuries by surrounding trunk with one-inch by four-inch wooden slats and securing in place with gauge wire around slats.

h.    Soil Contamination. Altering the soil chemistry can result in weakened trees, making them more susceptible to insects and disease. Prevent adverse effects on soil chemistry by spreading heavy plastic tarping where concrete is to be mixed or sheet rock cut; do not clean paintbrushes and tools over tree roots; dispose of chemical wastes properly and do not drain onto soil.

i.    Altering the Natural Drainage Course. When the natural drainage of a site is altered, watering for existing trees must be augmented by an irrigation system. Prior to site grading, prepare a site drainage plan. Sometimes surface water containment can sustain existing stands of trees without artificial irrigation.

2.    The City may approve the provision for substituting the retention of smaller trees in lieu of significant trees if it can be determined by a qualified professional that the small trees have equal or greater measurable benefits as specified in the purpose of this section and/or that the significant trees will not survive.

3.    All existing trees in good health, as determined by a qualified professional, which are located within the front yard setback or within an undeveloped public right-of-way shall be conserved whenever practical.

4.    When the removal of significant trees cannot be avoided, the City may require, as part of the required landscaping plan for the development site, the replacement of trees in size and number equivalent to the square inch measurement at DBH.

E.    Construction. All areas of significant vegetation shall be protected prior to, during, and after construction. Grading, operation of vehicles and heavy equipment, and storage of supplies and construction materials are prohibited within significant vegetation areas, except as approved in writing by the City for installation of utilities or streets. Such approval shall only be granted after the City concludes in writing that there is no other reasonable alternative to avoid the protected area, and any required mitigation is provided in conformance with BDC 1.3.300(C), Mitigation for the Removal of Vegetation. The written approval shall include the specific facts that support the conclusion.

F.    Performance Bond. To ensure that the significant trees identified through the development review process will be retained and protected, the Review Authority may require the developer to post a performance bond in an amount determined by the size of the trees being preserved as shown below:

	Tree Size	Bond Amount

	4 – 6 inches DBH	$1,000

	6 – 10 inches DBH	$1,500

	10 – 16 inches DBH	$3,000

	Greater than 16 inches DBH	$5,000

The amount of the required performance bond shall be determined by totaling the number of trees being preserved based on size and bonding value in the above table. The developer may utilize one of the following methods to assure full and faithful performance:

1.    A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon in a form approved by the City Attorney.

2.    A cash deposit in a City account at an approved lending institution.

3.    An irrevocable standby letter of credit from a federally insured banking institution or savings and loan operating in Oregon that unconditionally promises to pay the funds pledged upon demand by the City. Such obligation must be unaffected by the financial status of the person who has obtained the letter of credit.

4.    An “assurance provider” arrangement between the developer, the City and a federally insured financial institution which assures the City that funds to mitigate the loss or damage of significant trees identified through the development review process for preservation and protection will be provided by the federally insured financial institution to the City in the event the developer does not perform in conformance with the Land Use Development Agreement, and the federally insured financial institution must be satisfactory to the City.

5.    The City may place a second position lien on the subject property. The lien shall accrue interest at the rate of six percent until such time the lien amount has been collected. The lien amount shall be paid to the City in full prior to the final occupancy of a building or final plat recordation of a subdivision or partition plat.

G.    Termination of Bond. If the developer fails to carry out the provisions of the agreement, the City shall call upon the bond, or letter of credit or cash deposit or property lien or assurance provider arrangement, to finance any cost or expenses resulting from said failure. If the amount of the deposit, letter of credit, bond, or property lien or assurance provider arrangement exceeds the cost and expense incurred by mitigating the loss or damage of the significant trees, the City shall deposit the remainder into a City account for the purpose of tree preservation education, tree planting and maintenance. If the amount of the deposit, letter of credit, bond or assurance provider arrangement is less than the cost and expense incurred by the City for the improvements and repairs, the developer shall be liable to the City for the difference.

H.    Exemptions. The mitigation standards in BDC 1.3.300(C) shall not apply in the following situations:

1.    Dead, Diseased, and/or Hazardous Trees. Trees that are dead or diseased, or pose a hazard to personal safety, property or the health of other trees, may be removed if the Planning Director approves a report and recommendation from a certified arborist or other qualified professional. Prior to tree removal, the applicant shall provide a report from a certified arborist or other qualified professional to determine whether the subject tree is diseased or poses a hazard, and any possible treatment to avoid removal, except as provided by subsection (H)(2) of this section.

2.    Emergencies. Significant vegetation may be removed in the event of an emergency without land use approval pursuant to BDC Title 4, when the vegetation poses an immediate threat to life or safety, as determined by the Planning Director based on a certified arborist’s report submitted to the City. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.2.300 New Landscaping.

This section sets standards for and requires landscaping of all development sites that require Site Development Review. This section also requires landscape buffering for parking and maneuvering areas, and buffering between different land use districts. Note: Other landscaping standards are provided within the individual land use districts and in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards for Certain Uses, for specific types of development.

A.    Applicability. This section shall apply to all new development in all zones requiring Site Development Review.

B.    Landscaping Plan Required. A landscape plan is required. All landscape plans shall conform to the requirements in BDC 4.2.300(A)(7), Landscape Plan.

C.    Landscape Area Standards. A minimum percentage landscape coverage is required. Coverage is measured based on the size of plants at maturity or after two years of growth, whichever comes sooner. The minimum required landscaping shall equal 15 percent of the gross lot area for the following uses:

1.    Residential – duplex and triplex units and multiple-family developments.

2.    Commercial and office developments.

3.    Industrial developments. Seventy-five percent of the required 15 percent site landscaping shall be located within the front yard setbacks and parking areas or other areas visible to the public, unless otherwise required as a condition of approval.

4.    Mixed-use developments.

5.    Special landscape standards may be required in accordance with the special standards for certain uses in BDC Chapter 3.6 or as specified in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts.

D.    Landscape Materials. Landscape materials include live trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, nonplant ground covers, and outdoor hardscape features, as described below:

1.    Plant Selection. Native vegetation shall be preserved or planted where practical. A combination of live deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs and ground covers shall be used for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate, exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions. Fire resistive plants should be planted in forested areas or on slopes where necessary to reduce the risk of fire spreading to structures. As necessary, soils shall be amended to allow for healthy plant growth.

2.    Hardscape Features. Ground-level areas for passive use, such as patios, decks, plazas, paved dining areas, etc., may cover up to 15 percent of the required 15 percent landscape area; swimming pools, sports courts and similar active recreation facilities may not be counted toward fulfilling the landscape requirement.

3.    Nonplant Ground Covers. Bark dust, chips, aggregate or other nonplant ground covers may be used, but must be confined to areas underneath plants and is not considered a substitute for ground cover plants. Measures shall be taken to prevent erosion of nonplant ground covers onto adjacent properties or rights-of-way.

4.    Tree Size. Required deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper size of two inches or larger at time of planting, including trees planted adjacent to a public right-of-way.

5.    Shrub Size. Shrubs shall be planted from two-gallon containers or larger.

6.    Ground Cover Location and Size. All of the landscaped area that is not planted with trees and shrubs or covered by allowable hardscape features must be planted in ground cover plants, including grasses. Ground cover plants shall be sized and spaced in the following manner: planted at a rate of at least one plant per 18 inches on center, in triangular spacing based on plant habitat (growth rate) with an expected coverage of 80 percent within five years of the time of planting.

7.    Significant Vegetation. Significant vegetation preserved in accordance with BDC 3.2.200 may be credited toward meeting the minimum landscape area standards in subsection (C) of this section. Credit shall be granted based on the total square footage of the preserved canopy. The street tree standards of BDC 3.2.400 may be waived when trees preserved within the front yard setbacks provide the same or better shading and visual quality as would otherwise be provided by street trees between the street and sidewalk.

8.    Stormwater Facilities. Stormwater facilities (e.g., detention/retention ponds and swales) shall be landscaped. Landscaped bio-swales are encouraged and can be counted in the required amount of landscaped area on the site. Planting of broad leaf canopy trees is encouraged as effective surface water interceptors.

E.    Landscape Design Standards. All yards, parking lots and required street tree planter strips shall be landscaped at the time of site development in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All required landscaping and related improvements shall be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Only during winter months when the ground is frozen shall the required landscape improvements be eligible for financial guarantee prior to occupancy. Landscaping shall provide erosion control, visual interest, buffering, privacy, open space and pathway identification, shading and wind buffering, based on the following standards:

1.    Yard Setback Landscaping. Landscaping in yard setbacks shall satisfy the following criteria:

a.    Based on the proposed use of the site, provide visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards, while leaving front yards and building entrances mostly visible for security purposes; and observing the clear vision requirements of BDC Chapter 3.1;

b.    Use shrubs and trees as windbreaks or solar shading, where needed;

c.    Retain natural vegetation, as practicable;

d.    Define pedestrian pathways and open space areas with landscape materials;

e.    Provide focal points within a development, such as signature trees (i.e., large or unique trees), hedges and flowering plants;

f.    Use trees to provide summer shading within common open space areas and parking lots, and within front yards when street trees cannot be provided;

g.    Use a combination of plants for year-long foliage, color and interest; and

h.    Use landscaping to screen outdoor storage and mechanical equipment areas, and to enhance graded areas such as berms, swales and detention/retention ponds.

2.    Parking Areas. A minimum of 10 percent of the total paved area of all parking lot(s), as measured around the perimeter of all parking spaces and maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of an evenly distributed mix of broad-canopied deciduous shade trees with shrubs and/or ground cover plants. Evenly distributed means that the trees and other plants are distributed around the parking lot perimeter and between parking bays to provide a partial canopy. At a minimum, one tree per eight parking spaces total shall be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the parking area. All parking areas with more than 50 spaces shall include landscape islands with trees to break up the parking area into rows.

All landscaped areas for trees shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by four feet to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth. Where practical, landscape areas within parking lots shall be designed at a lower grade than the parking surface to allow surface water drainage to collect in the planter areas.

3.    Landscape Buffering and Screening Required. Landscape buffering and screening are required under the following conditions:

a.    Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Streets and Drives. Where a parking or maneuvering area for more than 10 vehicles is adjacent and parallel to a public or private street, a landscape buffer consisting of a variety of trees and/or shrubs shall be provided. The width of the landscape buffer shall be the same width as the front yard setback or a minimum of three feet, whichever is greater. The required screening shall provide breaks, as necessary, to allow for access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians via pathways.

The design of the screening shall also allow for visual surveillance of the site for security. Any areas between the parking and maneuvering area and the street/driveway line shall be landscaped with plants or other ground cover. All walls and hedges shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the owner.

b.    Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Building. Where a parking or maneuvering area, or driveway, is adjacent to a building, the area shall be separated from the building by a raised walkway, plaza, or landscaped buffer no less than two feet in width. Raised curbs, bollards, wheel stops, or other design features shall be used to protect buildings from being damaged by vehicles. The use of sidewalks adjacent to a building shall comply with ADA standards.

When parking areas are located adjacent to residential ground-floor living space, a landscape buffer with a minimum width of five feet is required.

c.    Screening of Mechanical Equipment, Outdoor Storage, Service and Delivery Areas, and Automobile-Oriented Uses. All mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, manufacturing, and service and delivery areas shall be screened to the greatest extent practical from all public streets, Residential Districts, and housing units on the same site. Screening shall be provided by one or more of the following: decorative wall (i.e., masonry or similar quality material as the building), evergreen hedge, non-see-through fence, or a similar feature that provides a non-see-through barrier. Walls, fences, and hedges shall comply with the vision clearance requirements and provide for pedestrian circulation, in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation. (See BDC 3.2.500 for other standards related to fences and walls.)

F.    Maintenance and Irrigation. The use of drought-tolerant plant species is encouraged. Water efficient irrigation shall be provided for new plants. If the plantings fail to survive, the property owner shall immediately replace them with an equivalent specimen (i.e., evergreen shrub replaces evergreen shrub, deciduous tree replaces deciduous tree, etc.). All other landscape features required by this code shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the owner.

G.    Additional Requirements. Additional buffering and screening may be required for specific land uses, as identified within the individual land use districts. In addition, the City may require additional landscaping through the Conditional Use Permit process. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.2.400 Street Trees.

This section sets standards and requirements for planting trees along all streets for shading, comfort, safety and aesthetic purposes. Except for BDC 4.3.700(A), Mid-Block Development, and BDC 4.3.700(D), Shared Courts, street trees must be planted for developments subject to BDC 3.6.200(H), Duplex and Triplex Development, BDC 4.2.500, Site Plan Review, and BDC Chapter 4.3, Subdivisions, Partitions, Replats and Property Line Adjustments, and Infill Development Options, for residential land divisions. Where sidewalks are being constructed with a development the street trees must not be planted until the sidewalks are completed. Street trees must conform to the following standards and guidelines:

A.    City of Bend Approved Tree List. The City has developed a list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes: low, medium and tall. Choices of trees are limited to the following list. Exceptions may be granted by the Planning Director.

Street trees must be those species suitable for the location in which they are placed. Typically, trees with a hardiness rating for zones 1 through 5 will survive in Central Oregon as long as irrigation is provided. Approved tree species include:

	1.	Trees with Low Mature Tree Height (25 feet or less), for use in areas under power lines or in small planting areas less than four feet width:

	 	Amur Maple/Acer ginnala	Hawthorn/Crataegus ‘variety’

	 	Canada Red Cherry/Prunus virginiana ‘Shubert’	Japanese Lilac Tree/Syringa reticulata

	 	Eastern Redbud/Cercis canadensis	Serviceberry/Amelanchier

	 	Flowering Crabapple/Malus ‘variety’ (choose fruitless varieties)	 

	2.	Trees with Medium Mature Tree Height (30 to 45 feet):

	 	American Hornbeam/Carpinus caroliniana	Hedge Maple/Acer campestre

	 	Callery Pear/Pyrus calleryana	Mountain Ash/Sorbus acuparia ‘variety’

	 	Hackberry/Celtis occidentalis ‘variety’	 

	3.	Tall Mature Tree Height (50 feet or larger) to be used along collector and arterial streets to create a canopy over the roadway:

	 	Green Ash/Fraxinus pennsylvanica	Pin Oak/Quercus palustris

	 	Honey Locust/Gleditsia tricanthos ‘variety’	Red Maple/Acer rubrum ‘variety’

	 	Littleleaf Linden/Tilia cordata	Red Oak/Quercus rubra

	 	Norway Maple/Acer platanoides ‘variety’	Pin Oak/Quercus palustris

	 	Green Beech/Fagus sylvatica 	 

	4.	Other Tree Species: Multi-trunk and weeping varieties are not appropriate as street trees. The Review Authority may approve other tree species as necessary to achieve the purposes of this code.

	5.	Where the City has adopted a Street Tree Master Plan, those trees identified in the master plan must be used.

B.    Growth Characteristics. Trees must be selected based on growth characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. The following should guide tree selection:

1.    Provide a broad canopy tree variety unless limited by overhead clearance.

2.    Use lower-growing or open-branched trees for spaces under utility wires.

3.    Select trees that can be “limbed-up” where vision clearance is a concern.

4.    Use narrow or “columnar” trees where awnings, other building features, or narrow sidewalks limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between buildings and the street.

5.    Avoid using trees that are susceptible to insect damage, and avoid using trees that produce excessive seeds or fruit.

6.    Select trees that are well adapted to the local environment, considering soil, wind, sun exposure, and exhaust. Drought-resistant trees should be used in areas with sandy or rocky soil.

7.    Select trees for their seasonal color, as desired.

8.    Use deciduous trees for summer shade and winter sun.

C.    Caliper Size. The minimum caliper size at planting must be two inches measured at four feet above ground. If the required caliper is not available as demonstrated by letters submitted by three different local nurseries, the Planning Director/Review Authority may accept a smaller caliper tree no less than one and one-half inches.

D.    Spacing and Location. Street trees must be planted within existing and proposed planting strips or in City-approved sidewalk tree wells on streets without planting strips. Where the landscape strip and/or sidewalk is not wide enough to accommodate street trees the Planning Director may allow the street trees to be planted within five feet from the back of the sidewalk. Where practical, small stature trees must be planted no closer to the curb or sidewalk than three feet, medium trees – three feet and large trees – four feet. Root barriers may be required with street tree planting to protect the City’s curb and sidewalk. Street tree spacing must be based upon the type of tree(s) selected and the canopy size at maturity. Small canopy trees and columnar shaped trees must be planted no further than 25 feet apart; medium and large canopy trees must be planted no further than 35 feet apart, except where planting a tree would conflict with existing trees, retaining walls, utilities and similar physical barriers. A random spacing of street trees may be approved for the equivalent number of trees required for the length of the frontage. Street trees must be planted no closer than 35 feet from a stop sign.

E.    Sidewalk Tree Wells. Street trees planted within sidewalk tree wells must be installed with a City-approved tree grate.

F.    Soil Preparation, Planting and Care. The developer is responsible for planting street trees, including, but not limited to, soil preparation, ground cover material, staking, and irrigation. The developer is also responsible for tree care (pruning, watering, fertilization, and replacement as necessary) for a minimum of one full growing season after planting unless an extended maintenance time is required.

G.    Assurances. If the street trees are not otherwise covered by a maintenance bond for public infrastructure, then the Planning Director may require the owner/developer to provide a performance and maintenance bond in an amount equal to 120 percent of the actual cost to purchase, plant and maintain for a minimum of one full growing season, to ensure the planting of the tree(s) and care during the first year after planting.

H.    Utility Easements. All street trees must be placed outside utility easements unless the utilities can be placed in a conduit for maintenance. If the existing parking/planter strip contains such easements and is not wide enough to also accommodate street trees, the street tree location requirement in subsection (D) of this section may be adjusted as approved by the Planning Director. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.2.500 Fences and Retaining Walls.

This section sets standards for new fences and retaining walls, including maximum allowable height and materials, to promote security, personal safety, and privacy. The following standards apply to all fences and retaining walls: 

A.    The City may require installation of fences and retaining walls as a condition of development approval.

B.    All fences and retaining walls, regardless of district or location, shall comply with the following requirements:

1.    The allowable height must be measured from the lowest grade at the base of the fence or retaining wall unless stated otherwise. Posts, trellises, lattice and any other material placed on top of the fence is considered to be part of the fence when measuring the overall height. As illustrated in Figure 3.2.500.A, when a fence is placed atop a retaining wall, the height of the fence is determined exclusive of the height of the retaining wall such that the top of the retaining wall is considered the finished grade.

Figure 3.2.500.A
[IMAGE]


2.    Fences to be built as required buffers shall comply with BDC 3.2.300.

3.    Fences and retaining walls shall comply with the clear vision area standards of BDC 3.1.500.

4.    Retaining walls may require a building permit and/or approved engineered plans.

5.    Fences over seven feet in height require a building permit and/or approved engineered plans.

6.    Fences and retaining walls may be placed on property lines.

C.    Fences. 

1.    Residential Districts.

a.    Fences located in the front setback must not exceed three and one-half feet in height.

b.    Exceptions.

i.    On corner lots, as illustrated in Figure 3.2.500.B, only one front setback area restriction applies relative to the three and one-half feet fence height restriction. The fence along the nonfront designated area must not exceed six feet in height from the area subject to the front setback to the rear property line.

ii.    On through lots the three and one-half feet fence height restriction only applies to the front setback which includes the front entrance to the dwelling unit. The fence along the nonfront designated area must not exceed six feet in height.

iii.    Decorative arbors, gates, and similar features must not exceed six feet in length.

iv.    Fences located in the front setback must not exceed four feet in height for child care facilities and registered or certified family child care homes. 

Figure 3.2.500.B Fence Example
[IMAGE]


c.    Fences must not exceed six feet in height in the side and rear setbacks. If there is a grade difference between two sites which would make a six-foot-high fence inadequate to provide for privacy, such fence must be no higher than six feet above the highest grade within five feet of the common boundary line, as illustrated in Figure 3.2.500.C.

Figure 3.2.500.C
[IMAGE]


d.    Barbed wire and razor wire fencing is prohibited.

2.    In all other districts fences shall not exceed eight feet in height.

3.    The following fences are exempt from these standards, except for the requirement to comply with the clear vision area standards in BDC 3.1.500 and any applicable building code requirements:

a.    Any security fencing around a public or quasi-public utility facility.

b.    Fences related to a park or approved recreational facility or a school athletic use including (but not necessarily limited to) tennis courts, driving ranges and ball fields.

c.    Any fence exempted under subsections (C)(3)(a) and (b) of this section that is in excess of 20 feet in height requires a Conditional Use Permit.

D.    Retaining Walls.

1.    The maximum allowable height of retaining walls is six feet, with the following exceptions:

a.    Retaining walls and terraced walls may exceed six feet when permitted as part of a Site Plan Review or land division approval. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 3.3 VEHICLE PARKING, LOADING AND BICYCLE PARKING

Sections:

3.3.100    Purpose.

3.3.200    Applicability.

3.3.300    Vehicle Parking Standards for On-Site Requirements.

3.3.400    Loading Standards.

3.3.500    On-Street Parking Design Standards.

3.3.600    Bicycle Parking Standards.


3.3.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and flexible standards for the development of vehicle parking, loading and bicycle parking. The design of parking and loading areas is critically important to the viability of some commercial areas, pedestrian and driver safety, the efficient and safe operation of adjoining streets, and community image and livability. Because vehicle-parking facilities can occupy large amounts of land, they must be planned and designed carefully to use the land efficiently while maintaining the visual character of the community. This chapter recognizes that each development has unique parking needs by providing a flexible approach for determining parking space requirements (i.e., “minimum” and “performance-based” standards). This chapter also provides standards for bicycle parking because many people use bicycles for recreation, commuting, and general transportation. Children as well as adults need safe and adequate spaces to park their bicycles throughout the community. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.3.200 Applicability.

All development within the City of Bend shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

In the Central Business District (CBD), prior to the issuance of any building permit for construction of a new building, enlargement of an existing building, or the change of use requiring additional off-street parking as required by BDC 3.3.300, the owner or occupant shall pay a fee in lieu of providing the required off-street parking or provide the off-street parking as specified in Table 3.3.300. The fee to be paid in lieu of providing parking shall be calculated on the basis of parking spaces required by this chapter. The fee and the policies regarding fees in lieu of parking shall be established by resolution by the City Council.

The fee shall be a one-time fee deposited into a fund to be used only for the planning, acquisition, development and maintenance of off-street parking facilities located in and/or adjacent to the CBD. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.3.300 Vehicle Parking Standards for On-Site Requirements.

The minimum number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces (i.e., parking that is located in parking lots and garages and not in the street right-of-way) is determined based on the standards in this section.

A.    Off-Street Parking Requirements. The number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces is determined in accordance with the following standards. Off-street parking spaces may include spaces in garages, carports, parking lots, and/or driveways if vehicles are not parked in a vehicle travel lane (including emergency or fire access lanes). In applying the exceptions and reductions listed in subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this section, reductions and exceptions may be combined except where otherwise specified. Where a fractional number of spaces results, the required number of spaces is rounded down to the nearest whole number.

 

Table 3.3.300 

Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces  

	Use	Minimum Requirement

	Residential

	Accessory dwelling unit	None

	Residential care home	2 parking spaces per dwelling unit

	All residential uses within the CB and MU Zoning Districts	1 space per dwelling unit

	Bed and breakfast inns	1 space per bedroom, plus 1 space for the manager or proprietor

	Short-term rentals	See BDC 3.6.500(H)

	Duplex and triplex	1-bedroom units – 1 space per unit

	2- or more bedroom units – 2 spaces per unit

	Manufactured home parks	2 parking spaces per dwelling unit

	Multifamily residential	Studio units or 1-bedroom units – 1 space/unit

	2-bedroom units – 1.5 spaces per unit

	3- or more bedroom units – 2 spaces per unit

	Retirement complexes for seniors 55 years or older – 1 space per unit

	Single-family, attached or detached, including a manufactured home on individual lot.	2 parking spaces per dwelling unit

	Commercial

	All commercial uses within the CB and MU Zoning Districts	1 space per 500 square feet of gross area

	Banking services	1 space per 350 square feet floor area

	Bulk and outdoor retail trade and services, including: auto, boat or trailer sales, retail nurseries, lumberyards, and similar bulk retail uses	1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area

	Commercial storage (e.g., ministorage, self-storage)	1 space per 6,000 square feet of net leasable square footage, with up to half the required spaces and associated driveway areas permitted to remain unmarked for trucks and other large vehicles.

	Entertainment (e.g., theaters, clubs, and other completely enclosed amusement uses)	1 space per 4 seats

	Hotels/motels	1 space for each guest room, plus 1 space for the manager

	Laundromats and dry cleaners	1 space per 350 square feet of customer use area, plus 2 spaces per 3 employees on the largest shift

	Office use (including medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories, alternative health care) 	1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area

	Restaurants and bars (subject to BDC 3.6.300(J)(10))	1 space per 200 square feet of gross leasable floor area

	Retail trade and services	 

	• General trade	• 1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area

	• Bulky merchandise (appliance, furniture)	• 1 space per 750 square feet of gross floor area

	Industrial Uses

	Heavy industrial	1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift or for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per company vehicle

	Light manufacture and production businesses (e.g., electronic equipment, printing, bindery, furniture, bakery, crafts, call center and similar uses)	1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift or for each 700 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per company vehicle

	Public/private utilities (e.g., natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable, and similar facilities)	1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift, plus 1 space per company vehicle; a minimum of 2 spaces is required

	Warehousing and distribution	1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area

	Public and Institutional Uses

	Adult day care	2 parking spaces per dwelling unit

	Child care facility	1 space per 2 employees; a minimum of 2 spaces is required

	Clubs, lodges, similar uses	1 space per 3 persons allowed by Building Code in the main assembly room or auditorium

	Community and regional parks and recreational facilities 	1 space per 10,000 square feet of gross area or 1 space per 1,000 square feet of building floor area, whichever is greater, or as required by a Conditional Use Permit

	Golf courses, including miniature golf 	2 spaces per hole, plus additional spaces for auxiliary uses as required elsewhere in this section

	Government – limited point of service (e.g., public works yards, vehicle storage, etc.)	1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift or for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per fleet vehicle

	Government – point of service intended to serve the entire City	1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area

	Government – point of service intended to serve a portion of the City	1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area

	Hospitals	1.5 spaces per bed

	Neighborhood parks and recreational facilities	None except as required for accessibility compliance or as required by a Conditional Use Permit

	Places of worship	1 space per 4 seats in the main worship area

	Residential care facility	1 space per 2 patient beds or 1 space per apartment unit

	Registered or certified family child care home	2 parking spaces per dwelling unit

	Schools (public and private) – elementary and middle 	1 space per employee or 4 seats in the auditorium, whichever is greater

	Schools (public and private) – high schools	1.5 spaces per classroom, plus 1 space per 10 students. If the school is designed to accommodate related uses such as auditoriums, stadiums, theatres, and gymnasiums, additional parking shall be provided at a rate of 1 space per 4 seats.

	Institutions of higher education	1 space per 5 off-campus students

1 space per 10 on-campus students

1 space per 2.1 employees

	Miscellaneous

	Unspecified uses	For uses not specified in Table 3.3.300, the Review Authority must determine the minimum number of required parking spaces as part of the development review process accompanying the proposed use, based upon similar uses listed in this table.

	Transportation and parking demand management (TPDM) plan	Institutional and employment master plans must provide a transportation and parking demand management (TPDM) plan in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, and BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan. All other development applications may choose to develop a TPDM plan in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan.

B.    Credit for On-Street Parking.

1.    The amount of off-street parking required may be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space abutting the development, up to 50 percent of the requirement, except as specified in subsections (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section.

a.    Uses within the CB Zone shall not receive credit for on-street parking, but have the option to pay a fee in lieu of providing off-street parking per BDC 3.3.200.

b.    For uses within the MU and MN Zones and in the Bend Central District, the amount of off-street parking required may be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space abutting the development, up to 100 percent of the requirement.

2.    On-street parking shall follow the established or approved configuration of existing on-street parking, except that angled parking may be allowed for some streets, where permitted by City, ODOT and/or County standards. One on-street parking space shall be defined as follows:

a.    Parallel parking, each 24 feet of uninterrupted curb, where allowed;

b.    Forty-five-degree diagonal, each with 14 feet of curb, where allowed;

c.    Ninety-degree (perpendicular) parking, each with 12 feet of curb, where allowed;

d.    Curb space must be connected to the lot that contains the use;

e.    Parking spaces will not obstruct a required clear vision area or violate any law; and

f.    On-street parking spaces credited for a specific use may not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. No signs or action limiting general public use of on-street spaces is permitted.

C.    Parking Location and Shared Parking.

1.    Location. Vehicle parking is allowed only on approved streets, within garages, carports and other structures, or on driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this code. Specific locations for parking are indicated within the individual land use districts for some land uses (e.g., the requirement that parking be located to side or rear of buildings, with access from alleys, for some uses). Required off-street parking shall not be located within the front yard setbacks except for single-family dwellings, ADUs, duplexes and triplexes.

2.    Screening. Commercial or industrial off-street parking which adjoins a residentially designated district shall be effectively screened by a fence and landscaping with a minimum width of 10 feet unless otherwise specified in this code.

3.    Off-Site Parking. Except for single-family dwellings, the vehicle parking spaces required by this chapter may be located on another parcel of land when commercial off-site parking is permitted in the underlying zone, provided the parcel is within 1,000 feet of the use it serves and the amount of off-site parking does not exceed the minimum amount of parking required for the intended use. The distance from the parking area to the use shall be measured from the nearest parking space to a building entrance, following a sidewalk or other pedestrian route. The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement, or similar written instrument.

4.    Mixed-Use Developments. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street automobile parking shall be 95 percent of the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e., the uses operate on different days or at different times of the day). In that case, the total requirements shall be reduced accordingly. (See subsection (C)(5) of this section, Shared Parking.)

5.    Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature, or of a weekday vs. weekend nature); and provided, that the right of joint use is evidenced by a binding agreement that is tied to the land or similar written instrument establishing the joint use. The binding agreement may restrict future changes to use of the property. Shared parking is encouraged.

6.    Availability of Facilities. Owners of off-street parking facilities may post a sign indicating that all parking on the site is available only for residents, customers and/or employees. Signs shall conform to the standards in the Bend Code.



D.    Exceptions and Special Standards for Parking.

1.    Exceptions for Required Parking.

a.    Seasonal outdoor seating where the seating area is less than 500 square feet is exempt from the required parking standards.

b.    The total number of required vehicle parking spaces for an industrial, commercial, or office use that is not part of a transportation and parking demand management (TPDM) plan in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.8 may be reduced by five percent for each of the listed activities which are provided by the owners or operators, up to a maximum 10 percent reduction in the total number of vehicle spaces per development.

•    Designating at least 10 percent of the employee vehicle parking spaces as carpool/vanpool parking and placing such spaces closer to the building than other employee parking.

•    Providing showers and lockers for employees who commute by bike.

•    Providing twice as many covered, secured bike racks or facilities as required by this code.

•    Providing a transit facility (e.g., bus stop) that is approved by the local transit authority, with related amenities. Related amenities include, but are not limited to, a public plaza, pedestrian sitting areas, shelter, and additional landscaping.

c.    The total number of required motor vehicle parking spaces for all uses except for single-family detached dwellings may be reduced by up to 10 percent for developments within 660 feet of a transit route (as the crow flies). Where only a portion of the site lies within 660 feet of a transit route, the reduction shall be applied only to buildings that are fully or partially within 660 feet of a transit route.

d.    The parking requirement for affordable dwelling units in conformance with BDC 3.6.200(C) is one on-site parking space per affordable dwelling unit.

2.    Special Standards for Commercial Customer Parking. The motor vehicle parking areas shall be located and designed to facilitate safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle movement to and from public sidewalks, streets, or transit stops. Ways to achieve this standard may include, but are not limited to:

•    Front facades and primary entrances of all buildings are oriented to a public street or a private internal drive or street, to minimize pedestrian and bicycle travel through a parking area and to provide safe, convenient, and direct travel routes for pedestrians;

•    One or more raised walkways are provided through the parking areas, meeting Federal Americans with Disabilities Act requirements, in order to provide safe, convenient, and direct travel routes for pedestrians through the parking areas;

•    Walkways abutting parking spaces or maneuvering areas are protected from vehicles through either landscaping buffers, minimum three feet wide on each side, or curbs on both sides;

•    Walkways across vehicle aisles are delineated by nonasphaltic material in a different color or texture than the parking areas;

•    On-site pedestrian walkways and bikeways connect to existing pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems that serve adjacent commercial uses or residential areas;

•    Internal drives or streets are designed to City standards for local streets in regard to pavement width, sidewalks, and street trees. Sidewalks comply with ADA standards. Sidewalks 10 to 15 feet wide abutting front building facades are strongly encouraged. Internal vehicular circulation design for the site complies with City street connectivity standards, including maximum block length and perimeter;

•    Internal drives or streets connect to public streets abutting the site, unless physically precluded by preexisting buildings;

•    Structures are located on the site to facilitate future infill and redevelopment of parking and landscape areas;

•    For shopping centers abutting one or more future transit routes, one or more transit stops are located and designed with the approval when applicable of the local transit provider;

•    No drive-up, drive-in, or drive-through drives or lanes are located between a building and a public or private street.

E.    Maximum Number of Parking Spaces. The number of parking spaces provided by any particular use in ground surface parking lots shall not exceed the required minimum number of spaces provided by this section by more than 50 percent. Spaces provided on-street, or within the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or under-structure parking, or in multi-level parking above or below surface lots, shall not apply toward the maximum number of allowable spaces. Parking spaces provided through “shared parking” also do not apply toward the maximum number.

Table 3.3.300.E.1 

Parking Stall Dimensions  

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	20' Stall	Aisle Width (*one-way)	Curb Length	Bay Width

	 	9'-0"	9.0	12.0	22.0	30.0

	0°	9'-6"	9.5	12.0	22.0	31.0

	 	10'-0"	10.0	12.0	22.0	32.0

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	9'-0"	19.8	13.0	12.7	52.5

	45°	9'-6"	20.1	13.0	13.4	53.3

	 	10'-0"	20.5	13.0	14.1	54.0

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	9'-0"	21.0	18.0	10.4	60.0

	60°	9'-6"	21.2	18.0	11.0	60.4

	 	10'-0"	21.5	18.0	11.9	61.0

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	9'-0"	21.0	19.0	9.6	61.0

	70°	9'-6"	21.2	18.5	10.1	60.9

	 	10'-0"	21.2	18.0	10.6	60.4

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	9'-0"	20.0	24.0	9.0	64.0

	90°	9'-6"	20.0	24.0	9.5	64.0

	 	10'-0"	20.0	24.0	10.0	64.0

* 24-foot minimum for two-way traffic

F.    Parking Stall Standard Dimensions and Compact Car Parking. All off-street parking stalls shall be improved to conform to City standards for surfacing, stormwater management and striping, and provide dimensions in accordance with Table 3.3.300.E.1 and Figure 3.3.300.

Figure 3.3.300

Parking Area Dimensions

	
[IMAGE]
	A = Parking angle

B = Stall width

C = Stall depth

D = Aisle width

	•    For one row of parking stalls use “C” + “D” as minimum bay width.

	•    Public alley width may be included as part of dimension “D,” but all parking stalls must be on private property.

	•    For estimating available parking area use 300 to 325 square feet per vehicle for stall aisle and access areas.

	•    For narrow lots, equivalent size stalls and aisles may be approved by the City Engineer.

	•    For large parking lots exceeding 20 stalls, alternate rows may be designated for compact cars; provided, that the compact stalls do not exceed 30 percent of the total required stalls. A compact stall measures 8 feet in width and 17 feet in length.

G.    ADA Accessible Parking Spaces. Accessible parking shall be provided for disabled persons, in conformance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Accessible parking is included in the total minimum number of required parking spaces in Table 3.3.300. Accessible parking facilities shall comply with the design requirements of the current building code as adopted by the State of Oregon. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.3.400 Loading Standards.

A.    Number of Loading Spaces.

1.    Nonresidential Buildings. Buildings where any of the floor area is in nonresidential use must meet the following standards:

a.    No loading spaces are required for buildings with less than 20,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area.

b.    One loading space is required for buildings with 20,000 or more square feet of nonresidential floor area.

c.    Two loading spaces are required for buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area.

B.    Size of Loading Spaces. Required loading spaces must be at least 35 feet long, 10 feet wide, and have a height clearance of at least 14 feet.

C.    Placement, Setbacks and Landscaping. Loading areas must comply with the setback and parking lot landscaping standards in this code. When parking areas are prohibited or not allowed between a building and a street, loading areas are also prohibited or not allowed.

D.    Loading Areas as Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking areas shall not be used to fulfill requirements of this section and may not be used except during off-peak parking hours. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.3.500 On-Street Parking Design Standards.

This section of the City of Bend Development Code provides specific requirements for construction of on-street parking facilities on arterial and collector classified roadways under the jurisdiction of the City of Bend.

A.    Parallel on-street parking may be allowed within pull-out parking bays on collector or minor arterial roadways classified per the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan as approved by the Planning Director subject to the following limitations:

•    Parking is located within residential or commercial zoning;

•    The posted speed of the roadway facility shall be 35 mph or less;

•    The roadway has bike lanes;

•    The roadway has sidewalks;

•    The roadway has only a single lane for motorized vehicle travel in each direction;

•    The roadway is a one-way street with two lanes of travel; and

•    Disabled accessible parking stalls and their access aisles shall have a maximum two percent slope in all directions.

B.    When pull-out parking bays are approved, the City Engineer shall approve construction plans in conformance with the following design criteria:

•    The AASHTO minimum stopping sight distance shall be provided along the roadway in advance of the bay for the eighty-fifth percentile travel speed of the roadway;

•    The bays only provide for two to three consecutive parking spaces;

•    Each parking space is eight feet by 25 feet in size;

•    There is spacing provided between successive parking bays of 100 feet;

•    The bays enable vehicles to pull easily in and out of travel stream;

•    The bays enable street sweeper and/or snow plow vehicles to follow curbs for maintenance purposes;

•    The bays and roadway facilities provide adequate drainage facilities; and

•    Disabled accessible parking signage shall be visible when a vehicle is parked in the designated space. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.3.600 Bicycle Parking Standards.

All uses that are subject to Site Development Review shall provide bicycle parking, in conformance with the following standards, which are evaluated during Site Development Review. This section does not apply to single-family, two-family, and three-family housing (attached, detached or manufactured housing), home occupations or other developments with fewer than 10 vehicle parking spaces.

A.    Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. A minimum of one bicycle parking space per use is required for all uses subject to Site Development Review. Table 3.3.600 lists additional standards that apply to specific types of development:

Table 3.3.600 

Required On-Site Bicycle Parking  

	Use	Requirement

	Multifamily dwellings with 4 units or more:	1 covered space per unit. Covered bicycle parking spaces may be located within a garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area. In those instances in which the residential complex has no garage or other easily accessible storage unit, the bicycle parking spaces may be sheltered from sun and precipitation under an eave, overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover.

	Retirement home or assisted living complex:	2 covered spaces or 1 covered space for every 10 employees, whichever is greater

	Retail sales and service	1 covered space for every 10 employees plus 1 space for every 20 motor vehicle spaces

	Multiple uses	For buildings with multiple uses (such as a commercial or mixed-use center), bicycle parking standards shall be calculated by using the total number of motor vehicle parking spaces required for the entire development. A minimum of one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces is required.

	Street vendors, itinerant merchants, and similar temporary sales operations	No bicycle spaces required

	Restaurants, cafes, and bars	1 covered space for every 10 employees plus 1 space for every 20 motor vehicle spaces

	Professional office	1 covered space for every 10 employees plus 1 space for every 20 motor vehicle spaces

	Medical or dental office or clinic or hospital	1 covered space for every 10 employees plus 1 space for every 20 motor vehicle spaces

	Stadium, arena, theater or similar use	1 covered space for every 20 seats

	Public or private recreational facility	1 space for every 10 employees plus 1 space for every 20 motor vehicle spaces

	Parking lots	All public and commercial parking lots and parking structures shall provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces.

	Industrial uses without retail trade or service	1 covered space for every 20 employees

	Industrial uses with retail	1 covered space for every 20 employees

	Elementary school	1 covered space for every 25 students. All spaces should be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.

	Junior high school	1 covered space for every 25 students. All spaces should be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.

	High school	1 covered space for every 25 students. All spaces should be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.

	College, university or trade school	1 space for every 10 motor vehicle spaces plus 1 covered space for every dormitory unit. Colleges and trade schools shall provide one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle spaces plus one space for every dormitory unit. Fifty percent of the bicycle parking spaces shall be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.

B.    Special Standards for the Central Business District. Within the Central Business District, bicycle parking for customers shall be provided in the right-of-way along the street either on the sidewalks or in specially constructed areas such as pedestrian curb extensions at a rate of one space per 3,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building. In addition, individual uses shall provide covered bicycle parking at the rate of one bicycle space for every 10 employees. At a minimum, each use shall provide one covered bicycle parking space. The bicycle parking shall not exceed six bicycles per parking area. Only when providing the required bicycle parking spaces is not feasible as determined by the City, the developer may pay a fee established by City.

C.    Location and Design.

1.    All bike racks shall have following design features:

a.    Inverted “U” style racks or similar design as illustrated below.

b.    Each rack shall provide each bicycle parking space with at least two points of contact for a standard bicycle frame.

c.    The bike rack shall have rounded surfaces and corners.

d.    The bike rack shall be coated in a material that will not damage the bicycle’s painted surfaces.


[IMAGE]


2.    Each required bicycle parking space shall be on asphaltic concrete, portland cement, or similar hard surface material and each space shall be at least two feet wide by six feet long with a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet. An access aisle width of at least five feet wide shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking.

3.    The location of the rack and subsequent parking shall not interfere with pedestrian passage, leaving a clear area of at least 36 inches between bicycles and other existing and potential obstructions. Customer spaces may or may not be sheltered. When provided, sheltered parking (within a building, or under an eave, overhang, or similar structure) shall be provided at a rate of one space per 10 employees, with a minimum of one space per use.


[IMAGE]


4.    Bicycle parking shall be conveniently located to both the street right-of-way and at least one building entrance (e.g., no farther away than the closest parking space). It should be incorporated whenever possible into building design and coordinated with the design of street furniture when it is provided. Street furniture includes benches, street lights, planters and other pedestrian amenities.

D.    Visibility and Security. Bicycle parking shall be visible to cyclists from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides sufficient security from theft and damage, except for bicycles stored per subsection (E) of this section.

E.    Options for Storage. Bicycle parking requirements for long-term and employee parking can be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle lockers, racks, or other secure storage space inside or outside of the building.

F.    Lighting. Bicycle parking should be at least as well-lit as vehicle parking for security.

G.    Reserved Areas. Areas set aside for bicycle parking should be clearly marked and reserved for bicycle parking only.

H.    Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as not to conflict with vision clearance standards (BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation). [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 3.4 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS Revised 9/19

Sections:

3.4.100    Purpose and Authority.

3.4.150    Waiver and Modification of Public Improvement Standards. Revised 9/19

3.4.160    Payment in Lieu of Sidewalk Construction. Revised 9/19

3.4.200    Transportation Improvement Standards. Revised 9/19

3.4.300    Public Use Areas.

3.4.400    Sanitary Sewer and Water Service Improvements.

3.4.500    Storm Drainage Improvements.

3.4.600    Utilities.

3.4.700    Easements.

3.4.800    Construction Plan Approval and Assurances.

3.4.900    Installation.


3.4.100 Purpose and Authority.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for design and construction of public and private infrastructure including: transportation facilities; sewer, water and other utilities; and drainage features and activities. One of the primary purposes of this chapter is to provide standards for attractive and safe streets that can accommodate vehicle traffic from planned growth, and provide a range of transportation options, including options for driving, walking, bicycling, transit and other transportation modes. This chapter is intended to guide development through the implementation of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

B.    Public Improvements Needed for Development. Development shall not occur unless the public improvements serving the development comply with the public facility requirements established or incorporated by this chapter, unless compliance is exempted by this code or unless the applicable standard is modified or waived under BDC 3.4.150.

C.    Compliance with Standards. All public improvements constructed as part of a development or to comply with a condition of development approval shall comply with all applicable standards, including but not limited to any standards and specifications adopted by the City applicable to public works or public improvements. The provisions of this chapter prevail over any inconsistent standard or specification unless the applicable standard is modified or waived under BDC 3.4.150.

D.    Conditions of Development Approval. No development shall occur unless required public facilities are in place or guaranteed. Improvements required to be constructed by the developer as a condition of development approval, when not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, shall be roughly proportional to the impact of development on public facilities and services. Findings in the development approval shall indicate how the required improvements are related to and roughly proportional to the impact. The City may deny an application if required public improvements are not in place, or the City may impose conditions of approval tying the timing of construction and/or occupancy of a proposed development to anticipated public improvements without requiring the applicant to construct the public improvements. [Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2139, 2010; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.150 Waiver and Modification of Public Improvement Standards. Revised 9/19

A.    Authority to Grant Waiver or Modification. Waivers and/or modifications of the standards of this chapter and/or the City of Bend Standards and Specifications may be granted as part of a development approval only if the criteria of subsection (B) of this section are met. A waiver for sidewalks for the Woodriver Village subdivision is not permitted under this subsection. See BDC 3.4.160, Payment in Lieu of Sidewalk Construction. 

B.    Criteria. The Review Authority, after considering the recommendation of the City Engineer, may waive or modify the standards of this title and the City of Bend Standards and Specifications based on a determination that (1) the waiver or modification will not harm or will be beneficial to the public in general; (2) the waiver and modification are not inconsistent with the general purpose of ensuring adequate public facilities; and (3) one or more of the following conditions are met:

1.    The modification or waiver is necessary to eliminate or reduce impacts on existing drainage patterns or natural features such as riparian areas, significant trees or vegetation, or steep slopes.

2.    An existing structure such as a substantial retaining wall makes widening a street or right-of-way or required placement of lines impractical or undesirable.

3.    Street access to an existing lot would be eliminated without the waiver or modification.

4.    Building on an existing lot would be infeasible without the waiver or modification.

5.    The standard is a street or right-of-way standard and existing structures on the same side of the block make future widening of the remainder of the street or right-of-way unlikely and the additional width on the project site would not be beneficial for sidewalks or parking without the extension for the rest of the block.

6.    The modification or waiver is needed to allow development of, or street access to, the property because of topographical constraints.

7.    The existing infrastructure (a) does not meet current standards, (b) is and will remain functionally equivalent to current standards, and (c) there is little likelihood that current standards will be met in the area.

8.    The installation of the required improvements would likely cause unacceptable significant adverse environmental impacts and the waiver/modification would avoid such impacts.

9.    There is insufficient right-of-way to allow a full width street cross-section and additional right-of-way cannot be provided.

10.    There is no street or right-of-way adjacent to the property and easement access has been obtained across private property.

11.    Required street frontage improvements for individual single-family dwellings could best be accomplished by planned area-wide improvements at a future date.

12.    The City has conflicting or inconsistent standards and the proposal would comply with one set of adopted standards. Standards are conflicting or inconsistent only when it is not possible to comply with both. In most situations, the more recently adopted standard should be followed and the older standard may be waived.

Maximization of the number of lots or parcels in a land division is not a reason to allow a waiver or modification.

C.    Other Requirements Not Waived. Any waivers under this section do not exempt the developer from submitting plans which meet all other applicable specifications.

D.    Application Requirements. The application for a waiver or modification shall be in writing submitted as part of a development application. The City Council may adopt a fee for a waiver/modification application by resolution. The application shall specify which requirement(s) of this chapter and/or the City of Bend Standards and Specifications are at issue and which of the condition(s) listed above are met. The application shall contain a statement explaining why the deviation from the required standards is necessary and why the waiver or modification sought will not harm or will be beneficial to the general public.

E.    Conditions. The City may impose a condition of approval requiring a signed agreement not to remonstrate against the formation of a local improvement district. [Ord. NS-2349, 2019; Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2139, 2010; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.160 Payment in Lieu of Sidewalk Construction. Revised 9/19

A.    Properties within the Woodriver Village subdivision must make a payment in lieu of constructing a sidewalk per lot which is not required to construct a sidewalk as a condition of development approval. The payment will be established in the City’s fee resolution. The payment requirement is limited to the Woodriver Village subdivision and is based on the unique characteristics of the Woodriver Village subdivision, as follows:

1.    The subdivision was approved in Deschutes County in 1972 prior to annexation to City of Bend in 1993;

2.    The public right-of-way width ranges between 40 feet to 60 feet;

3.    The pavement width is less than 24 feet;

4.    There are no curbs; and

5.    The area includes significant trees, rock outcroppings and a rural appearance.

B.    The applicant must make a payment in lieu of constructing the sidewalk prior to issuance of a building permit or land division final plat approval, whichever occurs first.

The payment in lieu of sidewalk construction is a one-time payment deposited into a sidewalk fund. The funds must be spent on costs directly related to the maintenance or construction of public pedestrian facilities, including land acquisition, design, and construction of sidewalks, that are reasonably expected to benefit or serve the resident(s) of the Woodriver Village subdivision. [Ord. NS-2349, 2019]




3.4.200 Transportation Improvement Standards. Revised 9/19

A.    Development Requirements. No development shall occur unless the development has frontage or approved access to a public or private street, in conformance with the provisions of BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, and the following standards are met:

1.    Streets within or adjacent to a development shall be improved in accordance with the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP), provisions of this chapter and other pertinent sections of this code.

2.    Development of new streets, and additional street width or improvements planned as a portion of an existing street, shall be improved in accordance with this section, and public street right-of-way and private street easements shall be dedicated to the City, Deschutes County or the Oregon Department of Transportation.

3.    All new and/or existing streets and alleys shall be paved per the City of Bend Standards and Specifications document.

B.    Variances. Variances to the transportation design guidelines in this section may be granted by means of a Class C variance, as governed by BDC 5.1.400(B)(4), Variance to Transportation Improvement Requirements. A variance may be granted under this provision only if a required improvement is not feasible due to topographic constraints or constraints posed by sensitive lands or the project does not meet the exception standards listed herein.

C.    Creation of Rights-of-Way for Streets and Related Purposes. Streets shall be created through the approval and recording of a final subdivision or partition plat; except the City may approve the creation of a public right-of-way by acceptance of a deed, where no plat will be recorded; and provided, that the street is deemed essential for the purpose of implementing the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan, and the deeded right-of-way conforms to this code. All deeds of dedication shall be in a form prescribed by the City and shall name “the public” as grantee.

D.    Creation of Vehicular Access and Public Utility Easements. The City may require a vehicular access and public utility easement established by deed when the easement is necessary to provide for vehicular access and circulation and/or provision of public utilities in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, or other sections of this code. Access easements shall be created and maintained in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code Section 10.207 and City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

E.    Street Location, Width and Grade. Except as noted below, the location, width and grade of all streets shall conform to the City of Bend Standards and Specifications document, the provisions of this chapter and an approved street plan or subdivision plat. Street location, width and grade shall be determined in relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.

1.    Street grades shall be designed and/or constructed as approved by the City Engineer in accordance with the design standards in Tables A through E in this section.

2.    Where the location of a street is not shown in an existing street plan in conformance with subsection (I) of this section, Future Street Plan and Extension of Streets, the location of streets in a development shall either:

a.    Provide for the continuation and connection of existing streets in the surrounding areas, conforming to the street standards of this chapter; or

b.    Where it is impractical to connect with existing street patterns because of topographical constraints or where the existing built environment precludes future street connections, the applicant shall conform to a street plan approved by the Review Authority. Such a plan shall be based on the type of land use to be served, the volume of traffic, the capacity of adjoining streets and the need for public convenience and safety.

F.    Minimum Rights-of-Way and Street Sections. Street rights-of-way and improvements shall be the widths defined in Street Improvement Standards Tables A through E. Additional right-of-way may be required at intersections to accommodate intersection widening and roundabouts.

1.    Pavement Widths. The required pavement width shall be determined based upon the factors listed below:

a.    Street classification in the Transportation System Plan;

b.    Anticipated traffic volume for the City’s planning horizon year;

c.    On-street parking needs;

d.    Sidewalk and bikeway requirements based on anticipated level of use;

e.    Requirements for placement of utilities;

f.    Street lighting;

g.    Minimizing drainage, slope, and sensitive lands impacts, as identified by the Bend Comprehensive Plan;

h.    Street tree location, as provided for in BDC Chapter 3.2;

i.    Protection of significant vegetation, as provided for in BDC Chapter 3.2;

j.    Safety and comfort for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;

k.    Street furnishings (e.g., benches, lighting, bus shelters, etc.), when provided;

l.    Access needs for emergency vehicles; and

m.    Consistent extension of existing street section.

2.    Future Street Widths and Special Building Lines. To ensure that adequate transportation corridors will be preserved for the future, the special setbacks established in subsection (J) of this section shall apply.

3.    Exceptions to Minimum Rights-of-Way Standards.

a.    Where opposite sides of the street are designated on the Bend Comprehensive Plan with different land use zones, the zone with the greater requirement for right-of-way dedication and pavement width will govern both sides of the street.

Table A: Improvement Standards for Dedicated Public Roadways in Residential Zones 

(UAR, RL, RS, RM-10, RM and RH)  

	Street Classification	Minimum Right-of-Way	Minimum Pavement Width	Planter Strips	Max. Grade (3)	Sidewalks Both Sides	Bike Lanes	Curbs

	Principal Arterial (2)	100'	76'	5'	6%	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Major Arterial	100'	76'	5'	6%	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Minor Arterial	100'	56'	5'	6%	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Major Collector	80'	56'	5'	8%	6'	Yes	Yes

	Local Street RM or RH	60'	36'	5'	10%	6'	No	Yes

	Local Street (1)

UAR, RL, RS, RM-10	60'	24'/28'/32'	5'	10%	5'	No	Yes

	Cul-de-Sac All Residential Zones	60'	24'	5'	10%	5'	No	Yes

	Alley	20'	20'	No	10%	None	No	No

Requirements:

1.    Local Streets:

a.    24-foot-wide street – No parking allowed on either side of the street.

b.    28-foot-wide street – Parking allowed on one side.

c.    32-foot-wide street – Parking allowed both sides in UAR, RL, RS, and RM-10 Zones.

d.    36-foot-wide street – Parking allowed both sides in RM and RH Zones.

e.    Special street widths (see subsection (J) of this section).

2.    Expressways and arterials that are Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) facilities shall meet ODOT design standards.

3.    See Table E for grade exceptions in steep terrain areas.

Table B: Improvement Standards for Dedicated Public Roadways in Commercial Zones 

CB, CC, CL, CG, ME, MR, PF and PO  

	Street Classification	Minimum Right-of-Way	Minimum Pavement Width	Planter Strips	Minimum Turn Lane/Median Island Width (1)	Maximum Grade (2)	Direct Site Access	Sidewalks Both Sides	Curbs

	Principal Arterial (3)	100'	76'	5'	11'/16'	6%	No	6'	Yes

	Major Arterial	100'	76'	5'	11'/16'	6%	No	6'	Yes

	Minor Arterial	100'	56'	5'	11'/16'	6%	No	6'	Yes

	Major Collector	80'	56'	5'	11'/16'	6%	Yes	6'	Yes

	Local 	60'	36'	5'	None	10%	Yes	5'	Yes

	Alley (4)	20'	20'	No	None	10%	Yes	None	No

Requirements:

1.    The first dimension is the minimum required width of the turn lane while the second dimension applies to the raised median width constructed between intersections:

a.    Intersection turn lane pocket width is 11 feet while the median end cap width is five feet in width.

2.    See: Table E for grade exceptions in steep terrain areas.

3.    Expressways and arterials that are Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) facilities shall meet ODOT design standards.

4.    Alleys are not required in Commercial Zones.

Table C: Improvement Standards for Dedicated Public Roadways in Industrial Zones IL and IG  

	Street Classification	Minimum Right-of-Way	Minimum Pavement Width	Planter Strips	Minimum Turn Lane/Median Island Width (1)	Maximum Grade (2)	Direct Site Access	Sidewalks Both Sides	Curbs

	Principal Arterial (4)	100'	76'	5'	11'/16'	6%	No	6'	Yes

	Major Arterial	100'	76'	5'	11'/16'	6%	No	6'	Yes

	Minor Arterial	100'	56'	5'	11'/16'	6%	No	6'	Yes

	Major Collector	80'	56'	5'	11'/16'	6%	Yes	6'	Yes

	Local: No Parking	60'	36'	5'	None	10%	Yes	5'	Yes

	Local: w/ Parking	60'	44'	5'	None	10%	Yes	5'	Yes

Requirements:

1.    The first dimension is the minimum required width of the turn lane while the second dimension applies to the raised median width constructed between intersections:

a.    Intersection turn lane pocket width is 11 feet while the median end cap width is five feet in width.

2.    See: Table E for grade exceptions in steep terrain areas.

3.    Alleys are not required in Industrial Zones.

4.    Expressways and arterials that are Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) facilities shall meet ODOT design standards.

Table D: Improvement Standards for Private Streets  

	Street Classification	Minimum Roadway Easement Dedication	Pavement Width	Maximum Grade	Direct Site Access	Bike Lanes	Sidewalks	Curbs

	Local Residential Streets	Greater than or equal to street improvement width including sidewalks.	24'/28'/32'	10%	Yes	No	5' both sides	Yes

	“T” Courts Less Than or Equal to 150 Feet Long	40'	24'	12%	Yes	No	Yes	Yes

	Local Commercial Streets	Greater than or equal to street improvement width, including sidewalks.	36'	10%	Yes	No	5' both sides	Yes

Requirements:

1.    Drainage must be retained on site and not drain to public right-of-way.

2.    Minimum roadway easement dedication (private property) with public property access dedicated for specific use for vehicle and pedestrian circulation.

3.    Private streets shall be constructed to public standards for public roadways (Tables A through C) except as modified by Table D. Private streets shall contain a public access easement and public utility easement for the entire width of the private street from the outside of each sidewalk, inward, and for the entire length of the private street.

4.    Collector and higher classification roadways are not permitted to be private.

Table E: Improvement Standards for Dedicated Public Roadways on Hillsides  

	Street Classification	Minimum Right-of-Way	Minimum Pavement Width	Max. Grade	Sidewalks Both Sides Curb Tight	Bike Lanes	Curbs

	Minor Arterial

(All Zones)	100'	36'	8%	6'	Yes	Yes

	Major Collector

(All Zones)	80'	36'	8%	6'	Yes	Yes

	Local: RM or RH Parking Both Sides	60'	36'	10%	6'	No	Yes

	Local: RS	60'	24'/28'/32' (3)	10%	5'	No	Yes

	Local Cul-De-Sac	60'	24'/28'/32' (3)	10%	5'	No	Yes

	Alley	20'	20'	10%	None	No	No

Requirements:

1.    Hillside street standards apply to those portions of streets constructed on existing slopes exceeding 15 percent.

2.    Planter strips are not required on those portions of the street that qualify for hillside standards.

3.    Local Streets:

a.    24-foot-wide street – No parking allowed on either side of the street.

b.    28-foot-wide street – Parking allowed on one side.

c.    32-foot-wide street – Parking allowed both sides in UAR, RL, RS, and RM-10 Zones.

d.    36-foot-wide street – Parking allowed both sides in RM and RH Zones.

e.    Special street widths (see subsection (J) of this section).

G.    Traffic Controls.

1.    Traffic signals/roundabouts shall be required and installed in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis, with development when traffic control warrants are met, in conformance with the Highway Capacity Manual and Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Traffic signal/roundabout design shall be approved by City Engineer. The developer’s financial responsibility and the timing of improvements shall be included as a condition of development approval.

2.    Traffic controls on roads under State jurisdiction shall be determined by the Oregon Department of Transportation.

H.    Medians. The use of landscaped medians improves community appearance, helps maintain system mobility and reduces the effects of wide street widths to all modes of travel. Medians will be landscaped with water efficient plant materials that are easily maintained.

1.    The design of medians on roads under City jurisdiction shall be approved by the City Engineer.

2.    The design of medians on roads under State jurisdiction shall be approved by the Oregon Department of Transportation.

I.    Future Street Plan and Extension of Streets.

1.    When a street plan has been developed and adopted by City Council along with an area plan, such as a Refinement Plan, that street plan shall guide the location and spacing of future streets pursuant to City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

2.    When no adopted street plan exists for the site, a future street plan shall be filed by the applicant in conjunction with an application for development, in order to facilitate orderly development of the street system. The plan shall show the pattern of existing and proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed development and shall include other properties within 400 feet of the site boundaries, and other developed streets or public rights-of-way or natural barriers surrounding and adjacent to the proposed development. The street plan is not binding; rather, it is intended to show potential future street extensions with future development.

3.    Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the property to be developed, when the Review Authority determines that the extension is necessary to give street access to, or permit a satisfactory future development of, adjoining land. The point where the streets temporarily end shall conform to subsections (I)(3)(a) through (c) of this section:

a.    These extended streets or street stubs to adjoining properties are not considered to be cul-de-sacs, since they are intended to continue as through streets when the adjoining property is developed.

b.    A City-approved barricade shall be constructed at the end of the street by the developer and shall not be removed until authorized by the City or other applicable agency with jurisdiction over the street. The Review Authority may also require signs that indicate the location of a future road connection.

c.    Temporary turnarounds (e.g., hammerhead or bulb-shaped configuration) shall be constructed for stub streets over 150 feet in length.

4.    Construction of partial width streets shall not be permitted, except as approved by the City Engineer. A partial street improvement may be approved only at the outer boundaries of a development where the street is required by other land use requirements and it is likely that adjacent underdeveloped property will complete the street construction. The following limitation shall apply:

a.    Partial street improvements are only allowed where available right-of-way is insufficient to allow a full street improvement.

J.    Special Setbacks.

1.    Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that adequate rights-of-way will be available for the appropriate street improvements as the City grows and that there will be no conflicts with the built environment.

2.    Applicability. The special setback standards shall be applied to any lot or parcel that abuts a public right-of-way.

    Exception. The special setback standards do not apply to intersections or streets that are already constructed consistent with the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP) including streets identified by the TSP as “not being authorized for lane expansion.”

3.    Setback.

a.    Unless waived under BDC 3.4.150, all buildings or structures shall be set back from planned future rights-of-way the minimum distance established in the applicable zoning district.

b.    Unless waived under BDC 3.4.150, the special setback from existing substandard width rights-of-way shall comply with Table F.

Table F: Special Setback Standards 

	Street Classification	Additional Setback from Centerline of Street

	Local Street	30 feet

	Collector	40 feet

	Arterial (Principal, Major, Minor)	50 feet

Note: The additional setback line shall be an assumed property boundary for the purpose of sidewalk construction.

K.    Street Alignment and Connections.

1.    Staggering of streets making “T” intersections at collectors and arterials shall be located to conform with the spacing standards contained in the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan and BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

2.    Spacing between local/local street intersections shall conform to the spacing standards contained in the City’s Standards and Specifications document and BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation. This standard applies to four-way and three-way (offset) intersections. Offset local street alignments shall be at least 125 feet distance between the centerlines of the streets.

3.    All streets that abut a development site shall be extended within the site to provide through circulation, unless prevented by environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns or compliance with other standards in this code. This exception applies only when it is not possible to redesign or reconfigure the street pattern to provide required extensions. Land is considered topographically constrained if the slope is greater than 15 percent for a distance of 250 feet or more. In the case of environmental or topographical constraints, the mere presence of a constraint is not sufficient to show that a street connection is not possible. The applicant must show why the environmental or topographic constraint precludes a street connection.

4.    Proposed streets or street extensions shall be located to provide access to existing or planned commercial services and other neighborhood facilities, such as schools, shopping areas and parks.

5.    In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the City, the design of developments and alignment of new streets shall conform to the standards in BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

L.    Sidewalks, Planter Strips, Curbs, Bicycle Lanes. Sidewalks, planter strips, curbs and bicycle lanes must be installed in conformance with the applicable provisions of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan, the Bend Comprehensive Plan, City of Bend Standards and Specifications and the following standards:

1.    The planter strip distance is measured from the face of the curb to the inside edge of the sidewalk.

2.    Sidewalks must be separated from the street by a planter strip and placed at the property line, where practicable, or as otherwise directed by the City Engineer.

3.    In areas with high pedestrian volumes, the City Engineer may approve a minimum 10-foot-wide sidewalk, curb tight, with street trees in tree wells and/or landscape planters.

4.    Bicycle lanes must be constructed on all collector and arterial streets unless otherwise designated.

5.    Planter strips are not required on T-courts.

6.    Where practical, sidewalks must be allowed to meander around existing trees in conformance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

7.    All public and private streets must have sidewalks and curbs.

a.    Exceptions. Properties within the Woodriver Village subdivision must make a payment in lieu of constructing a sidewalk subject to BDC 3.4.160, Payment in Lieu of Sidewalk Construction.

M.    Intersection Angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at an angle as near to a right angle as practicable, except where topography requires a lesser angle. In no case shall the centerline angle be less than 80 degrees.

N.    Existing Rights-of-Way. Whenever existing rights-of-way adjacent to or within a property are of less than standard width, additional rights-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision or site development, in conformance with Tables A through E in this section.

O.    Cul-de-Sacs. A cul-de-sac street shall only be used when the applicant demonstrates that environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation.

1.    All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a circular turnaround. Circular turnarounds shall have a curb radius of no less than 45 feet. Turnarounds may be larger when they contain a landscaped island or parking bay in their center. When an island or parking bay is provided, there shall be a fire apparatus access road of 20 feet in width.

P.    Grades and Curves. Grades shall not exceed those shown in Tables A through E in this section, unless approved through a waiver in accordance with BDC 3.4.150.

1.    Centerline curve radii and vertical curves shall conform to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) design criteria.

2.    At the intersections of arterial and/or collector streets, the approach grade shall average no more than +/- four percent for 250 feet from the edge of the intersecting roadway at full improvement. Local streets intersecting arterials or collectors shall provide a minimum of 50 feet of approach grade at no more than an average of +/- four percent.

3.    Existing conditions may warrant additional design criteria. All streets and intersection designs shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

4.    Lesser grades may be required at intersections as per City specifications. Grades in excess of 10 percent are subject to Fire Department approval.

Q.    Curbs, Curb Cuts, Ramps, and Driveway Approaches. Concrete curbs, curb cuts, curb ramps, bicycle ramps and driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, City of Bend Standards and Specifications and the following standards:

1.    Curb exposure shall be per City Standards and Specifications.

2.    All public and private streets shall have curbs, except there shall be no curbs on alleys unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

3.    Curb extensions at local residential street intersections are optional. If provided, the minimum width between the curb extensions shall be 24 feet. Curb extensions shall not be used on streets with bike lanes.

R.    Street Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. Wherever the proposed development contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land shall be created. New railroad crossings and modifications to existing crossings are subject to review and approval by the Oregon Department of Transportation and the rail service provider.

S.    Development Adjoining Arterial Streets. Where a development adjoins or is crossed by an existing or proposed arterial street, the development design shall provide access to/from the arterial consistent with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, and City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

T.    Alleys, Public or Private. Alleys shall conform to the standards in Tables A through E in this section. While alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, the corners of necessary alley/alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet, except where Fire Department access is required, the inside radius shall not be less than 30 feet. Right-of-way dedication for public alleys or roadway dedication for private alleys will be increased to match the pavement width.

U.    Private Streets. Private streets shall connect with public streets to complete the City’s transportation system grid where practical.

V.    Street Names. All street names shall be approved by Review Authority. No street name shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in Deschutes County, except for extensions of existing streets. Street names, signs and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area, except as requested by emergency service providers and shall comply with City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

W.    Survey Monuments. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to acceptance by the City, it shall be the responsibility of the developer’s registered professional land surveyor to provide certification to the City that all boundary and interior monuments shall be re-established and protected.

X.    Street Signs. The City, County or State with jurisdiction shall install all signs for traffic control. The cost of signs required for new development, including stop signs and any other roadway signs, shall be the responsibility of the developers and shall be installed as part of the street system developed and approved through the land use process. Street name signs shall be installed by developers at all street intersections per City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

Y.    Street Light Standards. Street lights shall be installed in accordance with City of Bend Standards and Specifications. [Ord. NS-2349, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.300 Public Use Areas.

Public open space and parks contribute to the livability of a growing community. They provide space for outdoor recreation and habitat for urban wildlife. These urban spaces are maintained and managed by the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District (BMPRD). Future public use areas are evaluated through the City’s land use application process.

A.    Neighborhood Parks. The following standards will be used to evaluate a proposed development to determine if the property includes an area that is suitable for a neighborhood park. Upon meeting these standards, the developer shall enter into negotiations with the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District regarding district purchase of land within the property proposed for development for construction of a neighborhood park.

1.    The subject property is located within a service area identified on the Neighborhood Parks Plan Map adopted by the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District as needing neighborhood parks.

2.    The property proposed for development is 10 acres or larger in area.

3.    The Bend Metro Park and Recreation District has indicated that the subject property contains a sufficient area that is suitable for neighborhood park development based on the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District Neighborhood Park Classification and Development Standards.

B.    Dedication Requirements.

1.    Where a proposed park, playground or other public use shown in a plan adopted by the Bend Metro Parks and Recreation District is located in whole or in part in a proposed development, the City may require the dedication or reservation of this area.

2.    If determined by the City Council to be in the public interest in accordance with adopted Bend Comprehensive Plan policies, and where an adopted plan of the City does not indicate proposed public use areas, the City may require the dedication or reservation of areas within the development of a character, extent and location suitable for the development of parks and other public uses.

3.    All required dedications of public use areas shall conform to BDC 3.4.100(D), Conditions of Development Approval.

C.    Acquisition by Public Agency. If the developer is required to reserve land area for a park, playground, or other public use, the land shall be transferred by deed to the appropriate public agency within six months following final approval, at a price agreed upon prior to approval of the development, or the reservation shall be released to the property owner. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.400 Sanitary Sewer and Water Service Improvements.

A.    Sewers and Water Mains Required. Sanitary sewers and water mains must be installed to serve each new development and to connect developments to existing mains in accordance with the City’s construction specifications as described in the City of Bend Standards and Specifications document and the applicable Bend Comprehensive Plan policies.

B.    Sewer and Water Plan Approval. Construction of sewer and water improvements cannot commence until the City Engineer has approved all sanitary sewer and water plans in conformance with City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

C.    Public Facility Plan Improvements. Proposed sewer and water systems must be sized to accommodate additional development within the area as projected by the Water and Sewer Public Facility Plans. The developer may be entitled to system development charge credits and reimbursement for the improvements if eligible under the applicable provisions of the Bend Code.

D.    Inadequate Capacity. Development may be restricted by the City where a deficiency exists in the existing water or sewer system that cannot be rectified by the development and which, if not rectified, will result in a threat to public health or safety, or surcharging of existing mains, or violations of State or Federal standards pertaining to operation of domestic water and sanitary sewer treatment systems.

E.    Sewer Collection Service outside the Bend Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). The City may establish sewer collection or treatment facilities outside the Bend UGB, including, but not limited to, the extension of sewer interceptor lines to serve lands in the UGB more efficiently by traversing outside the Bend UGB, or to connect to treatment facilities outside of the Bend UGB. Service connections to these facilities may only be allowed in cases where either the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or Oregon Health Division determines a public health hazard exists and service is provided consistent with OAR 660-011. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.500 Storm Drainage Improvements.

A.    Storm Drainage Improvements Required. Storm drainage facilities shall be depicted on City-approved engineered construction drawings and installed to serve each new development in accordance with applicable City construction specifications as described in the City of Bend Standards and Specifications and BC Title 16, Grading, Excavation, and Stormwater Management.

B.    Accommodation of Upstream Drainage. Drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed to accommodate increased runoff so that discharge rates existing before the proposed development shall not be increased, and accelerated channel erosion will not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbance or development activity. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.

C.    Effect on Downstream Drainage. Where it is anticipated by the City Engineer that the additional runoff resulting from the development will overload an existing drainage facility, the City shall withhold approval of the development until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or until provisions have been made for management of additional runoff caused by the development in accordance with City of Bend Standards and Specifications. Drainage shall not be directed to an existing watercourse, channel, stream or canal. Storm drainage facilities shall comply with applicable State and Federal regulatory requirements.

D.    Easements for Existing Watercourses. Where an existing watercourse traverses a development, such as a natural watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, or any other existing drainage facility including but not limited to irrigation canals, laterals and associated ditches, there shall be provided and recorded an easement conforming substantially with the lines of such existing watercourses and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance, as determined by the City Engineer.

E.    Easements for Developed Drainage Facilities. Where new drainage facilities are provided that include elements located outside the dedicated public right-of-way, such facilities shall be located within an area provided for in a recorded easement. The easement shall be adequate for conveyance and maintenance as determined by the City Engineer. [Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Order No. 2012-01, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.600 Utilities.

A.    Underground Utilities. All utility lines including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, lighting and cable television services and related facilities, shall be placed underground, except for surface-mounted transformers; surface-mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets; temporary utility service facilities during construction; and high capacity electric lines operating at 50,000 volts or above, which may be placed above ground.

The following additional standards apply to all development, in order to facilitate underground placement of utilities:

1.    The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility to provide the underground services. All above-ground equipment shall not obstruct clear vision areas and safe intersection sight distance for vehicular traffic in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

2.    The City reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-mounted facilities.

3.    All underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets by the developer, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets.

4.    Stubs for service connections shall be long enough to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

B.    Easements. Easements shall be provided and recorded for all underground utility facilities where required by the City. [Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.700 Easements.

A.    Requirement. Easements for sewer facilities, storm drainage, water facilities, street facilities, electric lines or other public/private utilities shall be dedicated on a final plat, or other instrument approved by the City.

B.    Provision. The developer or applicant shall make arrangements with the City, the applicable district and each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility easements necessary to provide full services to the development.

C.    Standard Width. The City’s standard width for exclusive public main line utility easements shall be 20 feet, unless otherwise specified by the utility company, applicable district, or City Engineer. [Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.800 Construction Plan Approval and Assurances.

A.    Plan Approval and Permit. Public improvements, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, lighting, parks, or other requirements, shall not be undertaken except after the plans have been approved by the City and the developer has signed a Public Facilities Infrastructure Agreement (PFIA), paid permit fees, and received a permit. The amount of the permit fee shall be set by City Council with the annual adoption of a fees resolution.

B.    Performance Guarantee. The City may require the developer or subdivider to provide bonding or other performance guarantees to ensure completion of required public improvements in accordance with the provisions of BDC 4.2.700, Bonding and Assurances for All Developments, and 4.3.400, Final Plat.

C.    Work within the Public Rights-of-Way. The City shall approve all contractors and their subcontractors who work in the City rights-of-way. [Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.4.900 Installation.

A.    Conformance Required. Improvements installed by the developer, either as a requirement of these regulations or at his/her own option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, approved construction plans, and to improvement standards and specifications adopted by the City, referenced within the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

B.    Commencement. Work shall not begin until the City has reviewed and approved the construction plans and notified the contractor of the approval.

C.    Resumption. If work is discontinued for more than one month, it shall not be resumed until the City is notified in writing.

D.    City Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the City. The City may require minor changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest. Modifications requested by the developer shall be subject to land use review under BDC 4.1.1300, Limitations on Approvals. Any monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the developer shall be replaced prior to final acceptance of the improvements.

E.    Engineer’s Certification. All public improvements shall be designed and certified by a civil engineer licensed and registered in Oregon. The civil engineer’s professional stamp and signature shall provide written certification to the City that all improvements, workmanship and materials are in accord with current and standard engineering and construction practices, conform to approved plans and conditions of approval, and are of high grade. Engineer’s certification is required prior to City acceptance of the public improvements, or any portion of the improvement, for operation and maintenance. [Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 3.5 OTHER DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

3.5.100    Density Transfers.

3.5.200    Outdoor Lighting Standards.

3.5.400    Solar Standards.

3.5.500    Solar Access Permits.


3.5.100 Density Transfers.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the Comprehensive Plan and encourage the protection of sensitive lands through the allowance of housing density transfers. Density transfers are the authorized transfer of allowed housing units (per BDC Title 2) from one portion of a property to another portion of the same property, or from one property to another contiguous property.

B.    Determination of Allowable Housing Units. The number of allowed housing units on a property is based on the surface area of the property (in acres) times the maximum allowed housing density in BDC Title 2.

C.    Density Transfer Authorized. Allowed housing units may be transferred from one portion of a property to another portion of the same property, or from one property to another contiguous property. The density transfer shall protect sensitive land areas as listed below either by dedication to the public or a land trust, or by a nonrevocable conservation easement. Sensitive land areas include:

1.    Land within the 100-year floodplain;

2.    Land or slopes exceeding 25 percent;

3.    Drainage ways;

4.    Wetlands;

5.    Identified Areas of Special Interest;

6.    Goal 5 Resources;

7.    A stand or grove of significant trees as defined in BDC Chapter 3.2.

A density transfer shall not be approved unless it meets one or both of the criteria below and it also conforms to subsections (D) and (E) of this section.

1.    The applicant shall dedicate land to the public in a size, configuration and condition desirable for public park or recreational purposes; or

2.    The density transfer is used to develop a mix of single-family and multifamily housing on the same property or development site.

D.    Prohibited Density Transfers. Density shall not be transferred from land proposed for street right-of-way, stormwater detention facilities, private streets, and similar areas that the Planning Director determines do not provide open space or recreational values to the public.

E.    Density Transfer Rules. All density transfers shall conform to all of the following rules:

1.    Allowed housing units shall be transferred only to developable lands (“receiving areas”). The number of allowed housing units shall be reduced on properties from which density is transferred (“sending areas”) based on the number of housing units transferred. The new number of housing units allowed on the sending area shall be recorded on a deed for the property that runs with the land. The deed shall state that the number of allowed housing units is subject to review and approval by the City, in accordance with current Zoning and Development Codes.

2.    The number of units that can be transferred is limited to the number of units that would have been allowed on the unbuildable area if not for the regulations in this code.

 

3.    The total number of housing units per property or development site shall not exceed 100 percent of the maximum number of units per gross acre permitted under the applicable Comprehensive Plan designation; except as otherwise permitted through the Master Planned Development process in BDC Chapter 4.5.

4.    All density transfer development proposals shall comply with the development standards of the applicable land use district, except as otherwise allowed by the Master Planned Development process in BDC Chapter 4.5.

5.    Public notice of the proposed density transfer is provided to all neighboring properties within 250 feet of the receiving property. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.5.200 Outdoor Lighting Standards.

A.    Intent. It is the intent of this section to allow citizens, businesses, and public agencies in Bend to illuminate residential, commercial, industrial, and public areas, roadways and walkways with lighting fixtures appropriate to the need while using such illumination in a way that preserves urban vistas and is directed onto and is confined to the property from which it is generated.

B.    Outdoor Lighting Fixtures Subject to This Section. Light fixtures subject to the standards in subsection (C) of this section are outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, lights for:

1.    Buildings and structures;

2.    Recreational areas;

3.    Parking lot and maneuvering areas;

4.    Landscape areas;

5.    Streets and street signs;

6.    Product display area;

7.    Building overhangs and open canopies;

8.    Holiday celebrations;

9.    Construction lights.

C.    Standards for Installation and Operation of Outdoor Lighting. Except as exempt by subsection (D) of this section, new outdoor lighting fixtures installed after February 18, 2004, shall be subject to the standards below. No provision of this section is intended to preempt BC Chapter 9.50, Signs, or applicable State codes.

1.    All outdoor lighting fixtures subject to this section shall be designed as a full cut-off fixture or have a shielding method to direct light emissions down onto the site and not shine direct illumination or glare onto adjacent properties.

2.    All lighting for roadways, roadway signs, intersections, and pedestrian ways shall be designed or have an opaque shielding method to direct light emissions downward and below the horizontal plane of the fixture in the permanently installed position.

3.    The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited.

4.    The operation of searchlights for advertising or promotional purposes is prohibited.

5.    Outdoor lights at designated Historic Sites or within Historic Neighborhoods that are consistent with the architectural style or era of the building or property shall be consistent with the provisions of this section.

6.    Businesses and institutions with outdoor lighting, such as parking lot lights, building lights, landscaping lights and other similar exterior lighting features, are encouraged to extinguish such lights at the end of the working day, except for lights necessary for personal and building safety.

7.    All outdoor lighting used for public or private sports stadiums, sports areas, recreation facilities, outdoor performance areas and other similar outdoor facilities shall be extinguished within an hour after conclusion of the final event of the day, except as exempted herein.

8.    Externally affixed neon lighting is prohibited except in the following manner: As a trim element that surrounds windows, doors, or building edges; when located on building facades that face street frontages or internal driveways within commercial shopping complexes; such lighting shall not be located more than 15 feet from finished grade and shall not be used to define a building roofline; and such lighting shall not include flashing, intermittent or rotating lights. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, all neon lighting associated with signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of BC Chapter 9.50, Signs.

D.    Exemptions. The following light fixtures or uses are exempt from complying with the outdoor lighting standards of this section. These exemptions shall not prevent the City from adoption of later ordinances that may address the retrofitting or removal of outdoor lighting fixtures.

1.    All outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed and operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, and not prohibited by this section. This exemption shall not apply if an existing light fixture is replaced. The addition of supplementary shielding and/or re-aiming of existing fixtures that shine direct illumination or visible glare beyond the property line where the fixture is installed are encouraged to help improve safety and quality of life in Bend.

2.    Residential decorative lighting and low wattage lighting used for yards and driveways that do not shine glare, emit direct illumination, or cast a shadow onto adjacent property.

3.    Commercial and industrial low wattage lighting used to highlight driveways and landscaping, or applied to a building providing they are properly aimed and shielded to not shine visible glare into the public right-of-way or onto adjacent or nearby properties.

4.    Up-lighting intended to highlight part of a building or landscaping; provided, that the light distribution from the fixture is effectively contained by an overhanging architectural element or landscaping element and does not shine beyond the intended target including into the night sky. Such containment elements may include but are not limited to awnings, dense shrubs or year-round dense evergreen tree canopies which will contain or limit illumination of the sky.

5.    Correctional Institutions. Exterior lighting for County correctional institutions shall be shielded high-intensity discharge lighting except at the immediate entry area, in which case other lighting may be used that conforms to the intent of this section.

6.    Low wattage lights used for holiday decorations for no more than 60 days are exempt from the requirements of this section.

7.    Carnivals and fairs that require the use of temporary outdoor lighting fixtures are exempt except that permanent installations at dedicated sites must conform to the requirements of this section.

8.    U.S. flags displayed by top-mounted lighting only. The illumination of all flags other than the U.S. flag shall be extinguished at the end of public business hours or by 10:00 p.m., whichever is later.

9.    Temporary lighting for television or movie film productions, roadway or utility construction or building construction not to exceed 60 days in any one vicinity. Permanent installations at dedicated sites must conform to the requirements of this section.

10.    The operation of outdoor lighting used for public or private sports stadiums, sports areas, recreation facilities, outdoor performance areas and other similar outdoor facilities later than the conclusion of the final event of the day when maintenance such as field grooming, irrigation, cleaning and other similar maintenance activities are required in order to have the facility ready for operation the following morning. Lights during after-events maintenance shall be kept at the minimum level practicable.

11.    All outdoor light fixtures used to highlight art features within a traffic circle or roundabout providing they are properly aimed and shielded to not shine visible glare into the public right-of-way or onto adjacent or nearby properties.

E.    Violations and Penalties. For any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve or convert any lighting fixture, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a violation and is subject to enforcement under the provisions of BDC Chapter 1.3, Enforcement. Each day a lighting fixture is in violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation.

F.    Definitions. The following definitions apply to terms in this section:

1.    End of business hours or end of business means (a) the end of normal or posted business hours when a business or institution is no longer open to serve customers or clients, and (b) the end of a shift or normal work hours when the majority of employees are gone from the business or institution.

2.    Full cut-off means a light fixture designed and constructed so that light is directed down and no light is projected above the horizontal plane. [See illustrations below]


[IMAGE]


3.    Glare means stray, unshielded light striking the eye that may result in (a) nuisance or annoyance such as light shining into a window; (b) discomfort causing squinting of the eyes; (c) disabling vision by reducing the ability of the eyes to see into shadows; or (d) reduction of visual performance.

4.    High intensity discharge lamp lighting means high-pressure sodium, mercury vapor, metal halide, low-pressure sodium, induction, sulfur, xenon, and other similar lamps.

5.    Installed means initial installation of outdoor lighting fixtures, poles, electrical wiring, and related mounting equipment following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Projects with approved construction plans prior to effective date of the ordinance codified in this section are excluded from compliance with the ordinance in the initial installation only.

6.    Low wattage lights means 12-volt direct current lights or individual lamps less than 0.25 watts each strung together within a translucent or transparent plastic cover.

7.    Replacement means the installation of a new lighting fixture in place of an existing fixture, and/or the installation of a new lighting housing or head to an existing pole, bracket or wall, tree, or other structure. “Replacement” does not mean the changing of light bulbs or lamps in a fixture for the same or lower wattage bulbs.

8.    Safety/Security. “Safety” means (a) sufficient lighting at building entrances, exits, walkways and parking areas to allow customers and employees to see any physical barriers and to be seen at all times as they access to vehicles and sidewalks, and (b) the use of full cut-off light fixtures above doors, at fire service stanchions, loading areas, and similar building access points.

9.    Shielding means an externally applied device such as a shroud or hood of metal, wood, opaque plastic or opaque painted glass so that light emitted by the fixture is directed downward below the horizontal plane onto the site and does not shine direct illumination or glare onto adjacent or nearby property.

10.    Unshielded means light fixtures lacking any means to restrict the emitted light to below the horizontal plane or to shine or glare onto adjacent or nearby property.

11.    Up lighting means a shielded light fixture usually installed on the ground or permanently mounted to an architectural element, tree, or other structure that has the light from the fixture directed in a contained distribution pattern above the horizontal plane to illuminate an adjacent or nearby building element, shrub, tree or other landscaping. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.5.400 Solar Standards.

A.    Purpose. Solar standards are utilized to create lot divisions, layouts and building configurations to help preserve access to sunlight to one- and two-family dwellings.

B.    Solar Lot Standards.

1.    Applicability. Solar lot standards apply to the creation of lots within subdivisions in RS and RM Zones.

2.    Solar Lot Requirements. In RS and RM Zones, at least 70 percent of the lots in a subdivision shall have a minimum north-south lot dimension of 80 feet or more.

3.    Exceptions to the Solar Lot Requirements. A proposed subdivision shall qualify for an exception to subsection (B)(2) of this section if one or more of the following development constraints are present:

a.    Compliance with applicable street standards or public street plans requires a street configuration that prevents the lot from being oriented for solar access.

b.    An existing public easement or right-of-way prevents the lot from being oriented for solar access.

c.    There is a significant natural feature on the site that will continue to exist after the site is developed, and that prevents the lot from being oriented for solar access.

4.    Exemptions to the Solar Lot Requirements. A proposed lot shall not be identified as a “solar lot” but shall be counted as a lot that satisfies subsection (B)(2) of this section when the lot satisfies subsection (B)(4)(a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section.

a.    Slopes. The lot has an average slope of 15 percent or more in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south.

b.    Existing Off-Site Shade. The lot is within the shadow pattern of off-site features, such as but not limited to buildings, topography, or coniferous trees or broadleaf evergreens, which will remain after development occurs on the site from which the shade is originating.

i.    Shade from existing or approved off-site buildings or structures and from topographic features is assumed to remain after development of the site.

ii.    Shade from vacant developable areas off site is assumed to be the shadow pattern that would result from the largest building allowed at the closest setback allowed on adjoining land, whether or not that building now exists.

iii.    Shade from coniferous trees or broadleaf evergreens is assumed to remain after development of the site if that vegetation is situated in a required setback; or part of a developed area, public park, or legally reserved open space; or part of landscaping or other features required pursuant to this code.

c.    Existing On-Site Shade. The site, or portion of the site for which the exemption is sought, complies with at least one of the following:

i.    The site is within the shadow pattern of on-site features such as, but not limited to, buildings and topography which will remain after the development occurs.

ii.    The site contains coniferous trees or broadleaf evergreens at least 30 feet tall and more than eight inches in diameter measured four feet above the ground which have a crown cover over at least 80 percent of the site or relevant portion. The applicant can show such crown cover exists using a scaled survey or an aerial photograph. If granted, the exemption shall be approved subject to the condition that the applicant shall preserve at least 50 percent of the nonsolar friendly vegetation that causes the shade that warrants the exemption. The applicant shall file a note on the plat or documents in the office of the County Recorder binding the applicant to comply with this requirement.

d.    Housing Mix. The lot is designated for a housing type other than single-family detached dwellings in a proposed subdivision that identifies at least 10 percent of the lots for a housing type other than single-family detached dwellings.

C.    Solar Setback Standards.

1.    Applicability. These standards apply to all structures on RS and RM zoned lots, 5,000 square feet or greater, with a minimum north-south lot dimension of 80 feet.

2.    Solar Setback Requirements. Buildings shall be set back from the northern property line according to the standards in this section. When a northern property line abuts an alley, street, or common area, the setback will be measured to the next lot line across the alley, street, or common area. An applicant for a development permit for a building subject to this section shall submit documentation that shows either the solar setback or how the structure qualifies for an exemption. If buildings on separate lots are attached or connected at a common lot line, the solar setback standards apply as if the buildings are a single building on a single lot composed of both lots.

a.    Solar Setback for RS Zone. The solar setback of the shade point shall be greater than or equal to the following formula:

	SSB =	(2.5 X SPH) + (N divided by 2) – 85

	Where:	 

	SSB =	Solar setback (the shortest horizontal distance between the shade point and the plane of the northern lot line).

	SPH =	Shade point height (reduce this dimension by three feet if the shade point is a ridgeline between 45 degrees east or west of true north).

	N =	North-south lot dimension. Maximum allowable “N” for purposes of calculating the solar setback shall be 90 feet.

The following table, which accurately applies the formula, can be used to determine compliance with the solar setback standard.

Table 3.5.400.A 

Solar Setback from Northern Lot Line for RS Zone [SSB]  

(All figures are in feet.)* 

	Shade Point Height* [SPH]	North-South Lot Dimension

	90 feet [N]	85 feet [N]	80 feet [N]

	18 feet	5	2.5	0

	20 feet	10	7.5	5

	22 feet	15	12.5	10

	24 feet	20	17.5	15

	26 feet	25	22.5	20

	28 feet	30	27.5	25

	30 feet	35	32.5	30

*    Solar setback and shade point height are usually measured from an eave or from a ridge line of a roof. See Figure 3.5.400, Measuring Shade Point Height.

b.    Solar Setback for RM Zone. The solar setback of the shade point shall be greater than or equal to the following formula:

	SSB =	(2.5 X SPH) + (N divided by 2) – 100

	Where:	 

	SSB =	Solar setback (the shortest horizontal distance between the shade point and the plane of the northern lot line).

	SPH =	Shade point height (reduce this dimension by 3 feet if the shade point is a ridgeline between 45 degrees east or west of true north).

	N =	North-south lot dimension. Maximum allowable “N” for purposes of calculating the solar setback shall be 90 feet.

The following table, which accurately applies the formula, can be used to determine compliance with the solar setback standard.

Table 3.5.400.B 

Solar Setback from Northern Lot Line for RM Zone [SSB]  

(All figures are in feet.)* 

	Shade Point Height* [SPH]	North-South Lot Dimension

	90 feet [N]	85 feet [N]	80 feet [N]

	24 feet	5	2.5	0

	26 feet	10	7.5	5

	28 feet	15	12.5	10

	30 feet	20	17.5	15

	32 feet	25	22.5	20

	34 feet	30	27.5	25

	36 feet	35	32.5	30

*    Solar setback and shade point height are usually measured from an eave or from a ridge line of a roof. See Figure 3.5.400, Measuring Shade Point Height.

Figure 3.5.400

Measuring Shade Point Height
[IMAGE]


3.    Exemptions to Solar Setback Requirements. A building is exempt from the solar setback standards when any of the following conditions exist:

a.    Slopes. The lot on which the building is located has an average slope of 15 percent or more in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true north.

b.    Existing Shade. The building will shade an area that is already completely shaded by one or more of the following:

i.    An existing or approved building or structure.

ii.    A topographic feature.

iii.    Coniferous trees or broadleaf evergreens that will remain after development of the site.

c.    Insignificant Benefit. The building will shade one or more of the following:

i.    A nondevelopable area, such as designated open space, a public utility easement, street or alley.

ii.    The wall of an unheated space, such as a garage, excluding solar greenhouses and other similar solar structures.

iii.    The wall of a nonresidential structure.

iv.    No more than 20 percent of a south wall of an existing habitable dwelling.

d.    Master Planned Development Exemption. The lot is identified as being exempt from solar setback provisions through an approved Master Planned Development application where one or more of the following exists:

i.    The lot has been identified as being exempt from solar setback standards.

ii.    The proposed building locations and heights were approved. [Ord. NS-2137, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.5.500 Solar Access Permits.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide and preserve solar access to productive solar collectors by establishing limitations for growth of vegetation on certain lots in the vicinity of a productive solar collector.

B.    Applicability. Any owner may submit an application for a solar access permit to provide solar access for a productive solar collector located on the owner’s real property.

1.    The application for a solar access permit shall be on forms prescribed by the City and shall contain at a minimum:

a.    A legal description of the applicant’s lot, including proof of ownership;

b.    Documentation to show that the solar collector is or will be a productive solar collector within six months of the application date;

c.    Descriptive drawings of the solar collector showing dimensions and location;

d.    A sun chart and statement of the solar heating hours for which solar access is sought;

e.    A statement that there is no reasonable alternative location for the solar collector that would result in a lesser burden on a neighboring lot;

f.    A statement that trimming the vegetation on the applicant’s lot will not permit an alternative location that would lessen the burden on a neighboring lot;

g.    A list of all lots that are within 150 feet to the south, southeast, and southwest of the solar collector, including for each such lot the legal description; the owner of record and address; the exempt vegetation located on the lot; and any existing nonexempt vegetation likely to encroach on the protected area;

h.    A statement that none of the lots impacted are located on a north facing slope with a grade that exceeds, on average, 15 percent.

2.    The applicant shall provide a map drawn to scale showing the following information:

a.    The location of and delineating all exempt and nonexempt vegetation as shown on the sun chart photograph as well as any nonexempt vegetation not shown on the sun chart which may encroach on the protected area in the future;

b.    The exact site of the solar collector, its height and orientation;

c.    An indication of true north;

d.    A survey of the lot.

3.    Approval Criteria.

a.    The solar collector is or will be a productive solar collector. For the purposes of this section, productive solar collector means a solar collector that provides no less than 10 percent of a building’s total energy requirements or 50 percent of a building’s annual water heating requirements.

b.    The protected area to be created by the solar access permit is reasonably located.

c.    The applicant requests solar heating hours no greater than two hours before and after the solar zenith from September 22 to March 21, and three hours before and after the solar zenith from March 22 to September 21.

d.    The solar access provided by the permit would not burden any lot with a north facing slope with an average grade of 15 percent or greater or which is more than 150 feet from the solar collector.

An applicant shall be denied if the applicant could trim vegetation on the subject property to permit an alternate location that would be less burdensome upon a neighboring lot.

C.    Solar Access Permit Issuance and Recordation.

1.    The City shall issue and acknowledge a solar access permit creating the solar access requested in the application or as modified by the City upon approval.

2.    The applicant shall record, with the Deschutes County Clerk, the solar access permit in the chain of title of the subject lot and each of the neighboring lots identified in the permit and provide proof of recordation.

3.    The solar access permit shall be prescribed by the City and shall contain at a minimum:

a.    A legal description of the applicant’s lot and each neighboring lot to be burdened by the solar access created by the solar access permit;

b.    A complete description of the solar access restrictions applicable to each neighboring lot, including the solar heating hours during which solar access is provided, and a sun chart showing the platted skyline, including vegetation and a scaled drawing showing the size and location of the protected area and its orientation with respect to true south;

c.    A reference to where the approved application may be obtained.

D.    Obligation Created by Solar Access Permit. The owner of any lot burdened by a solar access permit shall trim any nonexempt vegetation on a burdened lot that shades the protected area created by the solar access permit; provided, that there is no vegetation on the lot benefited by the solar access permit that also shades the protected area. Before any trimming is required, the permit holder must certify that the solar collector is still productive.

E.    Termination of Solar Access Permit.

1.    The Development Services Director shall terminate the solar access permit with respect to all or part of the neighboring lots burdened by the solar access permit if a petition for termination is submitted by the permit holder or the successor of interest, or the solar collector is shown to be unproductive for a period of one year or more.

2.    The permit holder shall record the termination of the solar access permit with the Deschutes County Clerk and provide proof of recordation to the City. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2137, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 3.6 SPECIAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN USES Revised 1/19

Sections:

3.6.100    Purpose.

3.6.200    Residential Uses. Revised 1/19

3.6.300    Nonresidential Uses.

3.6.400    Temporary Uses.

3.6.500    Short-Term Rentals.


3.6.100 Purpose.

This chapter supplements the standards contained in this code. It provides standards for certain land uses in order to control the size, scale and compatibility of those uses within all the zoning districts. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.6.200 Residential Uses. Revised 1/19

This section supplements the standards contained in BDC Title 2 and provides standards for the following land uses in order to control the size, scale and compatibility of those uses within the applicable zone.

A.    Courtyard Housing. Detached “zero lot line” houses on individual lots are subject to the same standards as single-family detached housing, except that the three-foot minimum side yard setback is required on one side of a typical lot. As shown in Figure 3.6.200.A, this type of housing is permitted to allow development on smaller (i.e., narrower) lots and still provide usable outdoor living area in side-oriented courtyards. The following standards are intended to promote compatibility and privacy between adjacent buildings and allow for building maintenance:

1.    Setbacks Adjacent to Non-Zero Lot Line Development. When a zero lot line house shares a side property line with a non-zero lot line development (including vacant lots), the zero lot line building shall be set back from the common property line by a minimum of seven feet;

2.    Construction and Maintenance Easement. Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a copy of a recorded easement for every zero lot line house that guarantees rights for the purpose of construction and maintenance of structures and yards. The easement shall stipulate that no fence or other obstruction shall be placed in a manner that would prevent maintenance of structures on the subject lot;

3.    Buffering. The building placement, landscaping, and/or design of windows shall provide a buffer for the occupants of abutting “zero lot line” lots. For example, this standard is met by placing ground-floor windows (along the zero setback) where views are directed into adjacent yards, or by directing views away from yards (e.g., bay window), or by using frosted glass or other window covering that obscures any view to the interior but allows light into the interior. This standard does not apply to adjoining non-zero lot line lots.

Figure 3.6.200.A – Courtyard Housing
[IMAGE]


B.    Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a small dwelling unit on a property that contains a single-family dwelling unit as the primary use. The ADU may be attached, detached, or within a portion of an existing dwelling unit. The maximum density standards do not apply to ADUs due to their small size and low occupancy. The standards of this section are intended to control the size, scale and number of ADUs on individual properties to promote compatibility with abutting land uses. ADUs must comply with the following standards in addition to the standards of the applicable zoning district:

1.    Permitted ADU. An ADU may only be permitted on a lot or parcel with a single-family detached dwelling, a single-family attached townhome, or a manufactured home.

2.    Number of ADUs. A maximum of one ADU is allowed per lot or parcel. 

3.    ADU Size. 

a.    An ADU on a property that is 6,000 square feet or less must not exceed 600 square feet of floor area.

b.    An ADU on a property that is greater than 6,000 square feet must not exceed 800 square feet of floor area.

c.    For purposes of measuring the ADU size in this subsection, floor area means the area measured in feet included inside the exterior surrounding walls of horizontal decked space intended to be a floored surface contained within the building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts, and courts and basements. When calculating floor area stairs are counted once unless the area under the stairs is part of the ADU floor plan, in which case the stairs are counted twice.

d.    Exception to ADU Size.

i.    Accessory structures attached to an ADU do not count towards the maximum floor area if they are not accessible from the interior of the ADU or if the accessory structure provides at least one allocated parking space for the ADU.

4.    Floor Area Ratio. The FAR as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions, must not exceed 0.60 for all buildings on site, cumulatively. 

a.    Exemptions to FAR.

i.    Accessory structures less than 10 feet in height and 200 square feet in area.

ii.    FAR does not apply to a property when the ADU is proposed to be located in a structure legally constructed prior to April 1, 2016.

iii.    Property not designated residential in the Bend Comprehensive Plan. 

5.    Building Height. A detached ADU must not exceed 25 feet in height. In order to consider the ADU to be attached to the primary dwelling unit, it must be attached by one of the following options as illustrated in Figure 3.6.200.B. The shared or attached wall must be the wall of an enclosed interior space, and does not include porches, patios, decks or stoops.

a.    The ADU must share a common wall for at least 25 percent of the length of the primary dwelling unit; or 

b.    The entire length of one elevation of the ADU must be attached to the primary dwelling unit.

Figure 3.6.200.B
[IMAGE]


    Exemption to Building Height. The building height does not apply when the ADU is proposed to be located in a structure legally constructed prior to April 1, 2016.

6.    Parking. None.

7.    Design Standards. A second story ADU over 600 square feet, abutting a RL or RS property with a residential development, must comply with the following:

a.    Exterior doorways and outdoor living spaces (e.g., balconies or decks) on the second story and exterior staircases must not be located in a side or rear yard abutting a RL or RS property with a residential development unless they are set back a minimum of 10 feet from the side or rear property line.

8.    Detached ADUs. A detached ADU must be a minimum of six feet apart from the primary single-family dwelling unit as measured between their building footprints, unless exempted below.

a.    Exemption. Does not apply when the primary single-family dwelling unit was legally constructed prior to April 1, 2016, and the ADU is proposed to be located in a detached structure legally constructed prior to April 1, 2016.

9.    Process. ADUs are subject to BDC 4.2.400, Minimum Development Standards Review.

C.    Affordable Housing Strategies. The City of Bend provides an incentive program to developers to assist in the development of affordable housing.

1.    For the purposes of the incentive program, the City defines affordable housing as housing with a sales price or rental amount that is within the means of a household that may occupy moderate- and low-income housing, meeting one of the thresholds defined in subsections (C)(1)(a) and (b) of this section.

a.    In the case of dwelling units for sale, “affordable” means housing in which the mortgage, amortized interest, taxes, insurance, and condominium or association fees, if any, constitute no more than 30 percent of such gross annual household income for a family at 80 percent of the area median income, based upon most recent HUD income limits for the Bend Metropolitan Statistical Area (Bend MSA).

b.    In the case of dwelling units for rent, “affordable” means housing for which the rent and utilities constitute no more than 30 percent of such gross annual household income for a family at 60 percent of the area median income, based upon most recent HUD income limits for the Bend Metropolitan Statistical Area (Bend MSA).

2.    In association with the land use review process, and prior to the issuance of a building permit for any units in an affordable housing development, the owner must enter into an affordable housing development agreement with the City. The development agreement must set forth the commitments and obligations of the City and the owner, including, as necessary, conditions to ensure the completion of affordable housing in the development.

3.    The owner must execute any and all documents deemed necessary by the City in a form to be established by the City Attorney, including, without limitation, restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, and related instruments (including requirements for income qualification for tenants of for-rent units) to ensure the continued affordability of the affordable housing units in accordance with this section.

4.    Developments in compliance with subsection (C)(1) of this section may be eligible for the following incentives unless otherwise specified:

a.    Density Bonus. A developer may be eligible for a density bonus when a percentage of the proposed dwelling units are affordable. The percentage of affordable units is based on the maximum number of dwelling units that would be allowed under the Comprehensive Plan designation for the subject site. The corresponding density bonus in Table 3.6.200.C is an increase in dwelling units over the maximum residential density that can be rented or sold as affordable units or at market rate.

    The maximum density must be calculated in compliance with BDC 2.1.600(C)(1). For purposes of calculating maximum density, fractional units are rounded down to the next whole unit. For purposes of calculating the number of affordable units and density bonus units, fractional units are rounded up to the next whole unit. 

    For example, a 10,000 square foot lot designated RH is permitted nine units (maximum density is rounded down). Of the nine units, the developer proposes 20 percent of the units to be affordable (nine units * 20 percent = 1.8 units, which is rounded up to two units). Therefore, of the nine units, two must be affordable. Since the applicant is proposing 20 percent of the units as affordable, the developer may receive a corresponding density bonus of 20 percent (nine units * 20 percent = 1.8 units, which is rounded up to two additional units). Therefore, the proposed project may have eleven units, two of which must be affordable.

Table 3.6.200.C – Density Bonus  

	Percent of Affordable Units Based on Maximum Density	Density Bonus 

	5%	5%

	10%	10%

	20%	20%

	30%	30%

	40%	40%

	50%	50 %

b.    Building Height Incentive. An increase in building height not to exceed 10 feet above the height of the underlying zone may be allowed for multifamily housing when the additional units gained by the height increase are affordable housing units.

c.    Lot Coverage Exception. For affordable housing developments where 50 percent or more of the dwelling units are deemed affordable in conformance with subsection (C)(1) of this section, the entire development may develop with a 50 percent lot coverage.

d.    Lot Area and Dimensions Exception. For affordable housing developments where 50 percent or more of the dwelling units are deemed affordable in conformance with subsection (C)(1) of this section, the required lot area and dimensions for the proposed lots or parcels may be reduced up to 20 percent for the entire residential development. For affordable housing developments where less than 50 percent of the dwelling units are deemed affordable in conformance with subsection (C)(1) of this section, the required lot area and dimensions for the proposed affordable housing dwelling units’ lots or parcels may be reduced up to 20 percent.

e.    Parking Requirement Reduction. The parking requirement for affordable dwelling units is one on-site parking space per affordable dwelling unit.

D.    Single-Family Attached Townhomes. Single-family attached housing (townhome units on individual lots) must comply with the standards in subsections (D)(1) through (4) of this section. The standards are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas.

1.    Building Mass Supplemental Standard. Within the RS and RM-10 Districts, the number and width of consecutively attached townhomes (i.e., with attached walls at property line) must not exceed four units. Within the RM and RH Districts the number and width of consecutively attached townhome units are not restricted. For purpose of this section, a “single-family attached townhome” means a dwelling unit, located on its own lot, sharing one or more common walls with one or more dwelling units. As shown in Figure 3.6.200.D.1 the common wall must be fully enclosed and shared for at least 25 percent of the length of each dwelling unit’s enclosed elevation, not including uncovered or open, covered porches, patios, decks or stoops. The common wall may be any wall of the dwelling unit, including the wall of an attached garage. As shown on Figure 3.6.200.D.2, attached single-family townhomes may have detached garages or ADUs that share a common wall between the two lots or parcels.

Figure 3.6.200.D.1
[IMAGE]


Figure 3.6.200.D.2
[IMAGE]


2.    Alley Access Developments. Townhome developments and subdivisions (four or more lots) must receive vehicle access only from a rear alley, except when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impractical (see subsection (D)(3) of this section for standards for street access developments). Alley(s) must be created at the time of subdivision approval, in accordance with BDC Chapters 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, 3.4, Public Improvement Standards, and 4.3, Subdivisions, Partitions, Replats and Property Line Adjustments. As necessary, dedication of right-of-way or easements and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) is required to implement the standards in BDC 3.1.300, Multi-Modal Access and Circulation.

3.    Street Access Developments. Townhomes receiving access directly from a public or private street must comply with the following standards, in order to minimize interruption of adjacent sidewalks by driveway entrances, slow traffic, improve appearance of the streets, and minimize paved surfaces for better stormwater management:

a.    Garage Door. The maximum combined garage door width facing the street is 50 percent of the total building width.

b.    Driveway Approaches. Townhomes may have a maximum of one driveway approach and must comply with the following:

i.    Townhomes with frontages on streets of different classifications must access the street with the lowest classification. 

ii.    The total width of shared driveway approaches must not exceed 32 feet. When a driveway serves more than one lot, the developer must record an access and maintenance easement/agreement to benefit each lot, prior to building permit issuance.

iii.    Driveway approaches on local streets may be separated in compliance with the following:

(A)    Approaches must be separated by a minimum of seven feet; and

(B)    Approaches must not exceed 16 feet in width.

iv.    Clear vision standards do not apply between driveway approaches for townhomes on local streets. All other standards in BDC 3.1.500, Clear Vision Areas, apply.

v.    For lots or parcels abutting an alley, access may be required to be taken from the alley in accordance with BDC 3.1.400(F)(3).

4.    Areas Owned in Common. Common areas must be maintained by a homeowners association or other legal entity. A homeowners association may also be responsible for exterior building maintenance. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions must be recorded and provided to the City prior to issuance of a building permit.

E.    Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots. Manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots, subject to building permit compliance with the following design standards. The following standards do not apply to units that existed on lots within the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code.

1.    Thermal Envelope. The manufactured home must be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code;

2.    Placement. The manufactured home must be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than 12 inches above grade, and complying with the minimum set-up standards of the adopted State Administrative Rules for Manufactured Dwellings. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 12 inches of the enclosing material can be exposed on the uphill side of the foundation skirt;

3.    Skirting. The foundation area of the manufactured home must be fully skirted;

4.    Historic Districts. The manufactured home must not be located in a designated historic district.

F.    Manufactured Home Subdivisions. Manufactured home subdivisions are reviewed as a Type II application for tentative plan approval. A manufactured home subdivision shall be subject to the provisions of BDC Chapter 4.3, Subdivisions, Partitions, Replats, Property Line Adjustments, and Infill Development Options in addition to the criteria below.

1.    Lot Size and Dimension Requirements. The minimum lot area and dimensions within a manufactured home subdivision shall be the same as that allowed within the underlying zone.

2.    Permitted Uses. Manufactured home subdivisions may contain manufactured homes and related accessory structures.

3.    Setbacks. Setbacks for manufactured homes, modular homes, and accessory structures shall be the same as provided in the underlying zone.

G.    Manufactured Home Parks. Manufactured home parks are reviewed as a Type II application for site plan review in conformance with ORS Chapter 446, the provisions of this title and the following criteria:

1.    Minimum Area Required. All manufactured home parks shall consist of a minimum area of five acres.

2.    Density. The maximum number of manufactured homes allowed within a manufactured home park shall not exceed 10 units per acre. The average area of a mobile home site shall not be less than 4,000 square feet excluding roadway, recreation areas and other accessory facilities. No manufactured home site shall be less than 2,000 square feet in area.

3.    Access. Manufactured home park accesses shall be located on public streets improved to a minimum width of 36 feet and which are improved to a point intersecting a collector or arterial street.

4.    Permitted Uses. Manufactured home parks may contain manufactured homes and accessory structures permitted in this chapter, community laundry and recreation facilities and other common buildings for use by park residents only, and one residence other than a manufactured home for the use of a caretaker or a manager responsible for maintaining or operating the property.

5.    Minimum Site Requirements.

a.    Park Streets. The minimum surfaced width of the roadway within an access way shall be 24 feet if there is no parking allowed and 30 feet if parking is allowed on both sides. The first 50 feet of the access way measured from the public street shall be surfaced to a minimum width of 30 feet and shall be connected to the existing public street according to plans approved by the City.

b.    Improvement Standards. The improvement of driveways, walkways, streets, drainage and other utilities shall conform to adopted State standards for such or shall conform to the City’s Standards and Specifications manual, whichever is more restrictive.

H.    Duplex and Triplex Development. Duplex and triplex development must comply with the following standards. The standards are intended to control development scale, and minimize impacts associated with compatibility.

1.    There must be a minimum of 15 percent of the site landscaped in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. Existing natural landscaping can count as part of the landscape requirement if protected and preserved during construction.

2.    Street trees must be planted in conformance with BDC 3.2.400, Street Trees.

3.    The applicant must provide usable open space or an exterior patio, balcony or deck consistent with the following:

	Dwelling Units	Usable Open Space	Exterior Patio, Balcony or Deck

	1 and 2 bedroom units	200 square feet per unit 	100 square feet per unit

	3 bedroom units or larger	300 square feet per unit	150 square feet per unit

a.    All usable open space areas that are comprised of lawn must be irrigated with an underground irrigation system.

b.     An exterior patio, balcony or deck to meet the requirements of this subsection will not be counted as part of the landscape requirement.

4.    Each unit must provide a minimum of 60 square feet of enclosed storage area for outdoor equipment, lawn chairs, barbecues, bicycles, etc. The storage area must be accessible from the exterior of the dwelling unit, have a minimum interior height of seven feet, and be no less than two feet in length in any direction. The storage area may be split into two areas as long as no area is less than 20 square feet and no dimension is less than two feet, except the height which is a minimum of seven feet. The storage area may be located in a garage; provided, that it does not interfere with required vehicle parking (nine feet by 20 feet). Storage must not be located within the setbacks.

5.    Each unit must provide an enclosure area for trash and recycling. This area is in addition to subsection (H)(4) of this section.

6.    Detached dwelling units must be a minimum of six feet apart as measured between their building footprints.

7.    Floor Area Ratio. In the RS District, the FAR as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions, must not exceed 0.60 for all buildings on site, cumulatively.

a.    Exemptions to FAR.

i.    Accessory structures less than 10 feet in height and 200 square feet in area.

ii.    Duplexes or triplexes created by remodeling an existing single-family detached dwelling without expanding the existing floor area.

iii.    Lots created after January 18, 2019, that are not adjacent to existing RS designated properties. 

8.    Driveway Approach. Duplexes may have a maximum of two driveway approaches and a triplex may have a maximum of three driveway approaches in compliance with the following:

a.    The total width of all driveway approaches must not exceed 32 feet per frontage. For lots or parcels with more than one frontage, see subsection (H)(8)(c) of this section.

b.    Driveway approaches may be separated when located on a local street. If approaches are separated, they must be separated by a minimum of seven feet.

c.    In addition, lots or parcels with more than one frontage must comply with the following:

i.    Lots or parcels must access the street with the lowest classification.

ii.    Lots or parcels with frontages only on collectors and/or arterial streets may have one driveway approach. The City Engineer will determine which frontage may have one driveway approach when lots or parcels only have frontages on collector streets or only on arterial streets.

iii.    Lots or parcels with frontages only on local streets must comply with the following:

(A)    Duplexes may have two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage or one maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach per frontage.

(B)    Triplexes may have three driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage or two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one frontage and one maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach on one other frontage.

d.    Clear vision standards do not apply between driveway approaches for duplexes and triplexes on local streets. All other standards in BDC 3.1.500, Clear Vision Areas, apply.

e.    For lots or parcels abutting an alley, access may be required to be taken from the alley in accordance with BDC 3.1.400(F)(3).

9.    Garage Door Standards.

a.    The maximum combined garage door width facing the street is 50 percent of the total building width.

b.    In addition to complying with the front setbacks for the respective zoning districts, the front of the garage or carport can be no closer to the front lot line than the longest street-facing wall of the dwelling unit that encloses livable space, except that:

i.    If there is a covered front porch, the garage or carport can extend up to five feet in front of the enclosed livable space, but no further than the front of the porch.

ii.    A garage or carport may extend up to 10 feet in front of the enclosed livable space if there is enclosed livable space or a covered balcony above at least a portion of the garage or carport.

c.    Exemptions to Garage Door Standards.

i.    Existing garages legally constructed prior to January 18, 2019.

ii.    When the side or rear wall of the garage faces the street, provided the standards of BDC 2.1.300(F)(6)(b)(ii) are met.

iii.    Lots created after January 18, 2019, that are not adjacent to existing residentially designated properties.

10.    Orientation Standards.

a.    At least one front door entrance to a dwelling unit must orientate to an abutting street or open to a porch covered by either a roof or living space. A covered walkway or breezeway is not a porch. If the main entrance is from a covered porch, the covered porch must:

i.    Meet a minimum area of 20 square feet;

ii.    Meet a minimum depth of four feet; and

iii.    Have an entry that faces a street.

For properties with more than one frontage, the applicant may choose which frontage to meet this standard. 

b.    Exemptions to Orientation Standards. 

i.    Duplexes or triplexes created by remodeling an existing single-family detached dwelling without expanding the existing floor area.

ii.    Lots created after January 18, 2019, that are not adjacent to existing residentially designated properties. 

I.    Residential Uses within Commercial Districts. Residential uses, such as multifamily housing, are encouraged adjacent to employment, shopping and services. All residential developments shall comply with subsections (I)(1) through (5) of this section, which are intended to guide mixed-use development; allow limited residential uses within commercial districts while conserving the community’s supply of commercial land for commercial uses; provide for designs which are compatible with a storefront character; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic and parking; and ensure proper management and maintenance of common areas. Residential uses that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are considered permitted uses and not a nonconforming use.

Figure 3.6.200.I

Example of Vertical and Horizontal Mixed Use
[IMAGE]


Note: the example shown above is meant to illustrate required building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a required design style.

1.    Mixed-Use Development. Residential uses shall be permitted in Commercial Districts only when part of a mixed-use development (residential with commercial or public/institutional use). Both “vertical” mixed-use (housing above the ground floor), and “horizontal” mixed-use (housing on the ground floor) developments are allowed, subject to the following standards in subsections (I)(2) through (5) of this section.

2.    Limitation on Street-Level Housing.

a.    Central Business District. Ground-floor residential uses on street frontages are prohibited except ground-floor entrances or breezeways are permitted for housing located above or behind a nonresidential storefront use.

b.    Other Commercial Districts. On arterial and collector street frontages in other Commercial Zoning Districts, ground-floor residential uses are limited to 25 percent of the street frontage, except ground-floor entrances or breezeways for housing located above or behind a nonresidential use.

3.    Density. The density standards are intended to ensure efficient use of buildable lands. Residential density standards apply to any portions of the development where ground-floor residential uses are proposed. Area used to calculate residential density includes all area dedicated to parking and landscaping required for the ground-floor residential uses, but does not include land dedicated to right-of-way.



a.    There is no minimum residential density standard for “vertical” mixed use in a Commercial Zoning District.

b.    Maximum residential density in a Commercial Zoning District shall be controlled by the applicable lot coverage and building height standards.

c.    For “horizontal” mixed use in a Commercial Zoning District, where the site is located within 660 feet of a transit route, the minimum residential density standards of the RM Zone shall apply for the portion of the site dedicated to housing on the ground floor.

4.    Common Areas. All common areas (e.g., walkways, drives, courtyards, private alleys, parking courts, etc., and multi-tenant building exteriors) shall be maintained by a legal entity or legal process. Copies of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the City prior to building permit approval.

5.    The commercial or public/institutional uses shall occupy at least the floor area equivalent to the entire ground-floor area of the development. The commercial or public/institutional uses shall be constructed prior to or concurrently with the residential uses.

J.    Residential Care Homes and Facilities. Residential care homes and facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1.    Licensing. All residential care homes and facilities shall be duly licensed by the State of Oregon.

2.    Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review shall be required for new structures to be used as residential care facilities, to ensure compliance with the licensing, parking, and other requirements of this code. Residential care homes are exempt from this requirement.

K.    Bed and Breakfast Inns. Bed and breakfast inns are permitted in all Residential Districts within a structure used as a residence and shall comply with the following standards.

1.    Maximum Size. The bed and breakfast structure is limited to a maximum of four bedrooms for guests and a maximum of eight guests per night.

2.    Employees. The bed and breakfast facility may have up to one full time equivalent nonresident employee for the facility.

3.    Food Service. Food services may be provided only to overnight guests of the bed and breakfast inn.

4.    Owner- or Operator-Occupied. The bed and breakfast inn shall be owner- or operator-occupied and shall maintain the exterior physical characteristics of a single-family dwelling. No separate structures shall be allowed (except for customary residential accessory buildings such as sheds, or detached garages).

5.    Location. There shall be at least 400 feet of separation along the same street between inns.

6.    Signs. Signs must meet the standards of BC Chapter 9.50, Signs.

7.    Monitoring. All bed and breakfast inns shall register with the City of Bend for Transient Room Tax and must maintain a guest logbook. It must include the names and home addresses of guests, guests’ license plate numbers if traveling by car, dates of stay and the room number of each guest. The log must be available for inspection by City staff upon request.

L.    Repealed by Ord. NS-2240.

M.    Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures are those of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary use or structure on the same lot. Typical accessory structures include detached garages, sheds, workshops, greenhouses and similar structures. This section does not apply to accessory dwelling units (ADUs). For standards applicable to ADUs, see subsection (B) of this section. Accessory structures must comply with all of the following standards in addition to the standards of the applicable zoning district:

1.    Primary Use Required. An accessory structure or use may only be permitted on a lot or parcel after the primary use is established. The accessory use must be a permitted use in the zoning district. 

2.    Restrictions. 

a.    A half bathroom and/or a wet bar may not be installed within an accessory structure unless the property owner signs a City of Bend compliance form stating that the structure will not be used as a dwelling unit. 

b.    A kitchen is not allowed.

c.    A full bathroom is not allowed. 

3.    Floor Area. The maximum floor area of an accessory structure in a Residential Zoning District must not exceed 1,500 square feet.

4.    Floor Area Ratio. The FAR as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions, must not exceed 0.60 for all buildings on site, cumulatively. 

a.    Exemptions to FAR. 

i.    Accessory structures less than 10 feet in height and 200 square feet in area.

5.    Building Height. The building height of a detached accessory structure must not exceed 25 feet. In order to consider the accessory structure to be attached to the primary dwelling unit, it must be attached by one of the following options and there must be an opening that allows for internal access through livable space to the primary portion of the dwelling unit:

a.    The accessory structure must share a common wall for at least 25 percent of the length of the primary dwelling unit; or 

b.    The entire length of one elevation of the accessory structure must be attached to the primary dwelling unit. 

    The shared or attached wall must be the wall of an enclosed interior space, and does not include porches, patios, decks or stoops. 

N.    Home Business. The purpose of this subsection is to support those who are engaged in small business ventures that could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters, or which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a primary dwelling unit or in an approved accessory structure or accessory dwelling unit. More than one home business may be operated on site provided the home businesses comply with the following standards cumulatively. There are three classes of home businesses.

1.    General Operational Standards. All home businesses must meet the following operational standards:

a.    The home businesses must be owned and/or operated by a resident of the home business site.

b.    The primary use of the dwelling unit must remain residential.

c.    The home business, except for outdoor storage, must be conducted wholly within lawfully built, enclosed structures and in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance of a business. For outdoor storage, see subsection (N)(1)(d) of this section.

d.    Outdoor storage, including but not limited to inventory, supplies, or equipment, must be completely screened behind a sight-obscuring wall or fence or within an enclosed structure so that the products, equipment or materials are not visible from the public right-of-way or abutting properties or common areas.

e.    The home business must not result in any alterations or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or Building Code occupancy classification.

f.    A maximum of two personal motor vehicles and/or trailers owned or leased by the residents and used in conjunction with a home business may be parked outdoors. Any additional motor vehicles and/or trailers utilized for a home business must be parked inside a lawfully built, enclosed structure. The motor vehicles must not exceed 14,000 pounds GVW. No commercial motor vehicle as defined in ORS 801.208 is permitted as part of a home business.

g.    One nonilluminated wall or window sign limited to two square feet in area and located on or below the first story at a maximum height of 14 feet is permitted. No other building or freestanding signs as exempted in BC 9.50.050 are permitted.

h.    The home business must not involve any use prohibited under subsection (N)(6) of this section.

i.    The home business must not produce radio or TV interference, glare, dust, vibration, smoke or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local, State or Federal standards or that can be detected beyond the property line.

j.    The home business must comply with the daytime and nighttime noise levels set by the BC 5.50.020, as measured at the property line.

2.    Class A Home Business. A Class A home business is one where the residents use their home as a place of work and no nonresident employees nor clients/customers come to the site. Class A home businesses also provide an opportunity for the residents to use their home as a business address but not as a place of work, for professions where the work is performed online or done at other locations.

a.    Review Procedure. Class A home businesses are considered permitted accessory uses. No land use approval is required.

b.    A Class A home business is intended to have no or negligible impact to the existing neighborhood and must meet the general standards of subsection (N)(1) of this section and the following standards:

i.    Only the residents of the dwelling unit participate in the home business on site.

ii.    No nonresident employees nor clients/customers come to the home business site.

iii.    There are no restrictions on business hours.

iv.    There is no outward indication of business activity.

v.    No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit, including the floor area of garages, accessory structures and an ADU, may be utilized for all home business uses.

3.    Class B Home Business. A Class B home business is one where the residents use their home as a place of work and involves a limited number of nonresident employees and/or clients or customers coming to the site.

a.    Review Procedure. A Class B home business is subject to the Type I procedures outlined in BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures.

b.    A Class B home business is intended to have minimal impact to the existing neighborhood and must meet the general standards of subsection (N)(1) of this section and the following standards:

i.    Only the residents of the home and one nonresident employee can participate in the home business. Off-site employees are permitted.

ii.    Clients or customers are only permitted at the home business from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.

iii.    The home business site can accommodate parking for the total number of nonresident employees, clients, and customers on site during the largest shift, in addition to the required parking for the primary dwelling unit. On-site parking and on-street parking credit must comply with BDC 3.3.300. Tandem parking is permitted.

iv.    No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit, including the floor area of garages, accessory structures and an ADU, may be utilized for all home business uses.

v.    A Class B home business is not permitted on a site with a Type II short-term rental.

4.    Class C Home Business. A Class C home business is one where the residents use their home as a place of work and the scope of the business activities exceeds the standards for a Class B home business.

a.    Review Procedure. A Class C home business is subject to the Type II procedures outlined in BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures.

b.    A Class C home business is intended to have minimal impact to the existing neighborhood and must meet the general operational standards of subsection (N)(1) of this section and the following standards:

i.    Only the residents of the home and up to three nonresident employees can participate in the home business. Off-site employees are permitted.

ii.    Clients or customers are only permitted at the home business from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.

iii.    The home business site can accommodate parking for the total number of nonresident employees, clients, and customers on site during the largest shift, in addition to the required parking for the primary dwelling unit. On-site parking and on-street parking credit must comply with BDC 3.3.300. Tandem parking is permitted.

iv.    A Class C home business is not permitted on a site with a Type II short-term rental.

5.    Exemptions. Garage, yard, or estate sales not to exceed three consecutive days three times per calendar year.

6.    Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited as home businesses:

a.    Any business utilizing the residence as a headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations.

b.    On-site retail sales, except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted Class B or C home business are allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music by music teachers, art or craft supplies by art or craft instructors, computer software by computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by a home business are allowed.

c.    Ambulance service.

d.    Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels or daytime or overnight animal boarding.

e.    Any business involving repair, reconditioning, after-market modification or customization, sales or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes, or large equipment on site.

f.    Marijuana businesses.

7.    Enforcement. The Planning Director or designee may visit and inspect the site of a home business in accordance with this chapter periodically to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice. Code violations will be processed in accordance with BDC Chapter 1.3, Enforcement.

O.    Temporary Housing.

1.    Supervision. On-site supervision must be provided at all times. At least one competent adult must be present for every 25 persons utilizing the facility.

2.    Loitering. There shall be no loitering at the facility location.

3.    Outdoor Activities. All functions associated with a temporary housing use, except for children’s play areas, outdoor recreation areas, parking and outdoor waiting must take place within the building proposed to house the temporary housing use. Outdoor waiting for clients, if any, may not be in the public right-of-way, must be physically separated from the public right-of-way and must be large enough to accommodate the expected number of clients. Waiting shall not take place beyond one hour before the facility opens or more than one hour after it has closed.

4.    Development Standards. The development standards for the base zone and any overlay zone shall apply to temporary housing uses, unless superseded by standards in this section.

5.    Parking. The parking space requirements for temporary housing uses shall be one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.

6.    Signs. Signs shall comply with all applicable Oregon codes and City of Bend ordinances including, but not limited to, BC Chapter 9.50, Signs, and Design Review provisions in this code.

7.    Separation. Any proposed temporary housing facility must be located at least 1,000 feet from any other temporary housing facility.

8.    Compliance. Any temporary housing facility must meet all other applicable requirements of Federal, State, and/or local authorities including but not limited to local Fire Department, building and Environmental Health requirements. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2241, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2107, 2008; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.6.300 Nonresidential Uses.

This section supplements the standards contained in BDC Title 2 and provides standards for the certain land uses in order to control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the applicable zone.

A.    Automobile-Oriented and Automobile-Dependent Uses and Facilities. Where permitted, automobile-oriented uses and automobile-dependent facilities shall meet all of the following standards. The standards are intended to provide a vibrant, storefront character, slow traffic, and encourage walking and transit use:

1.    Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-in and drive-through facilities, such as teller machines, service windows, drop-boxes and similar features associated with the drive-up and drive-through components of restaurants, banks and similar uses, shall meet all of the following standards:

a.    The drive-in or drive-through facility receives vehicular access from an alley or approved driveway, and not directly from a street except as authorized through development approval from the City.

b.    The drive-in or drive-through facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from street frontages and, for corner lots, are not oriented towards a street corner. For sites with a 10-foot maximum building setback, the maximum setback may be increased to 20 feet.

c.    Exceptions:

i.    Walk-up-only teller machines and kiosks may be oriented to a corner.

ii.    Drive-through facility setbacks may be reduced to 10 feet when the driving surface is three feet lower or six feet higher than the abutting sidewalk.

iii.    Drive-through facility setbacks may be reduced to 10 feet when the facility is visually screened by a landscape buffer 10 feet or wider with a mature vegetation height of at least three feet within three years of planting and does not create a conflict with the clear vision areas.

iv.    Automobile service and gas stations are exempt from the above standards. However, automobile service and gas stations shall comply with the provisions in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

2.    Automobile Service and Gas Stations. The following minimum standards shall apply to automobile service stations and gas stations:

a.    Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for a service station is 12,000 square feet with a minimum street frontage of 100 feet on both legs of a street corner for corner lots and 120 feet of street frontage on an interior lot.

b.    Front Yard Setback. A 10-foot landscaped front yard setback is required. Only access driveways constructed in conformance with the standards in this title may be installed in this required setback. Landscaping shall comply with clear vision standards at intersections and driveways.

c.    Lighting. Lighting fixtures installed within the fueling island canopy shall not extend below the canopy ceiling. The lighting fixtures, illumination intensity and direction shall comply with BDC 3.5.200, Outdoor Lighting Standards.

d.    Other Requirements.

i.    No storage of inoperable automobiles or automobile parts is permitted except in enclosed structures or screened parking lots.

ii.    Landscape planters shall be used when practical as fuel island bollards to protect gas pumps.

C.    Public and Institutional Land Uses. Public and institutional uses listed in Table 2.1.200 may be allowed in the Residential Districts subject to the following land use standards. These standards are intended to control the scale of these developments and their compatibility with nearby residences and surrounding development.

1.    Building Mass. Large-scale buildings shall incorporate changes in building direction (i.e., articulation) and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes. Such changes may include building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction; sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials; windows, and screening trees. The maximum width or length of a building shall not exceed 80 feet (from end-wall to end-wall), except that this standard may be increased through the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, or as part of a Master Planned Development.

2.    Vehicle Areas and Trash Receptacles. All vehicle areas (i.e., parking, drives, storage, etc.) and trash receptacles shall be oriented away from adjacent residences to the greatest extent practicable, and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height.

3.    Landscaping. The site shall be landscaped in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.2.

Some public and institutional uses, as listed in Table 2.1.200, may require a Conditional Use Permit in conformance with BDC 4.4.400 (conditional uses).

D.    Reserved.

E.    Plant Nursery. A plant nursery grows and sells shrubs, trees, ornamental bedding plants, and the like. A new plant nursery or the expansion of an existing plant nursery greater than 25 percent of the existing facility may be permitted as allowed in the applicable zoning districts upon compliance with all of the following standards:

1.    Location. The site shall be located on an arterial or collector street.

2.    Access. Shall be in conformance with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

3.    Landscaping. Since these operations are commercial in nature, they shall be permanently and well landscaped along all property boundaries, respecting the character of a residential area or entrance into the community.

4.    Site Review. Through the Site Development Review process, additional impacts to the adjoining properties may be identified. Provisions may be required where necessary to mitigate unforeseen impacts. Potential conditions for approval may include but are not limited to:

a.    Limited hours of operation 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (including truck deliveries).

b.    Visual screening of all on-site vehicle parking, equipment storage, and maintenance areas.

c.    No stockpiling of refuse (including compost) within 300 feet of an adjoining residential property.

d.    Greenhouses using mechanical heating and cooling equipment shall not be located within 300 feet of an adjoining residential property.

e.    On-site lighting needs shall respect the character of the area in which the nursery is located and shall comply with the provisions of BDC 3.5.200, Outdoor Lighting Standards.

F.    Outdoor Storage and Display within Public Rights-of-Way. Sidewalk vendors and outdoor display of merchandise shall be prohibited within the public rights-of-way except within the Central Business District, in which case the use shall be limited to cards, plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile oriented). A minimum clearance of five feet shall be maintained on the sidewalk at all times to allow pedestrians to pass by the displays. All merchandise shall be removed from the public way at the close of business each day.

G.    Outdoor Storage and Display On Site. Display or storage of merchandise such as seasonal sales, garden supplies, furniture, and outdoor equipment is prohibited unless approved through site development review in conformance with BDC Chapter 4.2, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

Exception: Temporary events such as weekend RV sales, tent sales or other special events regulated under BDC 3.6.400, Temporary Uses.

H.    Industrial Uses within Commercial Districts. Limited industrial uses are allowed in the Commercial Districts. Permitted industrial uses shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to protect nearby nonindustrial businesses from the negative impacts of industrial uses, and also protect the pedestrian-friendly, storefront character of certain Commercial Districts:

1.    Retail or Service Use Required. Light manufacture is allowed only when it is in conjunction with a permitted retail or service use (e.g., a bakery with a retail baked goods outlet or a kiln with retail pottery sales).

2.    Location. The industrial use shall be completely enclosed within a building, or shall be located within a rear yard not adjacent to a street or a residential use.

3.    Other Requirements. The industrial use shall not create excessive noise, dust or offensive odors that would be disruptive or be detrimental to other nearby commercial businesses or residential uses.

I.    Keeping Farm Animals. The purpose of this section is to regulate the raising and breeding of farm animals on residential lots within the City of Bend. These activities are considered to be accessory uses subject to the following standards.

1.    Types of Animals Allowed.

a.    One horse shall have a corral or pasture with a usable area of at least one acre; and for each additional horse, an additional one-half acre is required.

b.    Cows, goats, sheep, swine or other livestock shall not be kept on any parcel or lot with an area less than five acres.

c.    No more than four rabbits and/or chickens (hens only, no roosters) are permitted on parcels and lots 5,000 square feet or greater.

2.    Sanitation. Proper sanitation shall be maintained for all farm animals. Proper sanitation includes:

a.    Accumulation of waste prohibited;

b.    Odors resulting from the keeping of farm animals prohibited beyond property lines; and

c.    Storing all farm animal food in rodent-proof containers.

3.    Fencing. All fencing shall be designed and constructed to confine all farm animals within the owner’s property.

4.    Setbacks. All structures that house large farm animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from all existing adjacent residences and at least 15 feet from any interior or rear lot line.

J.    Neighborhood Commercial Sites. Neighborhood commercial sites within the Residential Districts are intended to provide pedestrian-friendly access to goods and services convenient to nearby residents, encourage affordable mixed-use housing types, and provide a compatible transition between commercial and residential uses. In addition to new neighborhood commercial sites, this subsection also recognizes and seeks to preserve long standing historical commercial uses that have served the neighborhood. 

    Neighborhood commercial sites must comply with the following standards, except buildings and associated sites constructed prior to the date of adoption of this code and with a documented history of a neighborhood commercial use may be exempt from certain standards as specified in this subsection. A determination of whether the site was historically a commercial use may be based on any of the following:

•    Listings in telephone, business, and Polk directories.

•    Advertisements in dated publications; e.g., trade magazines.

•    Building, land use, sign or development permits. 

•    Deschutes County Historical Museum records.

•    Historical uses do not include office uses that were approved with a conditional use permit.

1.    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

a.    Permitted and Conditional Uses. Residential and Neighborhood Commercial uses listed in BDC Table 2.1.200, Permitted and Conditional Uses, in compliance with the corresponding zoning district. 

b.    Prohibited Uses. 

i.    Automobile-oriented and automobile-dependent uses.

ii.    Marijuana businesses.

2.    Neighborhood Commercial Site Standards. Neighborhood commercial sites must comply with the following standards: 

a.    Neighborhood commercial sites are limited to one of the following:

i.    Sites greater than one-quarter mile from a Commercial Comprehensive Plan map designation, Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation and neighborhood commercial site, and located on a corner at an intersection; or

ii.    In the RM and RH Zones, sites located on a corner at an intersection and adjacent to a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation; or

iii.    In the RM and RH Zones, sites with frontage on an arterial or collector street, and adjacent to a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation. 

b.    Corner Neighborhood Commercial Site Development Standards.

i.    Corner neighborhood commercial sites may be located on multiple abutting properties including interior properties when they abut a corner property developed, or will be developed, with a neighborhood commercial use or historical commercial use.  

ii.    No portion of the street facing elevation which contains a neighborhood commercial use can be located more than 150 feet from the property corner at the intersection. 

(A)    Exemption. The street facing elevation for a neighborhood commercial use may exceed 150 feet along street frontages which abut an arterial or collector street and are adjacent to a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation.


[IMAGE]


c.    The area of the neighborhood commercial site to be developed and all abutting properties approved for or developed with a neighborhood commercial use must not exceed the following:

i.    One-half acre in size for neighborhood commercial sites located one-quarter mile or greater from a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation. 

ii.    One acre in size for neighborhood commercial sites located adjacent to a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation. 

d.    Exceptions to the above standards may be granted if it can be documented that the historic use of the site was previously a commercial use.

3.    Design Standards.

a.    Ground-Floor Windows. Ground-floor windows of the street wall of a nonresidential use must be installed for at least 50 percent of the length of the street wall and have an area equal to 60 percent of the ground-floor wall area of the street wall. Ground-floor wall area includes all wall areas up to 10 feet above finished grade. Windows are required to be transparent to foster both a physical and visual connection between activities in the building and pedestrian activities on the street. Buildings constructed prior to the date of adoption of this code are exempt.

b.    Front Door. At least one main front door entrance to the neighborhood commercial use must orient to an abutting street.

4.    Building Setbacks. All new neighborhood commercial buildings must have a maximum front setback of 10 feet, notwithstanding the applicable zone requirements. Buildings constructed prior to the date of adoption of this code are exempt from the building setback requirements. 

5.    Residential Dwelling Density Standard. All new neighborhood commercial sites adjacent to a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation must meet the minimum residential dwelling density of the zoning district. Buildings and associated sites constructed prior to the date of adoption of this code, and with a documented history of a neighborhood commercial use, are exempt from the residential density requirements.

6.    Parking Standard.

a.    The following parking requirements supersede parking requirements in Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces. Unless otherwise stated here, other sections of BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking, apply. 

i.    Neighborhood commercial sites located one-quarter mile or greater from a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation must comply with the following:

(A)    Neighborhood Commercial Uses. Off-street parking is optional where abutting on-street parking is available, except for food and beverage services. Where abutting on-street parking is not available or the use is for food and/or beverage services, parking must comply with the requirements in subsection (J)(6)(a)(ii)(A) of this section. 

(B)    Residential Uses. One space per dwelling unit. Tandem parking is permitted when the spaces are assigned to the same unit.

(C)    Short-Term Rentals. See BDC 3.6.500(H), Parking. 

ii.    Neighborhood commercial sites located adjacent to a Commercial or Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan map designation must comply with the following: 

(A)    Neighborhood Commercial Uses. One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, except food and/or beverage services is one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 

(B)    Residential Uses. One space per dwelling unit. Tandem parking is permitted when the spaces are assigned to the same unit.

(C)    Short-Term Rentals. See BDC 3.6.500(H), Parking.

(D)    The amount of off-street parking required may be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space abutting the development, up to 100 percent of the requirement, except for short-term rentals. 

b.    Off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicular use and circulation areas cannot be placed between a building and the street.

c.    Exemption. Buildings and associated sites constructed prior to the date of adoption of this code and with a documented history of a commercial use are exempt from the parking requirements. 

7.    Building Height. All new neighborhood commercial use buildings must not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the zoning district. For maximum building height exceptions for affordable housing, see BDC 3.6.200(C).

8.    Lot Coverage. None.

9.    Floor Area Ratio. None. 

10.    Mechanical Equipment and Trash Receptacles. Outdoor and rooftop mechanical equipment as well as trash receptacles must be architecturally screened from view. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning units must have a noise attenuating barrier to protect abutting Residential Districts from mechanical noise.

11.    Landscape Buffer.

a.    A landscape buffer is required along the side and rear property lines between nonresidential uses and any abutting stand-alone residential uses in the Residential Comprehensive Plan map designations. Conformance with the buffering standard is achieved when one of the following options is met, unless exempted.

i.    A landscape buffer is provided and is no less than 10 feet wide.

ii.    A landscape buffer is provided and is no less than five feet wide. Except for in the front setback, the landscape buffer must be located next to a solid wall or fence that is no less than six feet in height. 

iii.    Exemption. A landscape buffer is not required for side or rear property lines when the abutting properties are under common ownership.

b.    A landscape buffer is not in addition to (may overlap with) the side and rear setbacks. 

c.    The landscape buffer must provide trees, shrubs and ground cover. The buffer may contain pedestrian seating at least five feet from the abutting property line. The buffer may not contain trash receptacles or storage of equipment, materials, vehicles, etc. The landscaping standards in BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, provide other buffering requirements where applicable.

12.    Hours of Operation. Neighborhood commercial uses must not exceed the following hours of operation: 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Live entertainment outside of an enclosed building is prohibited. 

Figure 3.6.300.J

Neighborhood Commercial (Typical Site Layout)
[IMAGE]


K.    Utilities. This subsection applies to the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utility of municipal or other governmental agencies or licensed franchise of underground, overhead electrical, gas, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal system, including utility poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables and other similar equipment and accessories located outside of the public right-of-way, which are permitted in any zone. Utility poles may exceed the height limits otherwise provided for in this code. In considering an application for a public or licensed franchise utility use, the Review Authority shall determine that all utility poles, overhead wires, pumping stations, equipment shelters and similar gear shall be located, designed and installed to minimize their visual impacts. The Review Authority may require screening as a condition of approval.

L.    Landing Strips for Aircraft, Heliports. All landing strips for aircraft or heliports shall be so designed and the runways and facilities so oriented that the incidents of aircraft passing directly over dwellings during landing and take off pattern is minimized. They shall be located so that traffic, both land and air, shall not constitute a nuisance to neighboring uses. The proponents shall show that adequate controls or measures will be taken to prevent offensive noise, vibrations, dust or bright lights. New landing strips/heliports or the expansion of an existing landing strip or heliport shall not be construed to be a permitted use in any zone established by this code unless and until a Conditional Use Permit shall first have been secured.

M.    Hydroelectric Facilities.

1.    No new hydroelectric facility shall be constructed, and no existing hydroelectric facilities shall be enlarged or expanded in size of area or generating capacity on Tumalo Creek within the City of Bend.

2.    Hydroelectric facilities are allowed as a conditional use on the Deschutes River and irrigation canals within the City of Bend. Such conditional use shall be governed by the conditions set forth in subsection (M)(3) of this section.

3.    In addition to the general Conditional Use Permit criteria set forth in BDC Chapter 4.4, the criteria set forth below shall apply to any construction or expansion of, or other modification to, hydroelectric facilities in areas where such facilities are permitted as a conditional use. A Conditional Use Permit may be granted for the construction or expansion of, or other modification to, a hydroelectric facility only upon findings by the Hearings Body that the proposal meets each of the following criteria, where applicable:

a.    The facility is located at and physically connected to an existing manmade diversion or impoundment.

b.    The facility will not increase the maximum surface area or capacity of the impoundment created by the existing dam or diversion to which the facility will be connected.

c.    The facility will maintain or enhance, to the greatest extent possible, the existing scenic, visual, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the affected stretch of the river.

d.    The facility will maintain or enhance the existing recreational opportunities on or adjacent to the affected stretch of the river.

e.    The facility will maintain or enhance existing fish and wildlife habitat, and will have no adverse impact upon any threatened or endangered fish, wildlife, or plant species or their habitat.

f.    The facility and its operation will maintain or enhance existing water quality in the affected stretch of the river, except during construction of the facility, during which time adverse impacts on water quality will be minimized. Specifically, the facility and its operation will not:

i.    Deposit, or create a zone for the deposit of, sediments in the river or adjacent to the site;

ii.    Increase the temperature of the river in the affected stretch by any means, including but not limited to removal of vegetation or reduction in stream flow; or

iii.    Create the potential for, or result in, spillage, leakage or discharge of oil, chemicals or other substances or waste products which could reach the river.

g.    The facility and its operation will not increase soil or bank erosion or destroy bank habitat at or on land adjacent to the site, except during construction of the facility, during which time soil or bank erosion and destruction of bank habitat will be minimized.

h.    The facility and its operation will maintain existing public access to the affected stretch of the river.

i.    The facility will not be located at or immediately adjacent to any identified archeological or historical site, national or State park, wildlife refuge, Bureau of Land Management Outstanding Natural Area or Area of Critical Environmental Concern, Federal Research Natural Area, or U.S. Forest Service Special Interest Area.

j.    The facility and its operation will comply with all applicable noise and pollution regulations of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

k.    The facility and its operation will comply with all applicable State fill-and-removal statutes and regulations.

4.    The applicant for a Conditional Use Permit under subsection (M)(3) of this section shall submit the following for approval:

a.    Detailed construction plans and profiles of all facility features, including building elevations of the powerhouse and other structures, excavation plans and narrative as to where blasting will occur, where excess material will be deposited, and landscaping and reclamation plans.

b.    Detailed plans for meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (M)(3) of this section.

c.    Detailed plans for river enhancement documenting both on-site and off-site enhancement plans consistent with adopted river-related goals and policies, such as plans and methods for conserving water and enhancing stream flow. The plan shall identify costs, time schedules and coordination activities with affected persons and agencies for such enhancement plans.

d.    A cash deposit or performance bond in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost of river enhancement and landscaping.

e.    Detailed plans for a water conservation and stream enhancement program to be funded by a portion of revenues generated by the operation of the proposed facility. The program plans shall contain the following:

i.    A program timetable;

ii.    Projected gross revenues from the proposed facility;

iii.    Projected program expenditures and the percentage of gross revenue they represent;

iv.    Projected water savings and the percentage of known current water losses they represent;

v.    A declaration by the applicant that at least 50 percent of the conserved water will remain undiverted by the applicant;

vi.    A declaration by the applicant that water diverted for power generation will not cause water flow in that affected stretch of the river (from the diversion to the tailrace exit) to fall below the minimum stream flow for that stretch as recommended by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife; and

vii.    A declaration by the applicant that it will enter into an agreement with the City of Bend, prior to beginning construction of the facility, by which the applicant agrees to fulfill all of the requirements of this subsection.

N.    Destination Resorts.

1.    Information to Be Supplied by the Applicant.

a.    Proposed land uses and densities.

b.    Building types.

c.    Circulation pattern.

d.    Park, playground, and open space.

e.    Existing natural features.

f.    Impacts on schools, roads, water and sewerage systems, fire protection.

g.    Proposed ownership pattern.

h.    Waste disposal facilities.

i.    Water supply system.

j.    Lighting.

k.    General timetable for development.

2.    The Conditional Use Permit may be granted upon the following findings:

a.    That any exceptions from the standards of the underlying zone and subdivision ordinance are warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the development plan;

b.    That the proposal is in harmony with the surrounding area or its potential future use;

c.    That the system of ownership and the means of developing, preserving, and maintaining open space are adequate;

d.    That sufficient financing exists to assure that the proposed development will be substantially completed in the timetable outlined by the applicant;

e.    That open space shall comprise 65 percent of the land. Open space shall mean land not in streets or structures;

f.    That adequate provision is made for the preservation of natural resources such as bodies of water, natural vegetation, and special terrain features;

g.    That the areas of activities are contained in the center of the development, or that adequate buffer yards are established to protect adjacent private lands.

3.    Dimensional Standards:

a.    The minimum lot area, width, frontage, and yard requirements otherwise applying to individual buildings of the zone in which the development is located do not apply within a destination resort.

b.    The Hearings Body shall establish yards, height limitations, and space between buildings for the development, or may delegate this to the Site Plan Committee.

4.    Commercial uses designed and sized to meet the needs of the development’s population are allowed subject to the following:

a.    That such use shall be contained within the development;

b.    That adequate screening and site design shall ensure compatibility between these activities and adjacent uses.

O.    Beekeeping. The purpose of this section is to regulate the keeping of common domestic bees on residential lots within the City of Bend. This activity is considered to be an accessory use subject to the following standards.

1.    Location, Density, and Maintenance of Colonies.

a.    The number of colonies is limited to one colony per legal lot of up to 5,000 square feet of lot area, plus one additional colony per each additional 5,000 square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of eight colonies regardless of lot size.

b.    Colonies shall be located in the side or rear yard, and set back no less than 10 feet from the nearest property line, and shall comply with the following provisions:

i.    The beehives are isolated from public access by a security fence; and

ii.    The beekeeper establishes and maintains a flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, solid fencing material, dense vegetation or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends 10 feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the colony; or

iii.    The colony is situated 10 feet or more above the grade of the nearest adjoining property line.

c.    Colonies shall be maintained in movable-frame hives with adequate space and management techniques to prevent overcrowding.

d.    In any instance in which a colony exhibits aggressive behavior, the beekeeper must ensure that the colony is re-queened. Aggressive behavior is any instance in which unusual aggressive characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occur.

e.    Every beekeeper shall maintain an adequate supply of water for the bees located close to each hive.

P.    Marijuana Businesses. 

1.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to reasonably regulate those who are engaged in the retail sale, producing, growing, processing, wholesaling and testing of medical and recreational marijuana, consistent with State law, in the City of Bend, and to:

a.    Protect the general health, safety, property, and welfare of the public; 

b.    Balance the right of individuals to produce and access marijuana and marijuana derivatives consistent with State law, with the need to minimize adverse impacts to nearby land uses, residents, property owners and businesses that may result from the production, storage, distribution, sale, and/or use of marijuana and derivatives;

c.    Adopt reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on both medical and recreational dispensaries tied to specific community impacts;

d.    Prevent or reduce criminal activity that may result in harm to persons or property;

e.    Limit the exposure of minors to the commercial aspects of marijuana;

f.    Prevent or reduce diversion of State-licensed marijuana and marijuana derivatives to minors; and

g.    Minimize impacts to the City’s public safety services by reducing calls for service. 

2.    Applicability. 

a.    The provisions of this section apply to marijuana businesses within the Bend City limits.

b.    Relationship to Other Development Standards. Marijuana businesses must comply with all of the standards of this section and all applicable State laws and regulations. 

3.    Procedure.

a.    All new marijuana businesses must be reviewed through Site Plan Review, Minimum Development Standards Review and/or a Conditional Use Permit Review to ensure the standards of this section and other relevant portions of this code are met. Marijuana businesses are not eligible for the Minimum Development Standards Review exemption of BDC 4.2.400(B)(2). 

b.    The City will require a proof of a license from the State (either OHA or OLCC) confirming the security plan and all other required improvements, prior to final occupancy.

4.    Standards for Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Marijuana Retailers.

a.    Permitted. Medical marijuana dispensaries and marijuana retailers are permitted in all CB, CC, CL, CG, ME and MR zoning districts (unless listed as a conditional use, and subject to size limitations). See use tables in BDC Title 2.

b.    Co-Location of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Marijuana Retailers. Medical marijuana dispensaries and marijuana retailers selling medical and recreational marijuana may co-locate as allowed by State law and regulation.

c.    Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Marijuana Retailers and Proximity to Other Land Uses. 

i.    The distance limitations and definition established by this section shall control over the minimum distance limitations set forth by the State of Oregon.

ii.    The distance limitations are based upon the uses surrounding the proposed medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer site on the date the development application is submitted.

iii.    A medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer shall not be located within the specified proximity of any of the uses listed below. For purposes of this paragraph, the distance specified is a straight line measurement from the closest points between property lines of the affected properties.

d.    Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. No medical marijuana dispensary may operate or conduct business within:

i.    One thousand feet of a public or secondary school for which attendance is compulsory under ORS 339.020 (2013); or a private or parochial elementary or secondary school, teaching children as described in ORS 339.030(1)(a) (2013);

ii.    One thousand feet of another medical marijuana dispensary; 

iii.    One hundred fifty feet of a licensed child care facility, as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2; or 

iv.    One hundred fifty feet of a Bend Park and Recreation District developed park facility including neighborhood parks, community parks, regional parks, natural areas, urban plazas and community river parks, or an Oregon State Park.

e.    Existing Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. 

i.    A medical marijuana dispensary existing as of December 15, 2015, is considered a permitted use regardless if (A) an existing licensed child care facility is located within 150 feet; (B) an existing public or secondary school for which attendance is compulsory under ORS 339.020 (2013), or a private or parochial elementary or secondary school, teaching children as described in ORS 339.030(1)(a) (2013), is located within 1,000 feet, (C) another medical marijuana dispensary is located within 1,000 feet, or (D) an existing Bend Park and Recreation District developed park facility including neighborhood parks, community parks, regional parks, natural areas, urban plazas and community river parks, or an Oregon State Park is located within 150 feet.

ii.    A medical marijuana dispensary existing at the time any use listed in subsection (P)(4)(d) of this section is subsequently sited within the specified proximity of the dispensary may remain at that location and is considered a permitted use and not a nonconforming use. 

iii.    An existing medical marijuana dispensary may change to a marijuana retailer provided the business complies with applicable State laws and permitted and conditional use tables and this subsection (P).

iv.    The distance requirements in subsection (P)(4)(d) of this section do not apply for applications for marijuana retailers that meet the following criteria:

(A)    The application is from a medical marijuana dispensary existing as of December 15, 2015;

(B)    The marijuana retailer’s application is for the same address at which the medical marijuana dispensary is currently in operation;

(C)    The medical marijuana dispensary has no outstanding compliance issues pending with the Oregon Health Authority or the City of Bend;

(D)    The applicant meets all other requirements of this chapter;

(E)    The conversion to a marijuana retailer must be finalized no later than December 31, 2016, or, if the OLCC fails to issue marijuana retailer licenses by November 1, 2016, within 30 days of receiving an OLCC license. In no case may a conversion from a medical marijuana dispensary to a marijuana retailer occur after July 1, 2017. A change from a medical marijuana dispensary to a marijuana retailer must be approved by issuance of a Minimum Development Standards decision no later than December 31, 2016. An existing medical marijuana dispensary that converts to a marijuana retailer is not eligible for the Minimum Development Standards Review exemption under BDC 4.2.400(B)(2). 

f.    Marijuana Retailer. No marijuana retailer may operate or conduct business within: 

i.    One thousand feet of a public or secondary school for which attendance is compulsory under ORS 339.020 (2013); or a private or parochial elementary or secondary school, teaching children as described in ORS 339.030(1)(a) (2013); 

ii.    One thousand feet of another marijuana retailer; 

iii.    One hundred fifty feet of a licensed child care facility, as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2; or 

iv.    One hundred fifty feet of a Bend Park and Recreation District developed park facility including neighborhood parks, community parks, regional parks, natural areas, urban plazas and community river parks, or an Oregon State Park.

g.    Existing Marijuana Retailer.

i.    A marijuana retailer existing at the time any use listed in subsection (P)(4)(f) of this section is subsequently sited within the specified proximity of the retailer may remain at that location and is considered a permitted use and not a nonconforming use. 

ii.    An existing marijuana retailer may change to a marijuana dispensary provided the business complies with applicable State laws and permitted and conditional use tables and this subsection (P).

h.    Building Site. The medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retail facility must be located and operated completely inside a permanent building. Outdoor storage of any merchandise, plants, or other materials is not allowed. 

i.    Display. All marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia must be completely screened from view. There must be no marijuana, marijuana product, or marijuana paraphernalia visible from the exterior of the building.

5.    Production and Growing of Commercial Marijuana. 

a.    Production of Marijuana. Production (growing) facilities are prohibited in all residential, commercial MR and PO zoned and designated areas. It is allowed in industrial and ME designated areas, as further set forth in the use tables in BDC Title 2. Retail marijuana is not permitted at the same facility as production.

b.    Medical Grow Sites. Medical grow sites are permitted as allowed by State law up to the possession limitations for registered cardholders or designated primary caregivers of the cardholder in all zones.

c.    The private growing or cultivating of marijuana for noncommercial personal use, as defined by State law, is not regulated by this chapter.

6.    Commercial Marijuana Wholesale. Marijuana wholesale is permitted in CL, CG, MR and ME zones, similar to other wholesale uses (more than 75 percent of the business use needs to be wholesale). Wholesale is not permitted in residential designated areas. Wholesale is permitted in all industrial zoned and designated areas. See use tables in BDC Title 2.

7.    Marijuana Processing. 

a.    Residential Zones. Marijuana processing is prohibited in residentially zoned and designated areas. 

b.    Marijuana processing of cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid products not including processing of cannabinoid extracts is permitted in all CB, CC, CL, CG and MR zoned and designated areas, and in the commercial zoned and designated areas provided the building area is 5,000 square feet or less and the use includes a retail component as identified in the use tables in BDC Title 2. It is permitted conditionally subject to size limitations in the CL zoned and designated areas, and it is permitted in all industrial zoned and designated areas. See use tables. All marijuana processing is subject to Fire Marshal approval.

c.    Marijuana processing of cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid products and cannabinoid extracts is allowed in industrial and ME designated areas. Marijuana processing of cannabinoid extracts is subject to State law and Fire Marshal approval. See use tables in BDC Title 2.

8.    Marijuana Testing Laboratory. Marijuana testing laboratories are permitted in IL, IG, CB, CC, CL, CG, ME and MR zoned and designated areas, as further set forth in the use tables in BDC Title 2. 

9.    Operating License Required. All marijuana businesses operating in the City of Bend must obtain an operating license pursuant to BC Chapter 7.50, Marijuana Business Operating License. This applies to existing businesses (businesses currently operating at the time of adoption of this code) in order to continue operating and as a condition to obtaining land use approval under this chapter. 

10.    Marijuana Businesses – Prohibited Uses. In addition to the other prohibitions identified in this section, the following uses or practices are also prohibited:

a.    Drive-through dispensaries or facilities in any zone. 

b.    Temporary dispensaries or facilities in any zone.

c.    On-site consumption of marijuana at a licensed medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer unless: (i) the consumption is conducted for testing in compliance with OAR 333-008-1190; or (ii) the consumption is allowed under the medical exception granted in OAR 333-008-1200.

d.    Co-location of medical marijuana dispensaries or marijuana retailers at grow or marijuana producing sites.

e.    Marijuana businesses in residential zones or designations.

f.    Retail medical marijuana dispensaries or marijuana retailers in industrial zones.

g.    Marijuana businesses as a home occupation in any zone.

h.    Marijuana businesses as a neighborhood commercial use.

i.    Walk-up windows at medical marijuana dispensaries or marijuana retailers in any zone.

11.    Abandonment of Use.

a.    Notwithstanding BDC Chapter 5.2, Nonconforming Uses and Developments, if a marijuana business ceases operations for a period of more than 180 days, all marijuana development approvals will be void with no further proceedings.

b.    Failure to continuously maintain the Marijuana Business Operating License as provided in BC Chapter 7.50 will also be considered abandonment of use.

12.    Compliance and Enforcement.

a.    Any premises, house, building, structure or place of any kind where marijuana is sold, manufactured, bartered, or distributed in violation of State law or this City code is a public nuisance. The City may institute an action in Deschutes County in the name of the City to temporarily or permanently enjoin such nuisance. 

b.    This remedy is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative remedies available to the City authorized under this code, or by law or equity. 

Q.    Small Hydroelectric Facilities.

1.    Small hydroelectric facilities are subject to BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

Exception: Small hydroelectric facilities located underground or inside an existing structure are exempt from BDC Chapter 4.2.

2.    For small hydroelectric facilities that are subject to BDC Chapter 4.2, the following design elements are required in addition to the criteria of BDC Chapter 4.2:

a.    Structures and roofing must be constructed of nonreflective materials and finished in a color that blends with the surrounding vegetation and landscape.

b.    New powerlines associated with the small hydroelectric facility must be buried even if they are not located in the right-of-way. Existing overhead lines may remain.

3.    Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant must provide the City with any required documentation of all Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and State water right permits for the small hydroelectric facility. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2265, 2016; Ord. NS-2264, 2016; Ord. NS-2256, 2015; Ord. NS-2195, 2013; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.6.400 Temporary Uses.

Temporary uses are characterized by their short term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: 

	•    	Seasonal sales 

	•    	Farm produce sales

	•    	Temporary real estate sales office or model home 

	•    	Temporary building 

	•    	Education modular 

	•    	Medical hardship housing 

	•    	Carnivals/fairs, parking lot sales and warehouse sales

Unless otherwise permitted, temporary uses shall comply with this section. Temporary uses not specifically allowed under this section, including but not limited to temporary retail sales and services, in zones where retail sales and services are allowed, are prohibited. The use of a motor home, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, tent, or similar device as a dwelling unit is also prohibited.

Some temporary uses must be approved through a temporary use permit because they occur for longer periods than others. Other, shorter duration, temporary uses may occur without temporary use permit approval. In both cases, all temporary use standards of this section must be met at all times. 

A.    Seasonal Sales. Seasonal sales related to a holiday or seasonal event such as holiday tree sales and Fourth of July fireworks sales occur only once in a calendar year and for no longer than 30 days. No temporary use permit is required. However, the use shall comply with the following standards:

1.    The use is permitted in the zoning district and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior site plan review approval).

2.    The applicant has written permission from the property owner to temporarily place the use on the property.

3.    The minimum parking requirements of BDC Chapter 3.3 will be maintained for all uses on the site.

4.    The vision clearance standards of BDC Chapter 3.1 are maintained and public rights-of-way are not obstructed.

5.    Ingress and egress are safe and adequate and meet the access standards of BDC Chapter 3.1.

6.    The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. 

7.    The temporary use shall terminate no later than 30 days after initial start-up.

B.    Farm Produce Sales. The sale of farm produce is allowed to occur continually on a site which allows retail sales, not to exceed 180 days. A temporary use permit is required to ensure that all of the seasonal sales standards contained in subsections (A)(1) through (6) of this section are met. The use of tents for farm produce sales shall meet any applicable fire code and/or building code standards.

C.    Temporary Real Estate Sales Office or Model Home. A temporary real estate sales office or model home in a subdivision is subject to temporary use permit review to ensure that the following standards are met:

1.    Temporary real estate sales office:

a.    The temporary real estate sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision in which the real property is to be sold;

b.    The property to be used for a temporary real estate sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose; and

c.    The temporary real estate sales office shall be removed once all lots or homes/buildings within the subdivision are sold.

2.    Model house: 

a.    The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision where the real property to be sold is situated;

b.    The model house shall be designed as a permanent structure that meets all relevant requirements of this code; and

c.    The model house shall cease to be a temporary use and shall be used as a residential dwelling or other permitted use in the zoning district once all other lots or homes/buildings within the subdivision are sold.

D.    Temporary Building. A temporary building such as a trailer, cargo container, or prefabricated building may be used as a temporary commercial or industrial office or space associated with the primary use on a property. Temporary buildings are subject to temporary use permit review and must meet all of the following standards:

1.    The site is developed with a primary use or the primary use is under construction. 

2.    The temporary building must be located within the boundaries of the property on which the primary use is located (temporary buildings used during construction of the primary use may be located off site, but must be a reasonable distance from the primary use).

3.    Ingress and egress meet the applicable requirements of BDC Chapter 3.1.

4.    There is adequate parking for the temporary and primary uses as required by BDC Chapter 3.3. 

5.    The temporary building complies with applicable building codes.

6.    The use can be adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. 

7.    All locational standards for structures in the applicable zoning district are met (e.g., setbacks, height and lot coverage). 

8.    The length of time that the temporary building will be used must not exceed 12 months. When a temporary permit expires, the applicant or owner must remove the temporary building from the site.

9.    Temporary buildings used for construction purposes are allowed on a site under construction and do not need a temporary use permit; however, they must be removed 30 days after the final inspection is complete.

E.    Temporary Placement of Educational Modulars. The placement of educational modular classrooms may be granted for up to two years without site plan approval through a temporary use permit application approval. The temporary use permit application shall contain a schematic site plan that shows the following: (1) the type of modular proposed, and (2) the proposed placement location of the modular.

In addition to meeting the standards of subsections (D)(1) through (7) of this section, the application for a temporary use permit for an education modular shall also meet the following standards:

1.    The parking requirements of BDC Chapter 3.3 shall be met for the permanent and temporary structures.

2.    The landscaping requirements in BDC Chapter 3.2 shall be met. 

F.    Medical Hardship Housing. A temporary use permit is required for medical hardship housing. The following standards are applicable to the siting of medical hardship housing. 

1.    Temporary use permits may be granted in residential zones for relatives of the family residing on the property if the temporary dwelling unit will be used because of a medical problem requiring the use of such a unit. The existence of a medical problem that requires the patient to reside on the same site as his or her relatives shall be supported by the certificate of a medical doctor. The permit shall not exceed one year and may only be renewed with another certificate from a medical doctor.

2.    The temporary dwelling unit may be a manufactured dwelling, manufactured home, manufactured structure, or mobile home as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2. No permanent structure or foundation shall be established for the medical hardship housing. Recreational vehicles and trailers are prohibited.

3.    The applicant shall obtain required temporary permits for electrical, water and other services as appropriate before the temporary dwelling unit is occupied.

4.    All locational standards for structures in the applicable zoning district shall be met (e.g., setbacks, height and lot coverage).

5.    The medical hardship housing and all utility connections shall be removed no later than 90 days after the expiration of the permit.

G.    Temporary Carnivals, Fairs, Parking Lot Sales and Warehouse Sales. Temporary carnivals, fairs, parking lot sales and retail sales from a warehouse are permitted on developed commercial, industrial and public facility sites for a maximum of 14 days each calendar year. No permit is necessary; however, the following standards must be met:

1.    Adequate parking is available to meet the minimum parking requirements of BDC Chapter 3.3;

2.    The vision clearance standards of BDC Chapter 3.1 are maintained and public rights-of-way are not obstructed; and

3.    Vehicle ingress and egress locations meet the access standards of BDC Chapter 3.1. [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2183, 2012; Ord. NS-2107, 2008; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.6.500 Short-Term Rentals.

The purpose of this section is to protect the character of the City’s residential neighborhoods by limiting and regulating short-term rental of dwelling units.

The following provisions apply to all short-term rentals (STRs) after April 15, 2015.

A.    Applicability. No person shall occupy, use, operate or manage, nor offer or negotiate to use, lease or rent, a dwelling unit for short-term rental occupancy unless issued a short-term rental (STR) permit or exempted under this chapter. A permit is required for each dwelling unit even if located on the same legal lot. The standards of this section shall supersede the standards elsewhere in the Development Code, unless otherwise stated.

B.    Application Submittal Requirements. The following information shall be submitted to the City along with a form approved by the City in order to apply for a STR permit.

1.    The name, address, email address and telephone number of the owner of the short-term rental for which the permit is to be issued, and the same for the authorized representative if different than the owner. An application may be submitted by an owner with the buyer as the applicant and upon written request, the approval will be granted to both the owner and the buyer.

2.    A floor plan identifying the number of bedrooms proposed for use.

3.    A diagram and/or photograph of the premises showing and indicating the number, location and dimensions of designated on-site and abutting on-street parking spaces that meet the minimum required number of parking spaces and maneuvering per BDC 3.3.300.

4.    Acknowledgment by signature that the owner and authorized representative have read all the regulations relating to the operation of a short-term rental under BC Chapter 7.16.

5.    Certification of the accuracy of the information submitted and agreement to comply with the conditions of the permit.

6.    Consent to inspection to ensure compliance with this section.

C.    Review Type. Short-term rentals are permitted subject to the following permit processes, provided all other requirements of this section are met:

1.    Other than as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, short-term rentals within Commercial Zoning Districts (CL, CG, CC, CB, CN), the Mixed Employment Zone (ME), the Mixed-Use Urban Zone (MU), the Mixed-Use Neighborhood Zone (MN), and the Mixed-Use Riverfront Zone (MR) within the Old Mill District boundary (noted as Type I in Figure 3.6.500.C) are:

a.    Processed as a Type I application.

b.    Exempt from the concentration limits in subsection (E) of this section.

2.    Short-term rentals within Mount Bachelor Village, Deschutes Landing subdivision, and Courtyards at Broken Top Lots 1 through 8 and Lots 21 through 32, are:

a.    Exempt from obtaining a STR permit (an annual STR operating license will still be required).

b.    Exempt from the concentration limits for short-term rentals in subsection (E) of this section.

3.    Infrequent short-term rentals that are available for rent fewer than 30 days total per calendar year are:

a.    Processed as a Type I application.

b.    Exempt from the concentration limits for short-term rentals in subsection (E) of this section.

c.    Limited to no more than four rental periods per calendar year.

4.    Other than as provided in subsections (C)(2) and (3) of this section, in residential zones (SR2-1/2, RL, RS, RM, RM-10, RH) and in the MR Zone outside of the Old Mill District boundary (noted as Type II in Figure 3.6.500.C), STRs are permitted subject to a Type II permit process provided all requirements of this section are met.

5.    Owner-occupied short-term rentals are:

a.    Processed as a Type I application.

b.    Exempt from the concentration limits for short-term rentals in subsection (E) of this section.

c.    Limited to renting up to two rooms to overnight guests for a period fewer than 30 consecutive days. The owner must occupy the dwelling unit during the overnight rental period. Only part of the dwelling unit is used for rental purposes. The room(s) for rent cannot include rooms within a detached or attached accessory dwelling unit or accessory structure where there is no internal access to the dwelling unit.

d.    Not permitted to have a kitchen or a wet bar in the room for rent.

e.    Subject to all other standards within this section for short-term rentals unless otherwise specified.

6.    Modification of an approval for a short-term rental shall be:

a.    Processed as a Type I application and exempt from the concentration limits in subsection (E) of this section if the expansion includes an increase in the number of bedrooms approved under the initial STR approval. If the expansion does not increase the number of bedrooms, no modification of approval is required.

b.    Required to obtain a revised annual operating license to reflect the modification of approval.

c.    Prior existing uses as defined in subsection (M) of this section are subject to the provisions of BDC 5.2.100.

Figure 3.6.500.C

Mixed Riverfront Zone and Old Mill District
[IMAGE]


D.    Short-Term Rental Development Designation Process. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a process to allow properties to be designated as short-term rental developments that, once approved, would allow dwelling units within the designated STR development to be used as short-term rentals without being subject to the concentration limits in subsection (E) of this section.

1.    Designation Process. The City may approve by a Type III process designation of a property or group of adjacent properties as a short-term rental development. The Planning Commission shall be the decision-making body for a STR development designation application.

a.    Submittal Requirements. An application for a short-term rental development designation must include:

i.    An application, on a City form. All owners of all property within the area proposed for short-term rental development designation must sign either the application or a consent to submit the application.

ii.    A map showing the area to be included in the short-term rental development, and properties within one-quarter mile. All existing and approved short-term rentals within the one-quarter-mile area shall be shown on the map.

iii.    An application fee in an amount established by Council resolution.

iv.    A narrative explaining how all applicable criteria are met.

b.    Designation Criteria.

i.    The property must be in an RS, RM or MR Zone and be an entire subdivision or subdivision phase, including a minimum of one acre.

ii.    The short-term rental development must be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

iii.    Any negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval.

c.    Review Process. Short-term rentals within STR development shall be:

i.    Processed as a Type I application to ensure adequate parking is provided and occupancy limits are established.

ii.    Exempt from the concentration limits for short-term rentals in subsection (E) of this section.

E.    Concentration Limits. There must be at least 250 feet of separation between properties zoned RL, RS, RM, RH, and MR outside of the Old Mill District boundary (noted as Type II in Figure 3.6.500.C) measured radially from the property boundary of the subject property as determined by the City of Bend Development Services Director or designee, which have a valid Type II short-term rental application or permit.

F.    Limits on Permit Transfer. Notwithstanding BDC 4.1.1330, any short-term rental application submitted after April 15, 2015, is specific to the owner of the dwelling unit or owner-authorized buyer for which the permit is issued. This means that the short-term rental permit shall not run with the land, but shall terminate and be void with no further proceedings on sale or transfer of the real property which was rented pursuant to the short-term rental permit.

Sale or transfer means any change of ownership during the lifetime of the permit holder, whether or not there is consideration, or after the death of the permit holder, except a change in ownership where title is held in survivorship with a spouse or domestic partner, or a transfer on the owner’s death to a trust which benefits only a spouse, child(ren) or domestic partner for the lifetime of the spouse, child(ren) or domestic partner. The survivor may not sell or transfer title, except that title may transfer among the survivors. A sale or transfer also does not mean (1) the transfer of ownership from the owner(s) of the real property to or between the members of a limited liability company or partnership when the transfer involves the same owners, or (2) the transfer to a trustee, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership, or other similar entity, if at least one owner is living at the time of transfer so long as that owner retains at least a 25 percent interest in the entity. The permit or nonconforming right shall terminate if the original owner ceases to own at least 25 percent interest in the entity. If the owner is a corporation, the shareholders of the corporation shall be considered the owners for purposes of this section.

G.    Occupancy. The maximum occupancy for the dwelling shall be two persons per bedroom plus two additional persons. For example, a two-bedroom dwelling would have a maximum occupancy of six persons. For owner-occupied short-term rentals, the occupancy shall be two persons per rented bedroom, in addition to the long-term residents of the dwelling.

H.    Parking. The following parking standards are required, in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.3:

1.    The parking requirement for STRs is one space per bedroom. In the case of an owner-occupied STR, the parking requirement is either one space per bedroom or two spaces for the owners occupying the dwelling unit plus one space per approved STR bedroom, whichever is less.

2.    Each on-site parking space is required to be a minimum of 20 feet deep by nine feet wide. Parking spaces may be in a garage or in an otherwise approved parking space on the property, such as a driveway, provided the parking dimension for the spaces are met. New parking spaces are required to be paved and cannot be gravel. The entirety of the parking space must be accommodated on-site such that the space does not cross over the property line. Tandem parking is allowed. 

3.    If the garage is to be utilized to meet the parking requirement, a photo of the interior of the garage must be submitted to show the garage is available for parking. The garage must continually be available for guest parking as long as the STR permit is valid.

4.    Where on-street parking abutting the site is allowed, up to 50 percent of the required parking may be met with approved on-street parking spaces in accordance with BDC 3.3.300(B). 

I.    Prohibited Use. No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or tent or other temporary shelter shall be used in conjunction with the short-term rental.

J.    Short-Term Rental Operating License. In addition to obtaining a STR permit under this section, persons operating short-term rentals must obtain a short-term rental operating license under BC Chapter 7.16.

1.    For existing permits submitted prior to the effective date of this code, and permits obtained prior to September 1, 2015, and uses that now require a permit under this chapter, an operating license must be obtained by September 1, 2015.

K.    Abandonment of Use.

1.    Notwithstanding BDC Chapter 5.2, Nonconforming Uses and Developments, if the short-term rental ceases for a period of more than 12 months, the short-term rental permit shall be void with no further proceedings.

a.    For existing permits submitted prior to the effective date of this code, the period of use shall be measured from the 12 months prior to the due date for the operating license (September 1, 2015). For permits obtained after September 1, 2014, and before September 1, 2015, and uses that now require a permit under this chapter, the 12-month duration shall be measured from one year beginning September 1, 2015. The period of use shall then be measured annually thereafter.

2.    Failure to maintain the STR operating annual license as provided in that chapter shall be considered abandonment of use.

3.    Temporary Hardship Exemption.

a.    A temporary hardship exemption from this section may be granted by the Development Services Director or designee. The following hardships, including a submission of proof, may be acceptable to the City:

i.    Medical condition of the owner, spouse, domestic partner or immediate family member that jeopardizes the ability of the owner to operate the short-term rental;

ii.    Death of a spouse, domestic partner or immediate family member that jeopardizes the ability of the owner to operate the short-term rental; or

iii.    Structural integrity of the short-term rental that deems it uninhabitable for tenants and is not self-imposed.

b.    A time limit may be set by the Development Services Director or designee, but shall not exceed six months. A one-time extension may be approved upon request if one of the conditions of subsection (K)(3)(a) of this section still applies.

L.    Expiration of Approval and Initiation of Use. Notwithstanding BDC 4.1.1310 and 4.1.1315, Expiration of Approval and Initiation of Use, if the short-term rental does not initiate the use by renting the short-term rental at least one night within the first 12 months of obtaining a short-term rental permit, the short-term rental permit shall be void with no further proceedings.

1.    For existing permits submitted prior to the effective date of this code, and permit applications submitted after April 15, 2015, and prior to September 1, 2015, the 12-month initiation of use period shall begin September 1, 2015. For all permits submitted after that date, the initiation of use period begins upon final land use permit approval.

M.    Prior Existing Use.

1.    Existing Type I Permits. Any short-term rental approved and legally permitted under the former 2006 BDC 3.6.200(L) may continue as a legal nonconforming use provided:

a.    That the use is not abandoned under subsection (K) of this section; and

b.    That the owner obtains and renews the annual license as required by this section and BC Chapter 7.16. The owner of the dwelling has the burden of establishing a valid prior approval when applying for a short-term rental license or license renewal.

2.    Legal Nonconforming Uses. Any short-term rental that began operating prior to August 2006, when the initial short-term rental regulations were adopted, and has been lawfully and continually conducted since that time, may continue as a legal nonconforming use provided:

a.    That the use is not abandoned under subsection (K) of this section; and

b.    The owner obtains and renews the annual license required under this chapter and BC Chapter 7.16. The owner of the dwelling has the burden of establishing a prior legal use when applying for a short-term rental license or license renewal.

3.    Short-Term Room Rentals. Any short-term room rental that began operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (April 15, 2015), and submitted documentation to the City that only a single room in a dwelling was rented, may continue as a legal nonconforming use provided:

a.    That the use is not abandoned under subsection (K) of this section; and

b.    That the owner obtains and renews the annual license as required by this section and BC Chapter 7.16. The owner of the dwelling has the burden of establishing a prior legal use when applying for a short-term rental license or license renewal.

N.    Inspection. Any short-term rental applications submitted after April 15, 2015, shall be subject to inspection prior to commencement of the use by the City for compliance with this section.

1.    The Development Services Director or designee may conduct a site visit upon an application for a short-term rental to confirm the number of bedrooms stated on the application and the number, location and availability of on-site parking spaces. The site visit will be coordinated with the applicant and be conducted during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice.

2.    The Development Services Director or designee may visit and inspect the site of a short-term rental on a prescribed schedule to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice and other procedural safeguards as necessary. Code violations shall be processed in accordance with BDC Chapter 1.3, Enforcement. [Ord. NS-2314, 2018; Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2297, 2017; Ord. NS-2258, 2015; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2240, 2015]




Chapter 3.7 WIRELESS AND BROADCAST COMMUNICATION FACILITIES Revised 4/19

– STANDARDS AND PROCESS

Sections:

3.7.100    Purpose and Applicability. Revised 4/19

3.7.200    Definitions. Revised 4/19

3.7.300    Application Requirements. Revised 4/19

3.7.400    General Regulations. Revised 4/19

3.7.500    Review Process and Approval Standards. Revised 4/19

3.7.550    Eligible Facilities Request for a Modification of an Existing Tower or Base Station. Revised 4/19

3.7.600    Exemptions. Revised 4/19

3.7.700    Maintenance. Revised 4/19

3.7.800    Inspections. Revised 4/19

3.7.900    Preexisting Towers. Revised 4/19

3.7.1000    Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use. Revised 4/19


3.7.100 Purpose and Applicability. Revised 4/19

A.    Purpose. This chapter is intended to accommodate the provision of wireless and broadcast communication services and provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development, siting, and installation of wireless and broadcast communication facilities. In accordance with the guidelines and intent of Federal law and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, these regulations are intended to: (1) protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Bend; (2) preserve neighborhood character and protect aesthetic quality; (3) encourage siting in preferred locations; and (4) minimize adverse visual impacts through careful design, configuration, screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques.

B.    Applicability.

1.    This chapter applies to the development, siting, and installation of wireless and broadcast communication facilities, including but not limited to cellular telephone facilities, broadband internet facilities, and radio and TV broadcasting facilities. This chapter in no way prohibits, restricts, or impairs the installation, maintenance, or use of video antennas (including direct-to-home satellite dishes, TV antennas, and wireless cable antennas) used by viewers to receive video programming signals from direct broadcast facilities, broadband radio service providers, and TV broadcast stations.

2.    This chapter also applies to an eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimension of such tower or base station. See BDC 3.7.550, Eligible Facilities Request for a Modification of an Existing Tower or Base Station. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.200 Definitions. Revised 4/19

The following words and phrases used in this chapter, which supplement the definitions found in BDC Chapter 1.2 and elsewhere in this code, shall have the following meanings:

Antenna means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices designed for telephonic, radio, facsimile, data, or television communications through sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure. Antennas shall include, but not be limited to, devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted up and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be part of the antenna.

Antenna height means the vertical distance measured from the ground surface at grade to the tip of the highest point of the antenna on the proposed structure.

Antenna support means any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or any other structure that supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.

Appurtenances means attachments to the tower including, but not limited to, antennas, radios, mounts, rods, and other equipment related to the operation of the wireless communication facility.

Base station means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this section or any equipment associated with a tower.

1.    The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

2.    The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks).

3.    The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the State or local government under BDC 3.7.550, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.

4.    The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the State or local government under BDC 3.7.550, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.

Broadcast communication facility means any facility that transmits radio or television signals including, but not limited to, antennas, dish antennas, microwave antennas, and other types of equipment for the transmission of such signals, including towers and similar supporting structures, equipment cabinets or buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. This definition does not apply to amateur radio stations as defined by the Federal Communications Commission, Part 97 of the Commission’s Rules.

Camouflaged means any wireless or broadcast communication facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of camouflaged facilities may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements, towers made to look like trees and antenna support structures designed to look like flag poles or light poles.

Co-location means locating wireless or broadcast communication equipment from more than one provider on a single support structure.

Equipment building, shelter or cabinet means a cabinet or building used to house equipment used by wireless or broadcast communication providers at a facility.

Facade-mounted antenna means an antenna architecturally integrated into the facade of a building or structure.

Facility means a wireless or broadcast communication facility.

Facility or personal wireless service facility for small wireless facilities means an antenna facility or a structure that is used for the provision of personal wireless service, whether such service is provided on a stand-alone basis or commingled with other wireless communications services.

Faux tree means a wireless or broadcast communication tower camouflaged to resemble a tree.

Guyed tower means a wireless or broadcast communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors.

High visibility means the following types of wireless or broadcast communication facilities:

1.    Monopoles, lattice towers and guyed towers.

2.    Any wireless or broadcast communication facilities that do not meet the definition of stealth, low visibility, or moderate visibility.

Lattice tower means a guyed or self-supporting three- or four-sided, open, steel frame support structure used to support wireless or broadcast communication equipment.

Low visibility means the following facilities if they do not exceed the height limit of the applicable zoning district, or if they do not increase the height of an existing facility:

1.    Whip antennas not exceeding six feet in length or height, including mounting, and measuring no more than three inches in diameter, located on existing structures including, but not limited to, water storage tanks, high-voltage transmission towers, utility towers and poles, sign standards, and roadway overpasses, with equipment cabinets that are screened from view.

2.    Facilities, including equipment cabinets, that are screened from view through the use of architectural treatments, such as cupolas, steeples, and parapets, and are consistent with existing development on adjacent properties.

3.    Additions to existing permitted low visibility facilities if the additions themselves meet the definition of low visibility and are designed to minimize visibility of both the facility and equipment cabinets.

4.    Changes to an existing building that are consistent with the building’s architectural style and the equipment cabinets are not visible.

Maintenance means emergency or routine repairs or replacement of transmitters, antennas, or other components of previously approved wireless telecommunication facilities which do not create a significant change in visual appearance or visual impact.

Microcells provide additional coverage and capacity where there are high numbers of users within urban and suburban macrocells. The antennas for microcells are mounted at street level, typically on the external walls of existing structures, lamp-posts, and other street furniture. Microcell antennas are usually smaller than macrocell antennas, and when mounted on existing structures, can often blend into building features. Microcells provide radio coverage over distances, typically between 100 meters and 1,000 meters, and operate at power levels substantially below those of macrocells.

Moderate visibility means the following facilities if they do not exceed the height limit of the applicable zoning district, or do not increase the height of an existing facility, unless approved through a Conditional Use Permit:

1.    Panel-shaped antennas not exceeding eight feet in length or height that are flush-mounted to an existing building facade or other existing structure on at least one edge, or extend a maximum of 24 inches from the building facade or other structure at any edge, do not exceed the height of the building or other structure, and are designed to blend with the color, texture, and design of the existing building or structure, with equipment cabinets that are screened from view.

2.    Wireless or broadcast communication facilities that are camouflaged, such as faux trees, flag poles, and light poles; provided, that the equipment building, shelter, or cabinet for the facility is screened or camouflaged.

Monopole means a wireless or broadcast communication facility consisting of a single pole constructed for purposes of supporting one or more antennas without guy wires or ground anchors.

Neighborhood character means those unique attributes including, but not limited to, architecture, historical and cultural features, historical development patterns, landscape, hardscape, and the size, scale and spacing of buildings and other structures that define a neighborhood’s identity.

Panel or directional antenna means an antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area.

RF means radio frequency.

Roof-mounted antenna means any antenna with its support structure placed directly on the roof of any building or structure.

Screened means concealed from view with a sight-obscuring fence, wall or vegetation.

Service area means the area served by a single wireless or broadcast communication facility.

Side-mounted antennas means those antennas that are mounted on the side of a tower structure at any height, and includes both the antennas and equipment with protective radome coatings. This term also includes microwave dish antennas, solid or not, located at 150 feet or lower on a tower structure, regardless of the dish diameter. The term does not include solid microwave dish antennas exceeding six feet in diameter that are located above 150 feet on a tower structure.

Small top-mounted antennas means any antenna mounted on the top of a tower structure where the antenna is 20 feet or less in height and six inches or less in outside diameter.

Small wireless facility means a low-power wireless communication facility used to increase capacity to wireless communication demand areas or provide infill coverage in areas of weak reception, including a separate transmitting and receiving station serving the facility, or that is considered a small wireless facility under Federal law.

Speculation tower means an antenna support structure designed for the purpose of providing location mounts for wireless or broadcast communication facilities, without a binding written commitment or executed lease from a service provider to utilize or lease space on the tower at the time the application is submitted.

Stealth means facilities, including, but not limited to, microcells, antennas, equipment cabinets, and any other ancillary equipment that cannot be seen from any street or any adjacent property, improved or unimproved, and that do not result in any apparent architectural changes or additions to existing buildings. The addition of landscaping, walls, fences, or grading as screening techniques does not make an otherwise visible facility a stealth facility.

Structure means a pole, tower, base station, or other building, whether or not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the provision of personal wireless service (whether on its own or commingled with other types of services).

Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

Tower or telecommunications tower means any mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, freestanding tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas.

Whip antenna means an antenna that transmits or receives signals in 360 degrees. Whip antennas are typically cylindrical in shape, less than three inches in diameter and no more than six feet long, including the mounting.

Wireless communication facility means any facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, antennas, dish antennas, microwave antennas, and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, including telecommunications towers and similar supporting structures, equipment cabinets or buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. This definition does not apply to amateur radio stations as defined by the Federal Communications Commission, Part 97 of the Commission’s Rules. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.300 Application Requirements. Revised 4/19

Applicants for small wireless facilities must submit an application demonstrating compliance with BDC 3.7.500(A)(2). Applicants for eligible facilities requests must submit an application in compliance with BDC 3.7.550. All other applications for a wireless or broadcast communication facility must provide the following reports, documents or documentation:

A.    Geographic Service Area. The applicant must submit a map showing all the applicant’s existing sites in the City. Prior to the issuance of any building permits, applicants for AM, FM, HDFM, TV, and DTV projects must provide a copy of the corresponding FCC construction permit or license for the facility being built or relocated.

B.    Visual Impact and Alternative Site Analysis. The applicant must provide a visual impact analysis showing the maximum silhouette, viewshed analysis, color and finish palette, and proposed screening for all components of the facility. The analysis must include photo simulations and other information as necessary to determine visual impact of the facility as seen from multiple directions. The applicant must include a map showing where the photos were taken. Except for Type I applications, the applicant must include an analysis of alternative sites for the facility within and outside of the City that are capable of meeting the same service objectives as the preferred site with an equivalent or lesser visual impact. If a new tower is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate the need for a new tower and why alternative locations cannot be used to meet the identified service objectives.

C.    Narrative. The application must include a written narrative that describes in detail all of the equipment and components to be included in the facility, e.g., antenna(s) and arrays, equipment cabinet(s), back-up generator(s), air-conditioning unit(s), lighting, fencing, etc. The following information must also be provided:

1.    Height. Provide an engineer’s diagram showing the height of the facility and all of its visible components. Carriers must provide evidence that establishes that the proposed facilities are designed to the minimum height required from a technological standpoint for the proposed site to meet the carrier’s coverage objectives. If the tower height will exceed the base height restrictions of the applicable zone, this narrative must include a discussion of the physical constraints (topographical features, etc.) making the additional height necessary. The narrative must include consideration of the possibility for design alternatives, including the use of multiple sites or microcell technology that would avoid the need for the new facility or the requested height.

2.    Construction. Describe the anticipated construction techniques and time frame for construction or installation of the facilities. This narrative must include all temporary staging and the type of vehicles and equipment to be used.

3.    Maintenance. Describe the anticipated maintenance and monitoring program for the antennas, back-up equipment, and landscaping.

4.    Noise/Acoustical Information. Provide manufacturer’s specifications for all noise-generating equipment such as air-conditioning units and back-up generators, and a depiction of the equipment location in relation to adjoining properties.

5.    Landscape Plan. Provide a plan showing all proposed landscaping, screening and proposed irrigation with a discussion of how the chosen materials at maturity will screen the site.

6.    Parking. Provide a site plan showing the designated parking area for maintenance vehicles and equipment.

7.    Co-location. In the case of new multi-user towers or similar support structures, the applicant must submit engineering feasibility data and a letter stating the applicant’s willingness to allow other carriers to co-locate on the proposed facilities wherever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable.

8.    Lease. The site plan must show the lease area of the proposed facility.

9.    FCC License. Provide a copy of the applicant’s FCC license and/or construction permit, if an FCC license and/or construction permit is required for the proposed facility, including documentation showing that the applicant is in compliance with all FCC RF emissions safety standards.

10.    Lighting and Marking. Any proposed lighting and marking of the facility, including any required by the FAA. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.400 General Regulations. Revised 4/19

All applications for wireless and broadcast communication facilities are subject to the following requirements and regulations:

A.    Maximum Number of High Visibility Facilities per Lot or Parcel. No more than one high visibility facility is allowed on any one lot or parcel. The Planning Commission may approve exceeding the maximum number of high visibility facilities per lot or parcel if one of the following findings is made through a Type III review process: (1) co-location of additional high visibility facilities is consistent with neighborhood character, (2) the provider has shown that denial of an application for additional high visibility facilities would have the effect of prohibiting service because the facility would fill a significant gap in coverage and no alternative locations are available and technologically feasible, or (3) the provider has shown that denial of an application for additional high visibility facilities would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services. In such cases, the Planning Commission is the review authority for all related applications (e.g., Wireless or Broadcast Communication Facility Site Plan, Conditional Use Permit).

B.    Towers Adjacent to Residentially Designated Property. In order to ensure public safety, all wireless and broadcast communication towers located adjacent to any property designated as Residential on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map must be set back from all residential property lines by a distance at least equal to the height of the facility, including any antennas or other appurtenances. The setback is measured from that part of the tower that is closest to the neighboring residentially designated property.

C.    High visibility facilities require a Conditional Use Permit on any property designated as Residential on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map, or designated Public Facilities (PF) on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map but developed as a residential subdivision.

D.    Historical Buildings and Structures. No facility is allowed on any building or structure, or in any district, that is listed on any Federal, State or local historical register unless it is determined by the Review Authority that the facility will have no adverse effect on the appearance of the building, structure, or district. No change in architecture and no high visibility facilities are permitted on any such building, any such site, or in any such district.

E.    Equipment Location. No tower or equipment can be located in a front, rear, or side yard setback in any zone, and no portion of any antenna array can extend beyond the property lines. For guyed towers, all guy anchors must be located at least 50 feet from all abutting properties.

F.    Tower Heights. Towers may exceed the height limits otherwise provided for in the Development Code. However, all towers greater than the height limit of the underlying zone require a Conditional Use Permit application (Type II process).

1.    Exemption to Conditional Use Permit.

a.    Type I small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way or in a public utility easement on an existing or replacement utility or light pole.

G.    Accessory Building Size. All accessory buildings and structures built to contain equipment accessory to a wireless or broadcast communication facility may not exceed 12 feet in height unless a greater height is necessary and required by a condition of approval to maximize architectural integration. Each accessory building or structure located on any property designated as Public Facilities or Residential on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map is limited to 200 square feet, unless approved through a Conditional Use Permit.

H.    Visual Impact. All facilities must be designed to minimize the visual impact to the greatest extent practicable by means of placement, screening, landscaping, and camouflage. All facilities must also be designed to be compatible with existing architectural elements, building materials, and other site characteristics. The applicant must use the least visible antennas reasonably available to accomplish the coverage objectives. All high visibility facilities must be sited in such a manner as to cause the least detriment to the viewshed of adjoining properties, neighboring properties, and distant properties.

1.    Exemption.

a.    Small wireless facilities on an existing or replacement utility pole, light pole or structure.

I.    Colors and materials for facilities must be nonreflective and chosen to minimize visibility. Facilities, including support equipment and buildings, must be painted, colored or textured using colors to match or blend with the primary background, unless required by any other applicable law.

J.    All camouflaged facilities must be designed to visually and operationally blend into the surrounding area in a manner consistent with existing development on adjacent properties. The facility must also be appropriate for the specific site. In other words, it should not “stand out” from its surrounding environment.

K.    Facade-mounted antennas must be architecturally integrated into the building design and otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible. If possible, antennas should be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to be completely screened from view. Facade-mounted antennas must not extend more than two feet out from the building face.

L.    Roof-mounted antennas must be constructed at the minimum height possible to serve the operator’s service area and be set back as far from the building edge as possible or otherwise screened to minimize visibility from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties.

M.    Compliance with Photo Simulations. As a condition of approval and prior to final inspection of the facility, the applicant must submit evidence, such as photos, to the satisfaction of the City sufficient to prove that the facility is in substantial conformance with photo simulations provided with the application. Nonconformance requires modification to compliance within 90 days or the structure must be removed.

N.    Noise from any equipment supporting the facility must meet the requirements of BC Chapter 5.50, Noise.

O.    No signs, striping, graphics, or other attention-getting devices are permitted on any wireless or broadcast communication facility except for warning and safety signage with a surface area of no more than three square feet. Signs must be affixed to a fence or ancillary facility and limited to no more than two signs unless more are required by law.

P.    Traffic Obstruction. Maintenance vehicles servicing facilities located in the public or private right-of-way cannot park on the traveled way or in a manner that obstructs traffic.

Q.    No net loss in required parking spaces can occur as a result of the installation of any wireless or broadcast communication facility.

R.    Sidewalks and Pathways. Cabinets and other equipment must not impair pedestrian use of sidewalks or other pedestrian paths or bikeways on public or private land and must be screened from view.

S.    Lighting. Wireless or broadcast communication facilities cannot include any beacon lights or strobe lights, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable authority. If beacon lights or strobe lights are required, the Review Authority shall review the available alternatives and approve the design with the least visual impact. All other site lighting for security and maintenance purposes must be shielded and directed downward, and must comply with the outdoor lighting standards in BDC 3.5.200, unless otherwise required under Federal law.

T.    Speculation. No application can be accepted or approved for a speculation tower, i.e., from an applicant that simply constructs towers and leases tower space to service providers, but is not a service provider, unless the applicant submits a binding written commitment or executed lease from a service provider to utilize or lease space on the tower. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.500 Review Process and Approval Standards. Revised 4/19

A.    Type I Process. The following facilities are allowed with the approval of a Wireless or Broadcast Communication Facility Site Plan pursuant to a Type I process under BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures:

1.    Stealth and Low Visibility Facilities.

2.    Small Wireless Facilities.

a.    Small wireless facilities proposed in the public right-of-way or in a public utility easement on an existing or replacement utility or light pole, so long as they meet all of the following:

i.    The facilities:

(A)    Are mounted on existing or replacement structures 50 feet or less in height including their antennas; or

(B)    Are mounted on existing or replacement structures no more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent structures; or

(C)    Do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10 percent, whichever is greater.

ii.    Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume.

iii.    All other wireless equipment associated with the facility, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the facility, is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.

iv.    The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable FCC safety standards.

v.    Comply with Part II, Section 8 of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications when located in the public right-of-way or public utility easement.

b.    Small wireless facilities proposed on private property on an existing or replacement utility pole, light pole or structure, so long as they meet all of the following:

i.    The facilities do not exceed the height limits of the underlying zone or as otherwise authorized by Federal law.

ii.    Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume.

iii.    All other wireless equipment associated with the facility, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the facility, is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.

iv.    The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable FCC safety standards.

v.    Comply with Part II, Section 8 of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

3.    Facade-mounted antennas or low-powered networked telecommunications facilities, such as those employing microcell antennas, integrated into the architecture of an existing building in such a manner that no change to the architecture is apparent and no part of the facility is visible to public view.

4.    Antennas or arrays that are hidden from public view through the use of architectural treatments, e.g., within a cupola, steeple, or parapet which is consistent with the applicable building height limitation.

5.    New antennas or arrays that are attached to an existing broadcast communication facility located in any zone; provided, that they do not exceed the following “safe harbor” parameters:

a.    Side-mounted antennas.

b.    Small top-mounted antennas. No more than three small top-mounted antennas can be placed on the top of any one broadcast communication facility without a Type II review.

6.    To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, co-location of antennas or arrays on existing towers takes precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:

a.    An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height to accommodate the co-location of additional antennas or arrays, as long as the modified or rebuilt tower will not exceed the height limit of the applicable zoning district. The height change may only occur one time per tower.

b.    An existing tower that is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of additional antennas or arrays must be of the same tower type and reconstructed in the exact same location as the existing tower.

B.    Type II Process. The following facilities are allowed with the approval of a Wireless or Broadcast Communication Facility Site Plan pursuant to a Type II process under BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures:

1.    High visibility facilities located on any property designated as Commercial, Industrial, Public Facilities, or Mixed-Use on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map and at least 500 feet from any property designated as Residential on the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map.

2.    Moderate visibility facilities that do not exceed the height limit of the applicable zone.

3.    New antennas or arrays that are attached to an existing broadcast communication facility located in any zone which exceed the “safe harbor” parameters of subsection (A)(5)(a) or (b) of this section.

4.    Small wireless facilities that exceed the thresholds in BDC 3.7.500(A)(2).

C.    Conditional Use Permit Requirements. Applications for wireless or broadcast communication facilities in all other locations and situations including moderate or high visibility facilities that exceed the height limit of the applicable zone also require a Conditional Use Permit (Type II process). In addition to the approval standards in BDC Chapter 4.4, Conditional Use Permits, the applicant must demonstrate that the Wireless or Broadcast Communication Facility Site Plan approval standards in subsections (D)(2) through (5) of this section are met.

D.    Approval Criteria. The City may approve the use and Wireless or Broadcast Communication Facility Site Plan for any of the facilities listed in subsections (B) and (C) of this section upon a determination that the following criteria are met:

1.    The height of the proposed tower or facility does not exceed the height limit of the underlying zoning district, or does not increase the height of an existing facility.

2.    The location is the least visible of other possible locations and technological design options that achieve approximately the same signal coverage objectives.

3.    The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed facility will be compatible with adjacent uses, residences, buildings, and structures, with consideration given to:

a.    Scale, bulk, coverage and density;

b.    The harmful effect, if any, upon neighboring properties;

c.    The suitability of the site for the type and intensity of the proposed facility; and

d.    Any other relevant impact of the proposed use in the setting where it is proposed.

4.    All required public facilities have adequate capacity, as determined by the City, to serve the proposed wireless or broadcast communication facility.

5.    The proposed wireless or broadcast communication facility complies with all of the general regulations contained in BDC 3.7.400.

6.    Small wireless facilities must comply with Part II, Section 8 of the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

E.    Conditions of Approval. The City may impose any other reasonable condition(s) deemed necessary to achieve compliance with the approval standards, including designation of an alternate location, or if compliance with all of the applicable approval criteria cannot be achieved through the imposition of reasonable conditions, the application must be denied.

F.    Time Frame for Review. Within the time limits imposed by State or Federal law, less any time period that may be excluded by State or Federal law, the Review Authority must approve the application unless the Review Authority determines that the application is not covered by this chapter or does not comply with applicable standards. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.550 Eligible Facilities Request for a Modification of an Existing Tower or Base Station. Revised 4/19

A.    Applicability. An applicant may submit an eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimension of such tower or base station that involves:

1.    Collocation of new transmission equipment;

2.    Removal of transmission equipment; or

3.    Replacement of transmission equipment.

    For purposes of this subsection, “collocation” means (a) mounting or installing an antenna facility on a preexisting structure, and/or (b) modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure; provided, that, for purposes of eligible facilities requests, “collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

B.    Type I Process. An eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimension of such tower or base station is reviewed pursuant to a Type I process under BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures.

C.    The applicant must provide documentation or information to verify whether the request is not a substantial change. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following:

1.    For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10 percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater;

a.    Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings’ rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act;

2.    For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;

3.    For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

4.    It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;

5.    It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or

6.    It does not comply with the conditions of approval associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (C)(1) through (4) of this section.

D.    Approval Criteria. The City may approve an eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station upon a determination that the following criterion is met:

1.    The eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station does not substantially change the physical dimension of such tower or base station.

E.    Conditions of Approval. The City may impose any other reasonable condition(s) deemed necessary to achieve compliance with the approval standards, or if compliance with the applicable approval criteria cannot be achieved through the imposition of reasonable conditions, the application must be denied.

F.    Time Frame for Review. Within the time limits imposed by State or Federal law, less any time period that may be excluded by State or Federal law, the Review Authority must approve the application unless the Review Authority determines that the application is not covered by this chapter or does not comply with applicable standards. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019]


3.7.600 Exemptions. Revised 4/19

The following are exempt structures or activities under this chapter:

A.    Whip or other similar antennas no taller than six feet with a maximum diameter of two inches.

B.    Antennas (including direct-to-home satellite dishes, TV antennas, and wireless cable antennas) used by viewers to receive video programming signals from direct broadcast facilities, broadband radio service providers, and TV broadcast stations regardless of zone category.

C.    Low-powered networked telecommunications facilities such as microcell radio transceivers located on existing utility poles and light standards within public right-of-way. Low-powered networked telecommunications facilities must comply with this chapter.

D.    All military, Federal, State, and local government communication facilities except for towers.

E.    Cells on Wheels (COW), which are permitted as temporary uses in nonresidential zones for a period not to exceed 180 days, in residential zones for a period not to exceed 14 days, or during a period of emergency as declared by the City, County, or State.

F.    Replacement antennas or equipment, provided the replacement antennas and/or equipment (1) have a function similar to the replaced antenna and/or equipment and do not exceed the overall size of the original antenna and/or equipment or (2) the replacement equipment will be located in an existing cabinet or base station. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.700 Maintenance. Revised 4/19

The following maintenance requirements apply to all facilities:

A.    All landscaping must be maintained at all times and be promptly replaced if not successful.

B.    If a flag pole is used for camouflaging a facility, flags must be flown and must be properly maintained at all times.

C.    All wireless and broadcast communication sites must be kept clean and free of litter.

D.    All wireless and broadcast communication sites must maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC, the National Electric Safety Code, and all State and local regulations.

E.    All equipment cabinets must display a legible operator’s contact number for reporting maintenance problems. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.800 Inspections. Revised 4/19

A.    The City or its agents have authority to enter onto the property upon which a wireless or broadcast communication facility is located to inspect the facility for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the Building Code and all other construction standards provided by the City and Federal and State law.

B.    The City reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the wireless or broadcast communication facility owner. In the event such inspection results in a determination that violation of applicable construction and maintenance standards set forth by the City has occurred, remedy of the violation may include cost recovery for all costs incurred in confirming and processing the violation. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.900 Preexisting Towers. Revised 4/19

Towers that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this chapter are allowed to continue their use as they presently exist. This code does not make lawful any towers that are not lawfully approved on the date the ordinance codified in this code is adopted. Routine maintenance is permitted on such lawful preexisting towers.

Lawfully existing towers may be replaced as long as the replacement is located on the same property, no closer to the nearest property line than the existing tower, no taller than the existing tower, has a width no more than 10 percent larger than the existing tower and has identical lighting and painting. The tower being replaced must be removed within 30 days of completion of the replacement tower. Any other changes or modifications to a replacement tower must be treated as new construction, and must comply with the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


3.7.1000 Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use. Revised 4/19

The following requirements apply to the abandonment and/or discontinuation of use for all facilities:

A.    All facilities located on a utility pole must be promptly removed at the operator’s expense at any time a utility is scheduled to be placed underground or otherwise moved.

B.    All operators who intend to abandon or discontinue the use of any wireless or broadcast communication facility must notify the City of such intentions no less than 60 days prior to the final day of use.

C.    Wireless or broadcast communication facilities are considered abandoned 90 days following the final day of use or operation.

D.    All abandoned facilities must be physically removed by the facility owner no more than 90 days following the final day of use or of determination that the facility has been abandoned, whichever occurs first.

E.    The City reserves the right to remove any facilities that are abandoned for more than 90 days at the expense of the facility owner.

F.    Any abandoned site must be restored to its natural or former condition. Grading and landscaping in good condition may remain. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2158, 2011; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]

 


Title 4 APPLICATIONS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES Revised 1/19 Revised 4/19 Revised 9/19 Revised 2/20

Chapters:

4.0    Applications and Review Procedures

4.1    Development Review and Procedures Revised 4/19 Revised 2/20

4.2    Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review Revised 1/19 Revised 9/19 Revised 2/20

4.3    Subdivisions, Partitions, Replats and Property Line Adjustments, and Infill Development Options Revised 2/20

4.4    Conditional Use Permits

4.5    Master Planning and Development Alternatives

4.6    Land Use District Map and Text Amendments

4.7    Transportation Analysis Revised 2/20

4.8    Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan

4.9    Annexations


Chapter 4.0 APPLICATIONS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:

4.0.100    Introduction.


4.0.100 Introduction.

This title provides all of the application requirements and procedures for obtaining permits required by this code. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 4.1 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND PROCEDURES Revised 4/19 Revised 2/20

Sections:

4.1.100    Purpose.

4.1.200    General Provisions.

4.1.300    Type I Ministerial Procedures.

4.1.400    Type II and Type III Applications.

4.1.500    Type IV Legislative Procedures.

4.1.600    Deschutes River Design Review Procedures.

4.1.700    Repealed.

4.1.800    Quasi-Judicial Hearings. Revised 4/19

4.1.900    Type II and III Decisions.

4.1.1000    Reconsideration.

4.1.1100    Appeals.

4.1.1200    Proceedings on Remand.

4.1.1300    Limitations on Approvals.

4.1.1400    Declaratory Ruling.

4.1.1500    Development Agreements.

4.1.1600    Summary of Development Application Types.


4.1.100 Purpose.

This chapter provides uniform procedures for the granting or denial of applications and determinations by the City of Bend under the applicable State of Oregon statutes and rules, Bend Comprehensive Plan, Bend Development Code, and other ordinances which by their terms incorporate by reference the procedures in this chapter.

The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the issuance, suspension, or revocation of any on-site sewage disposal, sign, building, electrical or plumbing permits, except as they relate to Planning Division consideration of permitted uses.

For lands located inside the Bend Urban Growth Boundary, but outside the City limits, the applicability of this code shall be set forth through intergovernmental agreements. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.200 General Provisions.

Sections:

4.1.210    Pre-application Conference.

4.1.215    Public Meeting.

4.1.220    Application Requirements.

4.1.225    Acceptance of Application.

4.1.235    Withdrawal of Application.

4.1.240    Applicable Standards.

4.1.245    Notice to Public Agencies.

4.1.250    Conflicting Procedures.

4.1.255    Time Computation.

4.1.260    Lot of Record.


4.1.210 Pre-application Conference.

A pre-application conference with the City of Bend is highly recommended for complex applications or for applicants who are unfamiliar with the land use process. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of the Development Code and to identify issues likely to arise in processing an application. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.215 Public Meeting.

A.    The applicant for a Bend Comprehensive Plan Map amendment, Zoning Map amendment, conditional use permit, master plan, subdivision or site plan review for new development or an alteration/addition to one or more buildings containing a total of 10,000 square feet or more must present the proposal at a public meeting prior to submitting the respective application to the City Planning Division. The presentation must be made at either a regular or special meeting with a neighborhood association recognized by the City of Bend whose boundaries the subject property lies within, or a public meeting arranged and conducted by the applicant. The presentation at the public meeting must include the following:

1.    A map depicting the location of the subject property proposed for development.

2.    A visual description of the project including a site plan, tentative subdivision plan and elevation drawings of any structures if applicable.

3.    A description of the nature of the use including, but not limited to, sizes and heights of structures, proposed lot sizes, density, etc.

4.    The expected or anticipated impacts from the development.

5.    Any mitigation proposed by the applicant to alleviate the expected/anticipated impacts.

6.    An opportunity for the public to provide comments. Applicants are encouraged to reconcile as many public concerns as possible prior to submittal of their application.

B.    Public Meeting Notification. If any part of a proposed new development as referenced in subsection (A) of this section is to be constructed within the boundaries of a recognized neighborhood association of the City of Bend, the applicant shall notify the designated representative of such association of the presentation. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to schedule the meeting/presentation and provide adequate notification to the residents of the affected neighborhood of the date, time and location of the meeting/presentation. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to provide the information listed in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (c) of this section to the designated representative of the neighborhood association. Such meeting shall be held no less than 15 days and no more than 45 days from the date that the applicant notifies the designated representative of the affected neighborhood association. The following provisions shall be applicable to the applicant’s obligation to notify the residents of the area affected by the new development application, whether the proposed development is within the boundaries of a recognized neighborhood association or not:

1.    The applicant shall send mailed notice of the public meeting to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, and, if any part of the subject property is within the boundaries of a neighborhood association recognized by the City of Bend or within 500 feet of any other neighborhood association recognized by the City of Bend, notice shall be sent by Priority Mail with Delivery Confirmation to the designated representative(s) of such neighborhood association(s). The property owner list shall be compiled from the Deschutes County Tax Assessor’s property owner list from the most recent property tax assessment roll. The address for the designated representative(s) of the affected neighborhood association(s) shall be obtained from the City of Bend. The notice shall be sent a minimum of 15 days prior to the public meeting, and shall include at a minimum:

a.    Date, time and location of the public meeting.

b.    A brief written description of the proposal and proposed use, but with enough specificity so that the project is easily discernible.

c.    The location of the subject property, including address (if applicable), nearest cross streets and any other easily understood geographical reference, and a map (such as a tax assessor’s map) which depicts the subject property. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.220 Application Requirements.

A.    Property Owner. For the purposes of this section, the term property owner shall mean the owner of record or the contract purchaser and does not include a person or organization that holds a security interest.

B.    Applications shall:

1.    Be submitted by the property owner or a person who has written authorization from the property owner as defined herein to make the application;

2.    Be completed on a form prescribed by the City;

3.    Include supporting information required by this code and any other information necessary to, in the judgment of the Development Services Director, demonstrate compliance with applicable criteria;

4.    Be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as set forth in the adopted Fees Resolution;

5.    Provide proof of ownership in the form of a deed, or other recorded document; and

6.    In the case of applications for a quasi-judicial plan amendment or zone change, may be accompanied by applications for a specific development proposal.

7.    For applications that require a public meeting under BDC 4.1.215(A), include a copy of the Delivery Confirmation receipt and a Public Meeting Verification of Compliance form signed by the applicant and a representative of the Neighborhood Association(s), attesting to the contents of the materials provided at the meeting. If no representatives of the Neighborhood Association(s) are present at the meeting, the applicant may submit a statement to that effect. If the public meeting was arranged and conducted by the applicant, the notification materials listed in BDC 4.1.215(B)(1)(a) through (c) must also be submitted.

C.    The following applications are not subject to the ownership requirement set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section:

1.    Applications submitted by or on behalf of a public entity or public utility having the power of eminent domain with respect to the property subject to the application; or

2.    Applications for development proposals sited on lands owned by the State or the Federal government. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.225 Acceptance of Application.

A.    Completeness. Type I, II, and III applications shall not be accepted as complete until the Development Services Director has determined that the requirements of BDC 4.1.220 have been met and the application is complete or the application is deemed to be complete under State law. A Completeness Check Meeting shall be required for all Type II, III and IV land use applications unless exempted by the Development Services Director. The purpose of the Completeness Check Meeting is to determine whether the proposed development application is complete prior to acceptance of the application for processing by the City.

B.    An application is complete when, in the judgment of the Development Services Director, complete information to address all criteria has been provided by the applicant.

C.    Acceptance of an application as complete shall not preclude a determination at a later date that additional criteria need to be addressed or a later determination that additional information is needed to adequately address applicable criteria. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.235 Withdrawal of Application.

An applicant may withdraw an application in writing at any time prior to the time a decision becomes final. If the land owner is not the applicant, no consent to withdraw the application is needed from the land owner. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.240 Applicable Standards.

The standards and criteria applicable to an application shall be the standards and criteria applicable at the time the application was first submitted. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.245 Notice to Public Agencies.

In addition to any notice required by this code, written notice shall be provided to public agencies as prescribed below.

A.    Division of State Lands. The City shall notify the Oregon Division of State Lands (DSL) of any application that involves lands that are wholly or partially within areas that are identified as a significant wetland on the City’s Local Wetland Inventory. Notice shall be in writing using the DSL Wetland Land Use Notification Form, and shall be sent within five working days of acceptance of a complete application. (See ORS 227.350)

B.    Department of Fish and Wildlife. The City shall notify the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) in writing of any application for development activities within the riparian corridor. A mitigation recommendation shall be obtained from ODFW. Approval of the proposed development shall include a condition requiring compliance with the ODFW mitigation recommendations. (See OAR 635-415)

C.    Parks and Recreation Department. The City shall notify the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department (OPRD) in writing of any application for a proposed change, improvement, or activity within the one-fourth-mile boundary of either the Upper Deschutes Scenic Waterway or the Middle Deschutes Scenic Waterway. A landowner proposing a change, improvement, or activity within a State Scenic Waterway shall notify OPRD using the form provided by OPRD. The proposed change, improvement, or activity shall not be approved by the City unless either OPRD has given its written approval, or OPRD has not responded within one year from the date of notification. (See OAR 736-40)

D.    Other Agencies. The City shall notify other public agencies, as appropriate, that have statutory or administrative rule authority to review or issue State permits associated with local development applications. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.250 Conflicting Procedures.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where other provisions of the City of Bend Code or City of Bend ordinances specify procedures with greater opportunity for public notice and comment, those procedures shall apply. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.255 Time Computation.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or any day on which the City is not open for business pursuant to a City ordinance, in which case it shall also be excluded. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.260 Lot of Record.

Not all units of land are “lots of record.” The City of Bend will not issue any permits on a unit of land until it is determined that it is a lot of record. If a unit of land is not in an approved subdivision or partition, has not been issued a land use permit, or has never been determined to be a lot of record, a declaratory ruling for a lot of record will need to be filed. A Declaratory Ruling will determine if and when a unit of land was created and if it was created in accordance with the law in effect at the time of creation. For units of land created in Deschutes County prior to annexation into the City, the Deschutes County Lot of Record Ordinance shall apply.

A.    What is a lot of record? A unit of land held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the Deschutes County Clerk, which conforms to all zoning and subdivision/partition requirements in effect on the date the unit of land was created.

B.    What is not a lot of record?

1.    A unit of land created solely by a tax lot segregation because of an assessor’s role change or for the convenience of the assessor;

2.    A unit of land created by an intervening section or township line or right-of-way;

3.    A unit of land created by the foreclosure of a security interest.

C.    Remedy for Parcels Found Not to Be Lots of Record.

1.    In accordance with BDC Chapter 4.3, consolidate the unit of land with a contiguous unit of land that is determined to be a lot of record. Both units of land must be held in the same ownership as shown on the records of the Deschutes County Clerk.

2.    Apply for and obtain approval for a single lot partition in conformance with ORS 92.176 and BDC 4.3.200, 4.3.300 and 4.3.400.

3.    Apply for and obtain approval of a lot of record under ORS 92.176. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.300 Type I Ministerial Procedures.

Sections:

4.1.310    Type I Applications.

4.1.320    Completeness Check.

4.1.325    Decision.

4.1.330    Appeal.


4.1.310 Type I Applications.

A.    A Type I application may be handled administratively by the Development Services Director without public notice or hearing because a Type I decision is neither a land use decision nor a limited land use decision under ORS 197.015.

B.    The Development Services Director may elevate a Type I application to a Type II application when there is a need to interpret or exercise policy or legal judgment, or to apply discretionary land use standards. The Development Services Director’s decision to elevate a Type I application to a Type II application shall not be an appealable decision. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.320 Completeness Check.

A.    Type I applications shall be subject to the completeness check procedures found in BDC 4.1.412.

B.    Once accepted as complete, an applicant may place the application on “hold” for a period of no longer than 60 days, which may be extended by the Development Services Director for good cause, up to a total 245 days. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.325 Decision.

A.    Type I applications acted upon without notice or hearing shall be approved or denied by the Development Services Director or his or her designee.

B.    Notice of a decision shall be provided to the applicant or the applicant’s representative.

C.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant under BDC 4.1.1100.

D.    A Type I decision becomes final when no further appeal under this code is available. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.330 Appeal.

Any appeal shall be in accordance with BDC 4.1.1100. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.400 Type II and Type III Applications.

Sections:

4.1.410    Effect of Determinations Made Outside of Established Processes.

4.1.412    Completeness Check.

4.1.415    Type II Application Procedures.

4.1.420    Mailed Notice of Type II Applications.

4.1.423    Mailed Notice of Type III Applications.

4.1.424    Contents of Mailed Notices.

4.1.425    Posted Notice of Type II or Type III Applications.

4.1.426    Type III – Quasi-Judicial Procedures.

4.1.427    Site-Specific Plan Amendments and Zone Changes.

4.1.429    Review Authority for Site-Specific Zone Change.

4.1.430    Final Action in Type II or III Actions.

4.1.435    Temporary Approval.

4.1.445    Modification of Application.


4.1.410 Effect of Determinations Made Outside of Established Processes.

Any informal interpretation or determination, or any statement describing the uses to which a property may be put, made outside the declaratory ruling process in accordance with BDC 4.1.1400 or outside the process for approval or denial of a Type II or III application in conformance with BDC 4.1.400 through 4.1.900 shall be deemed to be a supposition only. Such informal interpretations, determinations, or statements shall not be deemed to constitute final City action effecting a change in the status of a person’s property or conferring any rights, including any reliance rights, on any person. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.412 Completeness Check.

A.    Except as provided in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, the City shall take final action on an application for a permit, limited land use decision or zone change, including resolution of all appeals, within 120 days after the application is deemed complete.

B.    Except as otherwise provided for through a Completeness Check Meeting, if an application for a permit, limited land use decision or zone change is incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant to submit the missing information. The application shall be deemed complete for the purpose of subsection (A) of this section upon receipt by the City of:

1.    All of the missing information;

2.    Some of the missing information and written notice from the applicant that no other information will be provided; or

3.    Written notice from the applicant that none of the missing information will be provided.

C.    On the one hundred eighty-first day after first being submitted, the application is void if the applicant has been notified of the missing information as required under subsection (B) of this section and has not submitted:

1.    All of the missing information;

2.    Some of the missing information and written notice that no other information will be provided; or

3.    Written notice that none of the missing information will be provided.

D.    The 120-day period set in subsection (A) of this section may be extended for a specified period of time at the written request of the applicant. The total of all extensions may not exceed 245 days.

E.    Except as provided under the Completeness Check Meeting process, an applicant shall not submit any evidence to supplement its application during the 30 days following submittal of its application, except when requested by the Development Services Director. Any evidence submitted by an applicant in violation of this section will not be considered in determining whether the application is complete and will be returned to the applicant. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.415 Type II Application Procedures.

A.    Type II decisions are made by the Development Services Director following public notice and an opportunity for parties to comment but without a public hearing. The Development Services Director may elevate a Type II master plan application to the Planning Commission for hearing as a Type III and all other Type II applications to the Hearings Body for hearing as a Type III.

B.    The Development Services Director’s choice between or among administrative or hearing procedures to apply to a particular application or determination is not an appealable decision. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.420 Mailed Notice of Type II Applications.

A.    Notice of Type II applications shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the issuance of a decision to persons entitled to notice under BDC 4.1.423. Such notice shall include all the information specified under BDC 4.1.424 except for the information specified in BDC 4.1.424(A)(7) and (10). Written notice shall be sent by mail to the following persons:

1.    The applicant.

2.    Owners of record of property as shown on the most recent property tax assessment roll of property located:

a.    Within 250 feet of the property that is the subject of the notice and where any structure being proposed is less than or equal to 50 feet in height. The notice boundary shall increase by 250 feet for every 25-foot increment of structure height above 50 feet.

b.    The applicant shall bear the cost (i.e., mailing, etc.) of any notice.

3.    The designated representative(s) of a neighborhood association recognized by the City of Bend, where any property within the notice area specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section is within the boundaries of a recognized neighborhood association.

4.    The notice requirements of this section shall be deemed met when the Planning Division can provide an affidavit or other certification that such notice was given.

5.    The Development Services Director may increase the minimum notice area up to 400 feet beyond what is otherwise required under subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, at his or her sole discretion.

B.    Any person may comment in writing on a Type II application within 14 days from the date notice was mailed or a longer period as specified in the notice.

C.    Notice of the Development Services Director’s Type II decision and the appeal period shall be mailed to all parties to the record.

D.    Any party can appeal a Type II decision in accordance with BDC 4.1.1100, Appeals. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.423 Mailed Notice of Type III Applications.

A.    Except as otherwise provided for herein, notice of a Type III application shall be mailed at least 20 days prior to the evidentiary hearing for those matters set for one evidentiary hearing, or 10 days prior to the first evidentiary hearing where two or more evidentiary hearings are held. Written notice shall be sent by mail to the following persons:

1.    The applicant.

2.    Owners of record of property as shown on the most recent property tax assessment roll of property located:

a.    Within 250 feet of the property that is the subject of the notice and where any structure being proposed is less than or equal to 50 feet in height. The notice boundary shall increase by 250 feet for every 25-foot increment of structure height above 50 feet.

b.    The applicant shall bear the cost (i.e., mailing, etc.) of any notice.

3.    The tenants of a mobile home park when the application is for the rezoning of any part or all of a mobile home park.

4.    The designated representative(s) of a neighborhood association recognized by the City of Bend, where any property within the notice area specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section is within the boundaries of a recognized neighborhood association.

B.    The notice requirements of this section shall be deemed met when the Planning Division can provide an affidavit or other certification that such notice was given.

C.    The Development Services Director may increase the minimum notice area up to 400 feet beyond what is otherwise required under subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, at his or her sole discretion. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.424 Contents of Mailed Notices.

A.    All mailed notices shall:

1.    Describe the nature of the applicant’s request and the nature of the proposed uses that could be authorized.

2.    List the criteria from the Development Code and the Bend Comprehensive Plan applicable to the application at issue.

3.    Set forth the street address or easily understood geographical reference to the subject property.

4.    State the date, time and location of any hearing or date by which written comments must be received.

5.    State that any person may comment in writing and include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedures for conduct of testimony, including, but not limited to, a party’s right to request a continuance or to have the record held open.

6.    If a hearing is to be held, state that any interested person may appear and provide evidence.

7.    State that failure to raise an issue in person at a hearing or in writing precludes appeal by that person to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), and that failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to LUBA based on that issue.

8.    State the name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained.

9.    State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost.

10.    State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at a reasonable cost.

B.    All mailed notices concerning applications necessitating an exception to one of the statewide land use planning goals shall state that a goal exception is proposed and shall summarize the issues in an understandable manner. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.425 Posted Notice of Type II or Type III Applications.

A.    Notice of a Type II or III application for which prior notice procedures are required shall be posted on the subject property by the applicant/property owner for at least 10 continuous days prior to any date set for receipt of comments. Such notice shall, where practicable, be visible from any adjacent public way. Failure of applicant/property owner to maintain posting of the sign for 10 continuous days shall not invalidate a land use approval.

B.    Posted notice of an application for a utility facility line approval shall be by posting the proposed route at intervals of not less than 500 feet. The notice shall be posted as close as practicable to, and be visible from, any public way in the vicinity of the proposed route. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.426 Type III – Quasi-Judicial Procedures.

A.    Quasi-judicial decisions bear different aspects than Type IV legislative decisions. A request will generally be considered a quasi-judicial process if it involves the following factors:

1.    The process is bound to result in a decision;

2.    The decision is bound to apply preexisting criteria to concrete facts; and

3.    The action is customarily directed at a closely circumscribed factual situation or small number of persons.

Although no factor is considered determinative and each must be weighed, the more definitively these factors are answered affirmatively, the more it will be considered a quasi-judicial decision.

B.    Type III decisions are made by the Planning Commission or Hearings Officer after a public hearing following the quasi-judicial hearings procedures of BDC 4.1.800, except the City Council is the sole review authority for annexations. The City Council is the final decision maker in Type III development applications that require the adoption of an ordinance. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.427 Site-Specific Plan Amendments and Zone Changes.

Any change initiated by an individual that includes a plan amendment and zone change for specific real property may be accompanied by the appropriate applications for a specific development proposal. Approval of such a plan amendment and zone change accompanied by a specific development proposal may be conditioned upon initiation of the development proposal within a specified time period, at the discretion of the Hearings Body, to ensure no greater intensity of use than that contemplated in the proceeding. Approvals of site-specific plan amendments and zone changes that are not accompanied by applications for a specific development proposal shall be based on evaluation of the highest impact uses authorized in the proposed zone.

Because site-specific plan amendments require an alteration of the Bend Comprehensive Plan by action of the City Council, they shall be processed through the Type III quasi-judicial proceeding where the initial Hearings Body makes a recommendation to the City Council for a final decision. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.429 Review Authority for Site-Specific Zone Change.

A.    The following is the review authority for site-specific zone change requests (Type III process) that bring the zoning into conformance with the Bend Comprehensive Plan:

1.    The Planning Commission is the review authority for site-specific zone change requests processed concurrently with a minor master plan.

2.    The City Council is the review authority for site-specific zone change requests processed concurrently with a major master plan.

3.    The Hearings Officer is the review authority for all other site-specific zone change requests. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.430 Final Action in Type II or III Actions.

A.    Where provided by this code or State statute, the City shall take final action, including consideration of appeals to the Council, in Type II or III actions within 120 days after the application is deemed complete.

B.    The periods set forth in this section during which a final decision on an application must be made may be extended for a reasonable period of time to a date certain at the written request of the applicant. The total of all extensions cannot exceed 245 days.

C.    Applications for the following determinations or approvals are exempt from the 120-day time limit established by this section:

1.    Quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan amendments;

2.    Revocation proceedings;

3.    Declaratory rulings;

4.    Consideration of remanded applications;

5.    Legislative actions; and

6.    Major master plans. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.435 Temporary Approval.

A.    The purpose of temporary land use approval is to allow an applicant in certain hardship or emergency situations to proceed without notice to those ordinarily entitled to notice with a land use action proposed in an application made to the Planning Division before the Division completes its review of the proposed use. In all cases, an applicant receiving temporary approval must obtain final approval on the submitted application pursuant to the procedures specified in this code.

B.    Subject to subsection (E) of this section, the City Council or the Development Services Director may authorize a temporary land use approval, provided all of the following are met:

1.    An application for the land use approval has been accepted as complete.

2.    A fee for review of the temporary approval has been paid.

3.    The applicant has demonstrated good and sufficient cause for such a temporary approval.

4.    It appears that the application will be given final approval in substantially the form submitted by the applicant.

5.    The applicant accepts each and every risk of loss and damage that may result if the application is denied, and further agrees in writing to hold City, its officers, agents and employees harmless from such loss and damage.

6.    The applicant agrees in writing to restore the site to its original condition if the application for the land use approval is denied.

7.    The applicant posts a bond or other form of security acceptable to the Review Authority in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of restoration of the site.

C.    For the purposes of this section, good cause shall include only hardship or emergency situations arising due to factors that, through the exercise of ordinary diligence, the applicant could not have foreseen. “Good cause” does not include an applicant’s request for a temporary permit for reasons of convenience only.

D.    A temporary use approval shall not be granted for variances, zone changes or plan amendments.

E.    The scope of the temporary approval shall be limited to allow the applicant to proceed only with that portion of the proposed use justifying the applicant’s claim of hardship or emergency.

F.    A temporary use approval shall expire as follows:

1.    Six months from the date of approval, if no decision has been reached on the underlying application.

2.    On the date the appeal period runs on the decision on the underlying application.

3.    On the date that all appeals of the decision on the underlying application are decided and final.

G.    A decision to approve a temporary use application is not appealable. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.445 Modification of Application.

A.    An applicant may modify an application at any time during the approval process up until the issuance of an administrative decision, or the close of the record for an application reviewed under a hearings process, subject to the provisions of BDC 4.1.412 and this chapter.

B.    The Review Authority shall not consider any evidence submitted by or on behalf of an applicant that would constitute modification of an application (as that term is defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions), unless the applicant submits an application for a modification, pays all required modification fees and agrees in writing to restart the 120-day review period as of the date the modification is submitted. The 120-day review period for an application, as modified, may be restarted as many times as there are modifications up to a total of 365 days from the day the application was accepted as complete.

C.    The Review Authority may require that the application be re-noticed and additional hearings be held.

D.    Up until the day a hearing is opened for receipt of oral testimony, the Development Services Director shall have sole authority to determine whether an applicant’s submittal constitutes a modification. After such time, the Hearings Body shall make such determinations. The Review Authority’s determination on whether a submittal constitutes a modification shall be appealable only to LUBA and shall be appealable only after a final decision is entered by the City on an application. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.500 Type IV Legislative Procedures.

Sections:

4.1.505    Type IV Applications.

4.1.510    Hearing Required.

4.1.515    Notice.

4.1.520    Initiation of a Legislative Change.

4.1.525    Review Authority.

4.1.530    Final Decision.

4.1.535    Corrections.


4.1.505 Type IV Applications.

Legislative decisions are made after public notice, public hearings and a recommendation by the Planning Commission to the City Council, except the City Council is the sole review authority for annexations. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.510 Hearing Required.

No legislative change can be adopted without review by the Planning Commission and a final public hearing before the City Council, except the City Council is the sole review authority for annexations. Public hearings are set at the discretion of the Development Services Director, unless otherwise required by State law. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.515 Notice.

A.    Published Notice.

1.    Notice of a Type IV legislative change shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 20 days prior to each public hearing.

2.    The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and contain a statement describing the general subject matter of the ordinance under consideration.

B.    Posted Notice. Notice shall be posted at the discretion of the Development Services Director.

C.    Individual Notice. For site-specific applications, individual notice to property owners, as defined in BDC 4.1.220(A), shall be provided.

D.    Neighborhood Associations. Notice of Type IV legislative changes shall be mailed to the designated representative of any neighborhood association recognized by the City of Bend, where the legislative change affects any land within the boundary of such neighborhood association. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.520 Initiation of a Legislative Change.

Requests for a plan map or text amendment of the Bend Comprehensive Plan or its implementing documents may be initiated by an individual, corporation, or public agency upon submittal of an application, supporting documentation and payment of required fees. The City Council, Planning Commission or Development Services Director may also initiate legislative changes. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.525 Review Authority.

A Type IV change must be reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to action being taken by the City Council, except the City Council is the sole review authority for annexations. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.530 Final Decision.

All legislative changes shall be adopted by ordinance. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]




4.1.535 Corrections.

The City’s Comprehensive Plan and Development Code may be corrected by order of the City Council to cure editorial and clerical errors. A public hearing on a corrections order is not required. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.600 Deschutes River Design Review Procedures.

For all property subject to the Deschutes River Design Review process pursuant to the Bend Development Code, the following procedures shall apply:

A.    There shall be two review tracks for Deschutes River Design Review depending on the level and type of activity proposed. Notwithstanding these provisions, the Development Services Director may refer any application to the Planning Commission for approval. The Planning Commission’s consideration shall follow the quasi-judicial procedures set forth in BDC 4.1.800.

1.    Review Track A. A Type II administrative review shall be performed by the Development Services Director for the following activities:

a.    Minor alterations of 10 percent or less to an existing building facade facing river, including roof.

b.    Changes in window or door placement visible from the river.

c.    Changes in parking locations.

d.    Fill or removal activity within 10 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the Deschutes River.

e.    New construction or additions that are not visible from the river due to topography, vegetation or existing development.

2.    Review Track B. A Type III review shall be performed by the Planning Commission for the following activities:

a.    Appeal of a Type II administrative review decision.

b.    New construction and new development.

c.    Master plan approval for large-scale projects.

d.    Variances to an application in conformance with BDC Chapter 5.1, Variances.

e.    Fill and removal activities associated with new development or for creation of fire breaks in association with appropriate fire prevention authorities.

B.    The applicant shall submit an application in writing to the Planning Division on forms provided by the City. The request shall include a site plan containing the relevant components listed in BDC 4.2.200 and a description of work and materials that will be used. The Review Authority shall review the request and respond to the applicant in writing of the decision and any conditions placed on the decision.

C.    Track B applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as follows:

1.    Notice for applications shall be as set forth in BDC 4.1.420, 4.1.423, and 4.1.424. The Commission shall hold a public hearing for any Type III applications. The hearings procedure shall be as set forth in BDC 4.1.800, Quasi-Judicial Hearings.

2.    The Planning Commission shall review the entire project, even if only a portion of the project falls within the Deschutes River Corridor Design Review Combining Zone.

3.    Appeals of the decision of the Planning Commission shall be to the City Council, subject to the procedures and restrictions set forth in BDC 4.1.1100, Appeals.

D.    Where the procedures in this section conflict with other provisions of this code with respect to Deschutes River Corridor Design Review, the provisions of this section shall prevail. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.700 Refinement Plan Review Procedures.

Repealed by Ord. NS-2289. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006; Ord. NS-1754, 2000]




4.1.800 Quasi-Judicial Hearings. Revised 4/19

Sections:

4.1.810    Filing of Staff Report for Hearing.

4.1.815    Hearings Body. Revised 4/19

4.1.830    Burden of Proof.

4.1.835    Nature of Evidence.

4.1.840    Limitation on Oral Presentations.

4.1.845    Standing.

4.1.850    Record.

4.1.855    Disclosure of Ex Parte Contacts.

4.1.860    Disclosure of Personal Knowledge.

4.1.865    Challenge for Bias, Prejudgment or Personal Interest.

4.1.870    Hearings Procedure. Revised 2/20

4.1.875    Setting the Hearing.

4.1.880    Close of the Record.

4.1.885    Continuances or Record Extensions.

4.1.890    Objections to Jurisdiction, Procedure, Notice or Qualifications.

4.1.895    Reopening the Record.


4.1.810 Filing of Staff Report for Hearing.

A.    At the time an application, that in the judgment of the Development Services Director requires a hearing, is deemed complete, a hearing date shall be set.

B.    A staff report shall be completed seven days prior to the hearing. If the report is not completed by such time, the hearing shall be held as scheduled, but any party may at the hearing or in writing prior to the hearing request a continuance of the hearing to a date that is at least seven days after the date the initial staff report is complete. The granting of a continuance under these circumstances shall be at the discretion of the Hearings Body.

C.    A copy of the staff report shall be mailed to the applicant, shall be made available at a reasonable cost to such other persons who request a copy and shall be filed with the Hearings Body.

D.    Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, oral or written modifications and additions to the staff report shall be allowed prior to or at the hearing. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.815 Hearings Body. Revised 4/19

A.    The following must serve as the Hearings Body as determined by the Development Services Director:

1.    Hearings Officer.

2.    Planning Commission for matters of interpretation of this code, appeals of Type II decisions where the Hearings Officer cannot hear the matter due to a conflict of interest, or as otherwise specified by provisions of City code.

3.    City Council, subject to BDC 4.1.1100, Appeals.

4.    City Council for annexation applications, subject to BDC Chapter 4.9, Annexations. [Ord. NS-2328, 2019; Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2103, 2008; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.830 Burden of Proof.

Throughout all local land use proceedings the burden of proof rests on the applicant. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.835 Nature of Evidence.

All relevant evidence shall be received. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.840 Limitation on Oral Presentations.

The Hearings Body may set reasonable time limits on oral testimony. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.845 Standing.

A.    Any interested person may appear and be heard in a Type III hearing, except that in appeals heard on the record, a person must have participated in a previous proceeding on the subject application.

B.    Any person appearing on the record at a hearing (including appeals) or presenting written evidence in conjunction with an administrative action or hearing shall have standing and shall be a party. A person whose participation consists only of signing a petition shall not be considered a party. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.850 Record.

A.    An audio tape recording of the hearing shall be made.

B.    All exhibits presented shall be marked to show the identity of the person offering the exhibit.

C.    Exhibits shall be numbered in the order presented, and shall be dated.

D.    When exhibits are introduced, the exhibit number or letter shall be read into the record.

E.    When a digital storage device such as a compact disc is submitted into the record, a transcript of the contents shall also be submitted. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.855 Disclosure of Ex Parte Contacts.

A.    Prior to making a decision, the Hearings Body or any member thereof shall not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or his or her representative in connection with any issue involved in a pending hearing except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. Should such communication – whether written or oral – occur, the Hearings Body member shall:

1.    Publicly announce for the record the substance of such communication; and

2.    Announce the parties’ right to rebut the substance of the ex parte communication during the hearing.

3.    Communication between City staff and the Hearings Body shall not be considered to be an ex parte contact. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.860 Disclosure of Personal Knowledge.

A.    If the Hearings Body or any member thereof uses personal knowledge acquired outside of the hearing process in rendering a decision, the Hearings Body or member thereof shall state the substance of that knowledge on the record and allow all parties the opportunity to rebut such statement on the record.

B.    For the purposes of this section, a site visit by the Hearings Body shall be deemed to fall within this rule. After the site visit has concluded, the Hearings Body must disclose its observations and conclusions gained from the site visit in order to allow for rebuttal by the parties. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.865 Challenge for Bias, Prejudgment or Personal Interest.

Prior to or at the commencement of a hearing, any party may challenge the qualification of the Hearings Body, or a member thereof, for bias, prejudgment or personal interest. The challenge shall be made on the record and be documented with specific reasons supported by facts. Should qualifications be challenged, the Hearings Body or the member shall disqualify itself, withdraw or make a statement on the record of its capacity to hear. A Planning Commission member with a conflict identified under ORS Chapter 197 must disqualify him or herself after disclosure. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]




4.1.870 Hearings Procedure. Revised 2/20

A.    A hearing shall be conducted as follows:

1.    The Hearings Body shall explain the purpose of the hearing and announce the order of proceedings, including reasonable time limits on presentations by parties.

2.    A statement by the Hearings Body regarding pre-hearing contacts, bias, prejudice or personal interest shall be made.

3.    Any facts received, noticed or recognized outside of the hearing shall be stated for the record.

4.    Challenges to the Hearings Body’s qualifications to hear the matter shall be stated and challenges entertained.

5.    At the commencement of a hearing under a Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation, the Hearings Body or his or her designee shall make a statement to those in attendance that:

a.    Lists the applicable substantive criteria;

b.    States that testimony, arguments and evidence must be directed toward that criteria or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations which the person believes to apply to the decision; and

c.    States that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the Hearings Body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.

6.    At the commencement of the initial public hearing, the Hearings Body or his or her designee shall make a statement to the applicant that the failure of the applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to proposed conditions of approval with sufficient specificity to allow the local government or its designee to respond to the issue precludes an action for damages in circuit court. An applicant is not required to raise constitutional or other issues relating to proposed conditions of approval unless the conditions of approval are stated with sufficient specificity to enable the applicant to respond to the conditions prior to the close of the final local hearing.

7.    An issue which may be the basis for an appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals shall be raised not later than the close of the record at or following the final evidentiary hearing on the proposal before the local government. Such issues shall be raised and accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the City Council, Planning Commission, Hearings Body or Hearings Officer, and the parties an adequate opportunity to respond to each issue.

8.    Order of Presentation.

a.    Explanation of procedural requirements.

b.    Open the hearing.

c.    Statement of pre-hearing contacts, bias, prejudice or personal interest.

d.    Challenge for bias, prejudgment or personal interest.

e.    Staff report.

f.    Applicant testimony.

g.    Testimony by those in favor of the application.

h.    Testimony by those neutral.

i.    Testimony by those opposed to the application.

j.    Applicant rebuttal.

k.    Staff comment.

l.    Questions from or to the chair may be entertained at any time at the Hearings Body’s discretion.

m.    Close the hearing.

n.    Deliberation.

o.    Decision.

9.    In appeal proceedings, the applicant is the party who initiated the application which is under appeal. Those person(s) opposed to the application shall testify under the “Testimony by those opposed to the application” portion of the appeal proceeding. Those persons in favor of the application shall testify under the “Testimony by those in favor of the application” portion of the appeal proceeding.

10.    The record shall be available for public review at the hearing. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.875 Setting the Hearing.

A.    After an application is deemed accepted a hearing date shall be set. A hearing date may be changed by the City staff, or the Hearings Body up until the time notice of the hearing is mailed. Once the notice of hearing is mailed any changes in the hearing date shall be processed as a continuance in accordance with BDC 4.1.885.

B.    If an applicant requests that a hearing date be changed, such request shall be granted only if the applicant agrees that the extended time period for the hearing shall not count against the 120-day time limit set forth in ORS 227.178. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.880 Close of the Record.

A.    Except as set forth herein, the record shall be closed to further testimony or submission of further argument or evidence at the end of the presentations before the Hearings Body.

B.    If the hearing is continued or the record is held open under BDC 4.1.885, further evidence or testimony shall be taken only in accordance with the provisions of that section.

C.    Otherwise, further testimony or evidence will be allowed only if the record is reopened under BDC 4.1.895, Reopening the Record.

D.    An applicant shall be allowed, unless waived, to submit final written arguments in support of its application after the record has closed within such time limits as the Hearings Body shall set. The Hearings Body shall allow applicant at least seven days to submit its argument, which time shall not be counted against the 120-day clock. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.885 Continuances or Record Extensions.

A.    Grounds.

1.    Prior to or at the initial hearing, an applicant shall receive a continuance upon any request if accompanied by a corresponding extension of the 120-day review period. If a continuance request is made after the published or mailed notice has been provided by the City, but at least seven days prior to the hearing, the hearing place shall be posted with notification of cancellation and a revised notice with the new hearing date, place and time shall be mailed to all persons who received the original notification. The applicant shall be responsible for any costs for providing notice of the continuance. If a continuance request is made less than seven days prior to the hearing, the Hearings Body shall take evidence at the scheduled hearing date from any party wishing to testify at that time after notifying those present of the continuance.

2.    Any party is entitled to a continuance of the initial evidentiary hearing or to have the record left open in such a proceeding in the following instances:

a.    Where additional documents or evidence are submitted by any party; or

b.    Upon a party’s request made prior to the close of the hearing for time to present additional evidence or testimony.

For the purposes of subsection (A)(2) of this section, additional documents or evidence shall mean documents or evidence containing new facts or analysis that are submitted after notice of the hearing.

B.    Except for continuance requests made under subsection (A)(1) of this section, the choice between granting a continuance or leaving the record open shall be at the discretion of the Hearings Body. After a choice has been made between leaving the record open or granting a continuance, the hearing shall be governed thereafter by the provisions that relate to the path chosen.

C.    Hearing Continuances.

1.    If the Hearings Body grants a continuance, the hearing shall be continued to a date, time and place certain at least seven days from the date of the initial hearing.

2.    An opportunity shall be provided at the continued hearing for persons to rebut new evidence and testimony received at the continued hearing.

3.    If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request, prior to the conclusion of the continued hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days to allow submittal of additional written evidence or testimony. Such additional written evidence or testimony shall be limited to evidence or testimony that rebuts the new written evidence or testimony.

D.    Leaving Record Open. If at the conclusion of the hearing the Hearings Body leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the Hearings Body shall allow for response to written evidence or testimony submitted during the period the record is held open.

E.    A continuance or record extension granted under this section shall be subject to the 120-day time limit unless the continuance or extension is requested or otherwise agreed to by the applicant. When the record is left open or a continuance is granted after a request by an applicant, the time period during which the 120-day review period is suspended shall include the time period made available to the applicant and any time period given to parties to respond to the applicant’s submittal. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.890 Objections to Jurisdiction, Procedure, Notice or Qualifications.

Any objections not raised prior to the close of oral testimony are waived. Parties alleging procedural error shall have the burden of proof at LUBA as to whether the error occurred and whether the error has prejudiced the party’s substantial rights. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.895 Reopening the Record.

A.    The Hearings Body may at its discretion reopen the record, either upon request or on its own initiative. The Hearings Body shall not reopen the record at the request of an applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension or a waiver of the 120-day time limit.

B.    Procedures.

1.    Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the manner of testimony (whether oral or written) and time limits for testimony to be offered upon reopening of the record shall be at the discretion at the Hearings Body.

2.    The Hearings Body shall give written notice to the parties that the record is being reopened, stating the reason for reopening the record and how parties can respond. The parties shall be allowed to raise new issues that relate to the new evidence, testimony or criteria for decision-making that apply to the matter at issue. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.900 Type II and III Decisions.

Sections:

4.1.910    Decision.

4.1.915    Findings as to Application Acceptance Date.

4.1.920    Findings as to Legal Lot of Record Status.

4.1.925    Notice of Decision.

4.1.930    Decision on Plan Amendments and Zone Changes.

4.1.935    Reapplication Limited.

4.1.940    Proposed Order.

4.1.945    Compliance with ORS 227.350.

4.1.950    Correction of Clerical Errors.


4.1.910 Decision.

A.    Approval or denial of a Type II or III application shall be based upon and accompanied by a written statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explains the justification for the decision based upon the criteria, standards and facts set forth.

B.    Any portion of an application not addressed in a Review Authority’s decision shall be deemed to have been denied.

C.    A decision on a Type II or III application is not final until the Review Authority issues a written decision, the decision or notice of the decision has been mailed and the appeal period to the next higher Review Authority within the City has run.

D.    Unless a temporary use permit has been issued, no building permit shall be issued until a decision is final. Appeal of a final decision to LUBA does not affect the finality of a decision for purposes of issuing building permits. If an applicant elects at his or her own discretion to proceed under a land use action with a pending LUBA appeal, he or she shall proceed only if:

1.    The applicant accepts each and every risk of loss and damage that may result if the application is denied, and further agrees in writing to hold City, its officers, agents and employees harmless from such loss and damage.

2.    The applicant agrees in writing to restore the site to its original condition if the application for the land use approval is denied.

3.    The applicant posts a bond or other form of security acceptable to the Review Authority in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of restoration of the site to its pre-approval condition. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.915 Findings as to Application Acceptance Date.

Each decision shall include findings as to when the proposed Type II or III action application was deemed complete and formally accepted as such by the Development Services Director. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.920 Findings as to Legal Lot of Record Status.

Each decision shall include a finding that the property subject to the proposed land use action is a legal lot of record as that term is defined in the Bend Development Code. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.925 Notice of Decision.

Notice of the Review Authority’s decision shall be in writing and mailed to all parties; however, one person may be designated by the Review Authority to be the recipient of the decision for a group, organization, group of petitioners or similar collection of individual participants. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.930 Decision on Plan Amendments and Zone Changes.

The Hearings Officer shall have authority to approve or deny Type III quasi-judicial zone changes when the zoning is proposed to be changed to be consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map. Plan amendments shall require adoption by ordinance. Zone changes processed concurrently with plan amendments shall also be adopted by ordinance. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.935 Reapplication Limited.

A.    If a specific application is denied on its merits, reapplication for substantially the same proposal may be made at any time after the date of the final decision denying the initial application.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a final decision bars any reapplication for a nonconforming use verification or for a determination on whether an approval has been initiated, unless the applicant comes forward with new evidence that was not available at the time the decision was made, and which could not, through reasonable diligence, have been discovered by the applicant prior to the decision. A lot of record determination shall be subject to reapplication under subsection (A) of this section, only if the applicant presents new factual evidence not submitted with the prior application. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.940 Proposed Order.

The Review Authority may request that any prevailing party draft a set of proposed findings and conclusions. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.945 Compliance with ORS 227.350.

A.    Final approval of any activity referred to in ORS 227.350(1) regarding State identified wetlands must include the notice statements required by ORS 227.350(3).

B.    Individual notice to the applicant and the owner of record consistent with ORS 227.350(5) shall be provided, unless notice in the written decision notice satisfies that requirement.

C.    Failure of the City to provide notice as required in this section shall not invalidate City approval.

D.    This section shall not become operative until the Division of State Lands makes available to the City a copy of the applicable portion of the Statewide Wetland Inventory. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.950 Correction of Clerical Errors.

Upon its own motion or the motion of a party, the City Council may, subject to any applicable public notice and hearing requirements, enact an ordinance correcting clerical or typographical errors in plan amendment or zone change ordinances and any maps appended thereto implementing decisions of the Review Authority. Such changes shall be entered only if the Council is able to make a finding that the decision of the Review Authority, including appendices, is not accurately reflected in the implementing ordinances. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1000 Reconsideration.

Sections:

4.1.1010    Reconsideration.

4.1.1020    Procedure.

4.1.1030    Limitation on Reconsideration.


4.1.1010 Reconsideration.

A.    An applicant may request that the Review Authority’s decision be reconsidered as set forth herein. A request for reconsideration shall be accompanied by a fee established by the City and by applicant’s written consent that the 120-day review period will not run during the period of the reconsideration and the resulting extended appeal period. The fee will be waived when, in the opinion of the Development Services Director, the reconsideration is requested to correct a clerical or technical error that is the City’s fault.

B.    Grounds for reconsideration of an administrative decision are limited to the following instances:

1.    The applicant’s submission of additional documents or evidence, that merely clarifies or supports the pending application, directed to one or more discreet aspects of the approval. The new information shall not constitute a modification of application as defined herein.

2.    Correction of an error in a condition established by the Review Authority where the condition is not supported by the record or is not supported by law.

3.    Correction of errors that are technical or clerical in nature.

C.    Grounds for reconsideration of the Hearing Body’s decision are limited to the following instances where an alleged error substantially affects the rights of the applicant:

1.    Correction of an error in a condition established by the Review Authority where the condition is not supported by the record or is not supported by law;

2.    Correction of errors that are technical or clerical in nature. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1020 Procedure.

A.    A request for reconsideration shall be filed with the Development Services Director within 12 days of the date the decision was mailed. The request shall identify the condition or issue to be considered and shall specify how the applicant would be adversely affected if the issue were to remain uncorrected.

B.    Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration of a Type II decision, the Development Services Director shall determine whether the request for reconsideration has merit. No comment period or prior notice shall be required for an administrative reconsideration.

C.    Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration of a Type III decision, the Development Services Director shall notify all parties to the proceeding of the request and allow for a 10-day comment period on the request. In those instances in which the only grounds for reconsideration of a Type III decision are technical or clerical in nature, at the end of the comment period, the Development Services Director shall determine whether the request for reconsideration has merit. In all other instances, at the end of the comment period, the Hearings Body shall determine whether the request for reconsideration has merit.

D.    The Review Authority shall modify the decision upon a determination that the request has merit and the issue substantially affects the applicant. Notice of the modification shall be sent to all parties to the proceeding. If the Review Authority determines that no modification is warranted, a denial shall be issued and sent to all parties to the proceeding.

E.    Filing a request for a reconsideration shall not be a precondition for appealing a decision.

F.    Filing a request for reconsideration stays the deadline for any party to file an appeal of the Review Authority’s decision. A new 12-day appeal period for all parties to the proceeding shall commence upon mailing of a modification or upon mailing a determination that a modification is not warranted. The new 12-day appeal period shall not be calculated as part of the 120-day review period. If an opponent files an appeal and an applicant has requested reconsideration, the opponent’s appeal shall be stayed pending disposition of the request for modification. If the decision is not modified, the appeal will be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in BDC 4.1.1100. If the decision is modified, the appellant must, within 12 days of the mailing of the modified decision, file in writing a statement requesting that its appeal be activated or the appeal will be invalidated. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1030 Limitation on Reconsideration.

No decision shall be reconsidered more than once before the same Review Authority. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1100 Appeals.

Sections:

4.1.1110    Who May Appeal.

4.1.1115    Filing Appeals.

4.1.1120    Notice of Appeal.

4.1.1125    Determination of Jurisdictional Defects.

4.1.1135    Consolidation of Multiple Appeals.

4.1.1140    Scope of Review.

4.1.1145    Hearing on Appeal.

4.1.1150    Type I Appeals.

4.1.1155    Re-hearing.

4.1.1160    Remands.

4.1.1165    Withdrawal of an Appeal.


4.1.1110 Who May Appeal.

A.    The following may file an appeal:

1.    A party; or

2.    A person entitled to notice and to whom no notice was mailed.

B.    A person to whom notice is mailed is deemed notified even if notice is not received. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1115 Filing Appeals.

A.    To file an appeal, an appellant must file a completed notice of appeal on a form prescribed by the Planning Division and pay an appeal fee.

B.    Unless a request for reconsideration has been filed, the notice of appeal and appeal fee must be received by the Community Development Department no later than the close of the public counter on the twelfth day following mailing of the decision. If a decision has been modified on reconsideration, an appeal must be filed no later than the close of the public counter on the twelfth day following mailing of the decision as modified. Notices of appeals shall not be received by facsimile machine or e-mail.

C.    In the case of an appeal of an administrative (Type II) decision to a Hearings Officer or to the Planning Commission, the Hearings Body’s decision on appeal shall become final 12 days after the decision is mailed. Except that, within 12 days after the decision is mailed, the City Council may, on its own motion and at its discretion, call up the decision of the Hearings Officer or Planning Commission and conduct an on the record review of the decision limited to issues identified in the Council’s motion.

D.    In the case of an appeal of a Type III decision, the City Council’s decision whether to grant review shall be discretionary. If the City Council declines review, the appellant may be entitled to a partial refund in accordance with the City’s adopted Fees Resolution. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1120 Notice of Appeal.

A.    The Notice of Appeal shall contain:

1.    A description of the decision which is being appealed, including the date of decision.

2.    A statement describing the interest the person who is appealing has in the decision. Only persons who have proper standing as provided by the law, and who have participated in the decision being appealed (if provision for such participation was provided in the previous proceeding), may appeal the decision. The statement of interest must demonstrate the person’s standing and participation.

3.    A description of the issues sought to be raised by the appeal; and a statement that the issues were raised during the proceeding that produced the decision being appealed. This description must include the specific criteria relied upon as the basis for the appeal, and an explanation of why the decision has not complied with the standards or requirements of the criteria. The issues raised by the appeal must be stated with sufficient specificity to afford the reviewing authority an opportunity to resolve each issue raised.

4.    In the case of a discretionary appeal request to the City Council, the Notice of Appeal shall include the following additional information to assist the Council in deciding whether to grant discretionary review of the decision being appealed:

a.    How the appeal presents issues that have significant public policy or community-wide implications for the City, as opposed to more limited issues which primarily involve the directly affected property or persons involved in the land use decision being appealed.

b.    Why it is necessary or desirable for the City Council to review these issues; and why the issues cannot be adequately and fairly reviewed by the Land Use Board of Appeals. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1125 Determination of Jurisdictional Defects.

A.    Any failure to conform to the requirements of BDC 4.1.1115, Filing Appeals, and 4.1.1120, Notice of Appeal, shall constitute a jurisdictional defect.

B.    Determination of jurisdictional defects in an appeal shall be made by the Review Authority to which an appeal has been made. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1135 Consolidation of Multiple Appeals.

A.    If more than one party files a notice of appeal on a land use action decision, the appeals shall be consolidated and noticed and heard as one proceeding.

B.    In instances of multiple appeals where separate appellants have asked for a differing scope of review, any grant of de novo review shall control over a separate request for a more limited review on appeal. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1140 Scope of Review.

A.    Before Hearings Officer or Planning Commission. The review of a Type II decision on appeal before the Hearings Officer or Planning Commission is de novo.

B.    Before the Council.

1.    Review of land use decisions by the City Council on appeal is discretionary. A decision by the City Council to not grant discretionary review of the appeal is the final determination of the City and will be considered to be an adoption by the Council of the decision being appealed, including any interpretations of this code or of the Bend Comprehensive Plan included in the decision. The final decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals as provided by law. The City Council’s decision whether to grant discretionary review will be made without testimony or argument from persons interested in the appeal.

2.    The scope of review for appeals that are granted discretionary review by the City Council shall be:

a.    Restricted to the issues raised in the Notice of Appeal, or as prescribed by the City Council.

b.    Be conducted during an appeal hearing before the City Council on the record made as part of the decision being appealed.

3.    The record for discretionary review by the City Council shall include:

a.    The land use application or request which is the subject of the appeal, any staff report, and all written comments, exhibits, or any other materials or information considered by the decision-maker in the proceedings that produced the decision being appealed.

b.    A written transcript of all proceedings before the decision-maker, or a stipulated written summary of the proceedings submitted by all of the parties to the appeal.

c.    Appellants shall submit the transcript or stipulated written summary of the proceedings to the Planning Division no later than the close of the day five days prior to the date set for receipt of written arguments.

d.    An appellant shall be excused from providing a transcript or stipulated written summary of the proceedings if the appellant was prevented from complying by:

i.    The inability of the Planning Division to supply the appellant with an audio recording of the prior proceeding; or

ii.    Defects on the audio recording of the prior proceeding that make it not reasonably possible for the appellant to supply a transcript. Appellants shall comply to the maximum extent reasonably and practicably possible.

4.    An appeal hearing before the City Council shall be conducted according to such procedures as the City Council shall prescribe, which may include an opportunity for presentations by the parties to the appeal.

5.    Decisions reviewed by the City Council can be affirmed, remanded, reversed, or modified in whole or in part by the City Council. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1145 Hearing on Appeal.

A.    The appellant and all other parties to the decision below shall be mailed notice of the hearing on appeal at least 10 days prior to any de novo hearing or deadline for submission of written arguments.

B.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the appeal shall be heard as provided in BDC 4.1.800, Quasi-Judicial Hearings. The applicant shall proceed first in all appeals.

C.    The order of Hearings Body shall be as provided in BDC 4.1.815, Hearings Body.

D.    The record of the proceeding from which appeal is taken shall be a part of the record on appeal.

E.    The record for a review on the record shall consist of the following:

1.    Minutes and audio recordings of any prior hearing, if available;

2.    All written and graphic materials that were part of the record below;

3.    The Review Authority’s decision appealed from;

4.    Written arguments, based upon the record developed below, submitted by any party to the decision;

5.    A staff report and staff comment based on the record; and

6.    Other information deemed relevant by the Review Authority.

F.    The Council shall not consider any new factual information in an “on the record” proceeding. Brief oral argument by the applicant and the appellant on the record may be allowed by the Council. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1150 Type I Appeals.

Notice of the hearing date set for appeal shall be sent only to the applicant. Only the applicant, his or her representatives, and his or her witnesses shall be entitled to participate. Continuances shall be at the discretion of the Hearings Body, and the record shall close at the end of the hearing. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1155 Re-hearing.

Re-hearings shall not be allowed. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1160 Remands.

Applications shall not be remanded to a lower level Review Authority after appeal, except by City Council as provided in BDC 4.1.1140(B)(5). [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]




4.1.1165 Withdrawal of an Appeal.

An appeal may be withdrawn in writing by an appellant at any time prior to the rendering of a final decision. Subject to the existence of other appeals on the same application, in such event the appeal proceedings shall terminate as of the date the withdrawal is received. An appeal may be withdrawn under this section regardless of whether other nonfiling parties have relied upon the appeal filed by the appellant. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1200 Proceedings on Remand.

Sections:

4.1.1210    Purpose.

4.1.1215    Hearings Body.

4.1.1220    Notice and Hearings Requirements.

4.1.1225    Scope of Proceeding.

4.1.1230    Effect of Reversal.


4.1.1210 Purpose.

This chapter shall govern the procedures to be followed where a decision of the City has been remanded by the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), the Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD), the Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC) or the Appellate Courts. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1215 Hearings Body.

The Review Authority for a remanded decision shall be the last Review Authority from which the appeal to LUBA or DLCD was taken, except that in voluntary or stipulated remands, the Council may decide that it will hear the case on remand. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1220 Notice and Hearings Requirements.

A.    The City shall conduct a review on any remanded decision if requested by the applicant in writing or initiated by the City for a City project. The remand procedure shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section, the LUBA, DLCD or LCDC or Appellate Court, decision, and applicable State law. Unless State law requires otherwise, only those persons who were parties to the proceedings before the City shall be entitled to notice and be entitled to participate in any hearing on remand.

B.    The review procedures shall comply with State law and with the requirements of this code for either legislative or quasi-judicial procedures, whichever was employed for the initial decision or as required by the remand. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1225 Scope of Proceeding.

A.    On remand, the Review Authority shall review only those issues that LUBA, DLCD, LCDC or the Appellate Court required to be addressed. The Review Authority shall have the discretion to reopen the record in instances in which it deems it to be appropriate.

B.    If additional testimony is required to comply with the remand, parties may raise new, unresolved issues that relate to new evidence directed toward the issue on remand. Other issues that were resolved by LUBA, DLCD, LCDC or the Appellate Court or that were not appealed shall be deemed to be waived and may not be reopened.

C.    Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, for remands of City-initiated legislative amendments, the City Council may allow the introduction and processing of new work tasks, issues, evidence and testimony if the Council determines that the information or task is necessary and/or valuable in order to resolve the remand. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1230 Effect of Reversal.

A decision reversed by LUBA, DLCD, LCDC or the Court of Appeals that results in a final appellate judgment or order of reversal cannot be further heard by the City in the absence of an amended or a new application. Submission of a revised application shall be governed by the time limit set forth in BDC 4.1.935, Reapplication Limited. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1300 Limitations on Approvals.

Sections:

4.1.1310    Expiration of Approval.

4.1.1315    Initiation of Use.

4.1.1320    Extensions to Avoid Environmental or Health Hazards.

4.1.1325    Modification of Approval.

4.1.1330    Transfer of Approval.

4.1.1335    Revocation of Approvals.


4.1.1310 Expiration of Approval.

A.    Scope.

1.    Except as otherwise provided herein, this section must apply to and describe the duration of all development approvals provided for under this code.

2.    This section does not apply to:

a.    Those determinations made by declaratory ruling, such as verifications of nonconforming uses and lot of record determinations that involve a determination of the legal status of a property, rather than whether a particular application for a specific land use meets the applicable standards of the code. Such determinations are final unless appealed and are not subject to any time limits;

b.    Temporary use permits of all kinds, which are governed by applicable ordinance provisions specifying the duration of such permits;

c.    Quasi-judicial and legislative plan and map amendments;

d.    Master plans approved after April 14, 2017, which are governed by BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives; or

e.    Annexations.

B.    Duration of Approvals.

1.    Except as otherwise provided under this code, a development approval is void two years after the date the decision becomes final if the use approved in the permit is not initiated within that time period.

2.    Except as otherwise provided in this code, approval of tentative land division plats shall be void after two years from the date of preliminary approval, unless the final plat has been recorded with Deschutes County. A one-year extension may be approved by the Development Services Director if the applicant can demonstrate sufficient progress to reasonably assure the plat will be recorded at the end of the third year, and if:

a.    An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the development approval period; and

b.    The request is submitted to the City prior to the expiration of the approval period.

3.    In the case of a development approval authorized under applicable approval criteria to be completed in phases, each phase must be consistent with the time specified in the approval. In no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than five years.

C.    Extensions.

1.    The Development Services Director may grant one extension of up to one year for a development approval that contained a one-year initial duration of approval, if:

a.    An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the development approval period; and

b.    The request is submitted to the City prior to the expiration of the approval period.

2.    The Development Services Director may grant one or more additional extensions if authorized by a City Council resolution which recognizes a City-wide need for an additional limited-duration extension, not to exceed two years. The additional extension may be granted if:

a.    The applicant has exhausted all other extension opportunities;

b.    The applicant makes a written request for an extension of the development approval period; and

c.    The request is submitted to the City prior to the expiration of the approval period.

3.    Approval of an extension granted under this section is an administrative decision, and is not a land use decision or a limited land use decision as described in ORS 197.015 or this code. An extension is not subject to appeal and shall be processed as a Type I application.

D.    Effect of Appeals. The time period set forth in subsection (B) of this section shall be tolled upon filing of an appeal to LUBA, until all appeals are resolved. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2114, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1315 Initiation of Use.

A.    For the purposes of this chapter, development undertaken under a development approval described in BDC 4.1.1310, Expiration of Approval, has been “initiated” if it is determined that:

1.    The proposed use has lawfully occurred;

2.    Substantial construction toward completion of the development approval has taken place; or

3.    Where construction is not required by the approval, the conditions of a permit or approval have been substantially exercised and any failure to fully comply with the conditions is not the fault of the applicant.

B.    For the purposes of this section, substantial construction has occurred when the holder of an approval has physically altered the land or structure or changed the use thereof and such alteration or change is directed toward the completion and is sufficient in terms of time, labor or money spent to demonstrate a good faith effort to complete the development.

C.    Initiation of use shall not be granted in lieu of a phased approval.

D.    A determination of whether a land use has been initiated shall be processed as a declaratory ruling. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1320 Extensions to Avoid Environmental or Health Hazards.

A.    In addition to extensions granted pursuant to BDC 4.1.1310(C) and notwithstanding any other provision of the Bend Code, a one-time extension may be granted to a tentative plat approval and any associated development approvals regarding the time for final plat approval where conditions of the approval, or extensions thereof, require or can be read to require approvals from other agencies for sewer or water systems and (1) the applicant can show that without such extension or extensions, a health or environmental hazard or risk thereof would continue to exist, be exacerbated or likely would be created and (2) the applicant submits a time frame and plan for meeting the outstanding conditions with the concurrence of a homeowners association having an ownership interest in project lands and such concurrence is demonstrated in the application.

B.    Such an extension shall be administrative, in writing, and not subject to appeal and shall, subject to the termination provisions of subsection (E) of this section, be granted for a time period not to exceed one year.

C.    In lieu of submittal of the time frame and plan and concurrence of the homeowners association with the application, that requirement of subsection (A) of this section may be satisfied by conditioning approval of the extension to require establishment of the agreed-to time frame and plan within the first 60 days of the extension period, which timeline and plan shall thereupon be deemed to be a condition of the extension approval.

D.    An extension under this section shall be conditioned upon adherence to the timelines and plan proposed in the extension application or as agreed to pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.

E.    Failure to demonstrate compliance with any extension condition shall, after notice and hearing under this code, result in termination of the extension granted under this section. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1325 Modification of Approval.

A.    An approval may be modified at any time after a decision becomes final.

B.    Modification Review Procedures.

1.    A modification that does not have significant additional impacts on surrounding properties must be reviewed only under the criteria applicable to the aspect(s) of the proposal that are to be modified.

2.    A modification that has significant additional impacts on surrounding properties must be reviewed under all criteria applicable to the entire approval and may, at the discretion of the City, require the filing of a new application.

3.    A modification must not be considered to have significant additional impacts on surrounding properties if the identified impacts could be addressed under the applicable provisions of this code at the time of future development (e.g., a future site plan review or conditional use permit application).

4.    A modification that is a new proposal must be filed as a new application.

C.    An application for a modification of a Type I approval must be processed as a Type I application. All other modifications must be processed as a Type II application unless elevated to a Type III process by the Development Services Director.

D.    The original approval time limitation is governed by BDC 4.1.1310.

E.    Modifications of development approvals must meet the approval criteria required in subsection (B) of this section in the appropriate corresponding section of this code (e.g., modification of a site plan review approval is subject to BDC Chapter 4.2; modification of a conditional use permit is subject to BDC Chapter 4.4, modification of a master plan or special planned district is subject to the applicable sections in BDC Chapter 4.5). For modifications of a master plan, PUD or special planned district approved under land use regulations in place prior to April 14, 2017, see subsection (F) of this section.

F.    Modifications of a master plan, PUD or special planned district approved under land use regulations in place prior to April 14, 2017, must meet the approval criteria required in subsection (B) of this section in one of the following sections in BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives:

1.    The modification of a master plan, PUD or special planned district that is primarily for residential uses is subject to the applicable approval criteria in BDC 4.5.200(D).

2.    The modification of a master plan, PUD or special planned district that is primarily for institutional uses is subject to the applicable approval criteria in BDC 4.5.300(E).

3.    The modification of a master plan, PUD or special planned district that is primarily for employment uses is subject to the applicable approval criteria in BDC 4.5.400(D). [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2229, 2014; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1330 Transfer of Approval.

Except as otherwise provided in this code, a development approval shall be deemed to run with the land and be transferable to applicant’s successors in interest. [Ord. NS-2240, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1335 Revocation of Approvals.

A.    Proceedings to revoke a development approval shall be initiated by the Development Services Director by giving notice of intent to revoke to the property owner.

B.    The Development Services Director may revoke a development approval for the following reasons:

1.    The conditions or terms of development approval are violated; or

2.    The project is not in substantial conformance with the approved plans or decision; or

3.    The applicant or the applicant’s representative made a material misstatement of fact in the application or supporting documents and such misstatement was relied upon by the Review Authority in making its decision whether to accept or approve the application.

C.    Revocations shall be processed as a Type II declaratory ruling under this code. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]




4.1.1400 Declaratory Ruling.

Sections:

4.1.1410    Availability of Declaratory Ruling.

4.1.1415    Persons Who May Apply.

4.1.1420    Procedures.

4.1.1425    Effect of Declaratory Ruling.


4.1.1410 Availability of Declaratory Ruling.

A.    Subject to the other provisions of this section, there shall be available for the City’s Comprehensive Plan and this code a process for:

1.    Interpreting a provision of the Bend Comprehensive Plan or implementing ordinances (and other documents incorporated by reference) in which there is doubt or a dispute as to its meaning or application;

2.    Interpreting a provision or limitation of a development approval issued by the City in which there is doubt or a dispute as to its meaning or application;

3.    Determining whether an approval has been initiated or considering the revocation of a previously issued development approval;

4.    Determining the validity and scope of a nonconforming use; and

5.    Lot of record.

Such a determination or interpretation shall be known as a “declaratory ruling” and shall be processed in accordance with this chapter. In all cases, as part of making a determination or interpretation the Development Services Director (where appropriate) or Hearings Body (where appropriate) shall have the authority to declare the rights and obligations of persons affected by the ruling.

B.    A declaratory ruling shall be available only in instances involving a fact-specific controversy and to resolve and determine the particular rights and obligations of particular parties to the controversy. Declaratory proceedings shall not be used to grant an advisory opinion on a specific quasi-judicial development application. Declaratory proceedings shall not be used as a substitute for seeking an amendment of general applicability to a legislative enactment.

C.    Declaratory rulings shall not be used as a substitute for an appeal of a decision or for a modification of an approval. In the case of a ruling on a City development approval, a declaratory ruling shall not be available until 60 days after a decision is final.

D.    The Development Services Director may refuse to accept and the Hearings Body may deny an application for a declaratory ruling if:

1.    The Development Services Director or Hearings Body determines that the question presented can be decided in conjunction with approving or denying a pending application or if in the Development Services Director or Hearings Body’s judgment the requested determination should be made as part of a decision on a development application not yet filed; or

2.    The Development Services Director or Hearings Body determines that there is an enforcement case pending in circuit court in which the same issue necessarily will be decided as to the applicant and the applicant failed to file the request for a declaratory ruling within two weeks after being cited or served with a complaint.

The Development Services Director or Hearings Body’s determination to not accept or to deny an application under this section shall be the City’s final decision. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1415 Persons Who May Apply.

A.    The following persons may initiate a declaratory ruling under this chapter:

1.    The owner of a property requesting a declaratory ruling relating to the use of the owner’s property;

2.    In cases where the request is to interpret a previously issued development approval, the holder of the approval; or

3.    In all cases arising under BDC 4.1.1410, Availability of Declaratory Ruling, the Development Services Director.

No other person shall be entitled to initiate a declaratory ruling.

B.    A request for a declaratory ruling shall be initiated by filing an application with the Planning Division and, except for applications initiated by the Development Services Director, shall be accompanied by such fees as have been set by the Planning Division. Each application for a declaratory ruling shall include the precise question on which a ruling is sought. The application shall set forth whatever facts are relevant and necessary for making the determination and such other information as may be required by the Planning Division. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1420 Procedures.

Declaratory rulings shall be processed as either a Type II or Type III application. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1425 Effect of Declaratory Ruling.

A.    A declaratory ruling shall be conclusive on the subject of the ruling and bind the parties thereto as to the determination made.

B.    BDC 4.1.935, Reapplication Limited, notwithstanding, and except as specifically allowed therein, parties to a declaratory ruling shall not be entitled to reapply for a declaratory ruling on the same question.

C.    Except when a declaratory ruling is made by the City Council, the ruling shall not constitute a final policy of the City of Bend. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1500 Development Agreements.

Sections:

4.1.1510    Purpose.

4.1.1520    Applicability.

4.1.1530    Initiation.

4.1.1540    Negotiations.

4.1.1550    Adoption.

4.1.1560    Hearings Body.


4.1.1510 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to clarify the authority and procedures for City Council consideration of Development Agreements authorized by ORS Chapter 94 outside the land use process. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1520 Applicability.

The City Council may establish a Development Agreement between the City and any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of that property. Development Agreements that do not include a development application are not governed by the City’s Development Code, and may be established in any manner deemed appropriate by the Council, consistent with the Council’s authority under the City’s Charter. Development Agreements that contain a development application are governed by this section. The following include but are not limited to situations that may require a Development Agreement as described by this section:

A.    Multiple party or partnership situations.

B.    Large infrastructure requirements.

C.    Timing issues.

D.    Litigation.

E.    Urban renewal. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1530 Initiation.

Development Agreements governed by this section may be initiated by the Council on its own motion or in response to a request by City staff, following consultation with any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property that is the subject of the proposed Development Agreement. Neither City staff nor the Council are required to proceed with consideration of a request for a Development Agreement. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1540 Negotiations.

Negotiations between the parties to a Development Agreement shall commence upon a request by the City Council to identified City staff to establish a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) regarding the anticipated scope of the Development Agreement. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1550 Adoption.

The provisions of ORS 94.504 through 94.528 shall be followed in the adoption of a Development Agreement under this section. Once a preliminary agreement is reached between the parties, the owner or owners of the property that is the subject of the Development Agreement shall submit an application to the Development Services Director for adoption of the Development Agreement and for any development application requested in connection with the Development Agreement. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1560 Hearings Body.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, the City Council shall be the Hearings Body for a Development Agreement. The Council may appoint a Hearings Officer or the Planning Commission to serve as the Hearings Body for specific development applications associated with a proposed Development Agreement, prior to the final decision on the Development Agreement as a whole. In that event, the Council shall establish a schedule for such decisions, and shall consider, but shall not be bound by, such decisions. [Ord. NS-2122, 2009; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.1.1600 Summary of Development Application Types.

There are four types of procedures: Type I, II, III, and IV. Table 4.1.1600 lists the City’s development applications and their required types of procedure(s).

Table 4.1.1600 

Summary of Development Application Types  

	Development Application	Type I*	Type II*	Type III	Type IV

	Condo Plat/Condo Change of Use	X	 	 	 

	Design Review CB Zone – Minor Facade Change	X	 	 	 

	Design Review – Minor Alteration/Expansion	X	 	 	 

	Final Plat – Partition or Subdivision	X	 	 	 

	Home Business Class B	X	–	–	–

	Lot of Record Verification	X	–	–	–

	Minimum Development Standards	X	–	–	–

	Property Line Adjustment	X	 	 	–

	Site Plan Minor Alteration/Expansion	X	 	 	–

	Temporary Use	X	 	 	–

	Short-Term Rental♦	X	X	 	–

	Cemetery Subdivision	 	X	 	–

	Conditional Use Permit	 	X	 	–

	Declaratory Ruling – Administrative Decision	 	X	 	–

	Design Review CB Zone – Track 1	 	X	 	–

	Design Review Deschutes River, Administrative	 	X	 	–

	Design Review for New Construction/Major Alteration/Expansion	 	X	 	–

	Home Business Class C	 	X	 	–

	Partition (Tentative Plan)	 	X	 	–

	Planned Unit Development (PUD) Modification	 	X	 	–

	Residential Compatibility Exception, Administrative	 	X	 	–

	Site Plan Major Alteration/Expansion	 	X	 	–

	Site Plan New Development	 	X	 	–

	Solar Access Permit	 	X	 	–

	Subdivision (Tentative Plan)	 	X	 	–

	Temporary Permit	 	X	 	–

	Triplex Review	 	X	 	–

	Variance (Class A, B, C)	 	X	 	 

	Waiver of Standards	 	X	 	 

	Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facility Site Plan♦♦	X	X	 	 

	Declaratory Ruling – Hearings Officer or Planning Commission 	 	 	X	 

	Design Review CB Zone – Track 2	 	 	X	 

	Deschutes River Design Review – Planning Commission Hearing	 	 	X	 

	Extraterritorial Extension and/or Connection of Water and Sewer Service	 	 	X	 

	Master Plan	 	X	X	 

	Special Planned District	 	 	X	X

	MR Zone Review – Facilities or Master	 	 	X	 

	Residential Compatibility Exception, Hearings Officer	 	 	X	 

	River Setback Exception	 	 	X	 

	Zone Change	 	 	X	 

	Annexation	 	 	X	X

	Bend Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment	 	 	X	X

	Bend Comprehensive Plan or Code Text Amendment	 	 	X	X

	Refinement Plan/Development Agreement per ORS Chapter 94	 	 	X	X

	Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) Expansion	 	 	X	X

*Unless elevated by the Development Services Director as authorized in BDC Chapter 4.1.

♦See BDC 3.6.500, Short-Term Rentals.

♦♦See BDC Chapter 3.7, Wireless and Broadcast Communication Facilities – Standards and Process.

[Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2260, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


Chapter 4.2 MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REVIEW, SITE PLAN REVIEW AND DESIGN REVIEW Revised 1/19 Revised 9/19 Revised 2/20

Sections:

4.2.100    Purpose.

4.2.200    Review Processes.

4.2.300    Submittal Requirements. Revised 2/20

4.2.400    Minimum Development Standards Review. Revised 1/19 Revised 9/19 Revised 2/20

4.2.500    Site Plan Review. Revised 2/20

4.2.600    Design Review.

4.2.700    Bonding and Assurances for All Developments.

4.2.800    Development in Accordance with Permit Approval.


4.2.100 Purpose.

The purpose of Minimum Development Standards Review (MDS) is to:

•    Streamline development review for minor additions or expansions and/or changes of use, and applicable single-family detached dwellings, single-family attached townhomes, accessory dwelling units and duplex dwellings.

•    Ensure compliance with specific appearance, transportation safety and utility standards specified in this code.

The purpose of Site Plan Review is to:

•    Provide rules, regulations and standards for efficient and effective administration of Site Plan Review;

•    Carry out the development pattern and plan of the City according to the Bend Comprehensive Plan policies;

•    Promote the public health, safety and general welfare;

•    Ensure adequate public facilities and services are available to serve new development;

•    Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, mixed uses, transportation options, and detailed human-scaled design.

The purpose of Design Review is to:

•    Ensure detailed, human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of architectural building styles. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.200 Review Processes.

A.    Minimum Development Standards Review. Applications are reviewed under the Type I process. If Minimum Development Standards Review is combined with a Waiver or Modification of Public Improvement Standards, the application shall be reviewed following the Type II process.

B.    Site Plan Review. Applications that do not meet the applicability of the Minimum Development Standards Review shall be processed as Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review applications are reviewed following the Type II process.

C.    Design Review. Applications are reviewed under the Type II process. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.300 Submittal Requirements. Revised 2/20

A.    An application for review under this chapter shall include the following information, as deemed applicable by the Development Services Director based on the size, scale and complexity of the development.

1.    Existing Site Conditions Map. At a minimum the existing site conditions map shall contain the following:

a.    The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance of 150 feet from the subject property. Existing aerial photos may be used. The property boundaries, dimensions and gross area shall be identified;

b.    Topographic contour lines shown at one-foot intervals for slopes of 10 percent or less. For slopes greater than 10 percent, contour lines shall be shown at two-foot intervals. Slopes greater than 25 percent shall be identified;

c.    The location and width of all public and private streets, drives, sidewalks, pathways, rights-of-way, and easements on the site and adjoining the site for a distance of 150 feet. Existing aerial photos may be used;

d.    Potential natural hazard areas, including any areas identified as subject to a 100-year flood, areas subject to high water table, and areas mapped by the City, County, or State as having a potential for geologic hazards;

e.    Resource areas, including wetlands on the City’s Local Wetlands Inventory, streams, surface mines, and wildlife habitat identified by the City or any natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection;

f.    Features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, drainage ways, canals and ditches both on the site and adjoining the site for a distance of 150 feet. Existing aerial photos may be used;

g.    The location, size and species of trees and other vegetation having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade;

h.    Locally or federally designated historic and cultural resources on the site and the adjacent parcels;

i.    North arrow, scale, names and addresses of all persons listed as owners on the most recently recorded deed;

j.    Name, address, email address and telephone number of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable.

2.    Proposed Site Plan. The site plan shall contain the following information (as applicable):

a.    The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;

b.    Existing site features, including trees, identified on the site analysis map, if any, which are proposed to be retained or modified by the proposed development;

c.    The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, pavement and other improvements on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 150 feet. Setback dimensions for all existing and proposed buildings shall be provided on the site plan;

d.    The location and dimensions of all site circulation for vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles including entrances and exits to the site, loading and service areas;

e.    The location and dimensions of all vehicle parking areas (show striping for parking stalls and wheel stops (if applicable) and bicycle facilities);

f.    The location, type and height of exterior lighting fixtures;

g.    Locations of bus stops and other public or private transportation facilities;

h.    Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading and delivery;

i.    Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street furniture, and similar improvements.

3.    Deed Restrictions. The applicant shall submit copies of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants.

4.    Architectural Drawings. The Development Services Director may request architectural drawings showing one or all of the following:

a.    Building elevations with building height and width dimensions;

b.    Floor plans;

c.    Building materials, colors and type;

d.    The name, address and phone number of the architect or designer.

5.    Preliminary Grading and Drainage Plan. A preliminary grading and drainage plan prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered landscape architect shall be required in conformance with BC Title 16, Grading, Excavation, and Stormwater Management. The preliminary grading plan shall show the location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general changes to contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed.

6.    Surface Water Detention and Treatment Plan. A plan prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered landscape architect showing all drainage retention areas, catch basins, and storm piping prepared in accordance with BDC 3.4.500, Storm Drainage Improvements and BC Title 16, Grading, Excavation and Stormwater Management, shall be required.

7.    Landscape Plan. A landscape plan shall be required, and at the direction of the Development Services Director, shall show the following:

a.    A planting schedule containing the location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials (at time of planting);

b.    Existing and proposed building and pavement outlines;

c.    Irrigation plans, written soil specifications at time of planting, and anticipated plant installation time line;

d.    The location of existing and proposed terraces, retaining walls, decks, patios, shelters, and play areas;

e.    Existing and proposed abutting street right-of-way landscaping;

f.    Other information as deemed appropriate by the Development Services Director. An arborist’s report may be required for sites with mature trees that are protected under BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

8.    Sign Drawings. Depictions of proposed signs shall be in conformance with BC Chapter 9.50, Signs. A separate sign permit will be required for all signs.

9.    Narrative. Letter or narrative report documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in BDC 4.2.500(D), Site Plan Review Approval Criteria.

10.    Traffic Impact Study. A Traffic Impact Analysis shall be submitted if required by BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis.

11.    Water and Sewer Capacity Analyses. These analyses are provided by the City upon request and payment of fee, if required.

12.    If the properties are not served by the City sewer system in accordance with BC Title 15, provide documentation from the Deschutes County Environmental Soils Division which indicates that the proposed development will be in compliance with all applicable requirements for sanitary septic systems when such systems exist on the properties affected by the development.

13.    Additional Information. The Development Services Director may require, at the applicant’s expense, studies, reports or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features or concerns. [Ord. NS-2361, 2020; Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.400 Minimum Development Standards Review. Revised 1/19 Revised 9/19 Revised 2/20

A.    Minimum Development Standards Review for Single-Family Detached Dwellings, Single-Family Attached Townhomes, Accessory Dwelling Units and Duplex Dwellings.

1.    Applicability. This section applies to the construction of a new single-family detached dwelling, single-family attached townhome, accessory dwelling unit or duplex dwelling. Except as provided in subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section, a dwelling unit is also considered new if the livable space of an existing dwelling unit is increased by 50 percent or more. (Partial to full demolition of the existing dwelling unit’s livable space replaced with new square footage of livable space is considered new square footage.)

2.    Exemptions. The following are not subject to this section:

a.    Single-family detached dwellings that have existing full utility and full street frontage infrastructure.

b.    Single-family attached townhomes that have existing full utility and full street frontage infrastructure, and have vehicular access from an alley.

c.    New construction of 200 square feet or less in area to an existing dwelling unit’s livable space.

3.    Approval Criteria. The Review Authority must approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for Minimum Development Standards Review based upon the criteria listed below.

a.    The proposed land use is a permitted or conditionally permitted use in the zoning district.

b.    In addition to the standards below, conditionally permitted uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit and must meet the criteria in BDC 4.4.400.

c.    The following standards are met:

i.    The land use, building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimensions, density, lot coverage, building height, design review standards and other applicable standards of the underlying zoning district are met.

ii.    Single-family attached townhomes, accessory dwelling units and duplexes must comply with the corresponding standards of BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

iii.    Water and Sewer.

(A)    Where available, public water mains must be extended to and through the length of the property frontage with services provided to the dwelling unit(s) in accordance with the City of Bend Standards and as further set forth in BC Title 14, Water.

(B)    The proposal complies with BC Title 15, Sewer.

iv.    Street and Alley Improvements.

(A)    Full street and/or alley improvements must be constructed along the frontages of the property when an improved street and/or alley has been built to the property line. When a street and/or alley has been built to the property line and is not constructed to City standards, an alternative design may be approved by the City Engineer to match existing improvements. The Development Services Director may grant a waiver of this requirement under BDC 3.4.150. In such cases, an agreement to not remonstrate against the formation of a local improvement district must be recorded against the property; however, a waiver must be processed as a Type II process.

(B)    For properties over one acre in size where future division of the property is allowable, street and/or alley improvements are not required if any portion of the dwelling is located more than 300 feet from an improved street or alley. In such cases, an agreement to not remonstrate against the formation of a local improvement district must be recorded against the property.

(C)    Street improvements are not required for accessory dwelling units.

v.    Sidewalk Improvements.

(A)    When an existing public sidewalk exists within 600 feet of the front property line on the same side of the street of any of the frontages, sidewalks must be constructed along all frontage(s) of the site. A corner lot or parcel has two or more front property lines and frontages. Sidewalks are not required for accessory dwelling units.

(B)    Properties within the Woodriver Village subdivision must make a payment in lieu of constructing a sidewalk subject to BDC 3.4.160, Payment in Lieu of Sidewalk Construction. A payment in lieu of constructing a sidewalk is not required for accessory dwelling units. 

vi.    Driveways and required parking areas must be paved with asphalt, concrete or comparable surfacing; a durable nonpaving material (e.g., grass-crete, eco-stone) may be used to reduce surface water runoff and to protect water and air quality. Gravel is not allowed. Driveway apron design and location must conform to City of Bend Standards and Specifications and the City’s adopted accessibility standards for sidewalks and walkways. 

B.     Minimum Development Standards Review for All Other Uses.

1.    Applicability. This subsection applies to development other than those in subsection (A) of this section where there is:

a.    A building expansion of up to 50 percent of the existing building area or up to 5,000 square feet, whichever is less; and/or

b.    An outdoor use or parking expansion of up to 50 percent of the existing outdoor use area or parking area or up to 5,000 square feet of new outdoor use area or parking area, whichever is less; and/or

c.    A change of use of a building or property that increases demand on public facilities and/or requires new additional parking spaces; and/or

d.    A permanent or semi-permanent stand-alone commercial use no larger than 250 square feet in size on an existing commercial site (e.g., produce stand, food cart and similar uses); and/or

e.    Relocating or reconfiguring an existing driveway that does not increase a nonconformity or create a nonconformity. All other changes shall be processed as a Type II unless exempted.

2.    Exemption.

a.    Where the property is currently in compliance, and will remain in compliance, with all standards specified in the approval criteria in subsection (B)(3)(c) of this section, then Minimum Development Standards Review is not required.

b.    Closing an existing driveway is exempt from Minimum Development Standards Review.

3.    Approval Criteria. The Review Authority shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for Minimum Development Standards Review based upon the criteria listed below.

a.    The proposed land use is a permitted or conditional use in the zoning district.

b.    Conditionally permitted uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit and shall meet the criteria in BDC 4.4.400.

c.    The following standards are met:

i.    The land use, building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimensions, density, lot coverage, building height, design review standards and other applicable standards of the underlying zoning district are met.

ii.    Equipment, outdoor storage, manufacturing and service/delivery areas shall be screened as specified in BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

iii.    The minimum required number of parking spaces and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved and striped as specified in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

iv.    Bicycle parking shall be installed or upgraded to meet the standards specified in BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

v.    Access to the public right-of-way shall comply with BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, unless exempted by BDC 5.2.100(E). If exempted, the access location may remain but the approach and access area within the right-of-way shall be brought up to City standards.

vi.    New paved parking areas shall meet the landscaping requirements of BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

vii.    Uses shall comply with the corresponding standards of BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

viii.    Existing required landscaped areas impacted by new construction shall be replaced elsewhere on site.

ix.    When an existing public sidewalk exists within 600 feet of the front property line on the same side of the street of any of the frontages, sidewalks shall be constructed along all frontage(s) of the site. A corner lot or parcel has two or more front property lines and frontages.

x.    Public utilities shall be adequate to serve the proposal. Where existing utilities are to be replaced, or new utilities are to be installed, construction shall comply with this code and with the City’s Standards and Specifications.

xi.    The proposal complies with BC Title 15, Sewer. [Ord. NS-2361, 2020; Ord. NS-2349, 2019; Ord. NS-2318, 2018; Ord. NS-2308, 2018; Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.500 Site Plan Review. Revised 2/20

A.    Applicability. Site Plan Review shall apply all new uses, new buildings, new outdoor storage or sales areas, new parking lots and other development that exceeds the applicability thresholds in BDC 4.2.400, Minimum Development Standards Review.

B.    Exemption. Applications processed through Minimum Development Standards Review, or determined to be exempt from Minimum Development Standards Review, are exempt from Site Plan Review.

C.    Existing Development. Existing lawfully developed sites that do not conform to the current standards of this code are only required to meet current standards on the portions of the site affected by the proposed alteration or expansion. Any alterations to the site must meet current code standards.

D.    Site Plan Review Approval Criteria. The City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed Site Plan Review application based on the following criteria:

1.    The proposed land use is a permitted or conditional use in the zoning district;

2.    Conditionally permitted uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit and shall meet the criteria in BDC 4.4.400;

3.    The land use, building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimensions, density, lot coverage, building height, design review standards and other applicable standards of the applicable zoning district(s) are met;

4.    The proposal complies with the standards of the zoning district that implements the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation of the subject property;

5.    The applicable standards in BDC Title 3 are met;

6.    All applicable building and fire code standards are or will be met;

7.    All required public facilities have adequate capacity, as determined by the City, to serve the proposed use;

8.    The proposal complies with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis; and

9.    The proposal is in substantial conformance with any applicable approved master plan, master facilities plan, refinement plan, and/or special planned district.

10.    The proposal complies with BC Title 15, Sewer.

E.    Final Site Plan. A Final Site Plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The Final Site Plan shall depict the proposal as approved and shall incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision. No building or engineering permits will be issued until the Final Site Plan is approved.

F.    Expiration of Approval. In accordance with BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, the land use approval shall lapse, and a new application shall be required, if a building permit has not been issued within the duration of Site Plan Review approval. [Ord. NS-2361, 2020; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2263, 2016; Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.600 Design Review.

A.    Applicability. Design Review is required for exterior alterations to existing buildings that modify 25 percent or more of the surface area of any exterior wall or roof where Minimum Development Standards Review or Site Plan Review is not otherwise required.

B.    Exemptions. The following activities or structures are not subject to this section:

1.    Maintenance of the exterior of an existing structure such as re-painting, re-roofing or re-siding where similar materials and colors are used or materials and colors are used that comply with the provisions of this code.

2.    Exterior alterations to existing buildings that modify less than 25 percent of the surface area of any exterior wall or roof where there is no net loss of glazing.

3.    Interior remodeling or tenant improvements.

4.    Buildings that are subject to review by the Bend Landmarks Commission.

5.    Single-family detached dwellings.

6.    Applications that require Minimum Development Standards Review or Site Plan Review.

7.    Properties located in the Central Business District (CB). See BDC 2.2.800, Development and Design Standards for the Central Business Zoning District.



8.    Properties located in the Water Overlay Zone (WOZ). See BDC 2.7.650, Deschutes River Corridor Design Review Combining Zone.

C.    Design Review Approval Criteria. The Review Authority shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for Design Review based upon all relevant design standards contained in BDC Title 2 and applicable sections of BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards and Regulations for Certain Uses.

D.    Final Design Plan. A final design plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The final design plan shall depict the proposal as approved and shall incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision. No building permits will be issued until the final design plan is approved. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.700 Bonding and Assurances for All Developments.

A.    Performance Bonds for Public Improvements. On all projects where public improvements are required, the City will allow concurrent construction of public and private improvements if the owner enters into a Site Plan Development Agreement stating that all private and public improvements shall be completed prior to certification of final occupancy. The City may require a bond or other adequate assurances in an amount not greater than 120 percent of the construction cost, as determined by the City, as a component of the Site Plan Development Agreement in order to guarantee the public improvements.

B.    Release of Performance Bonds. The bond or assurance shall be released when the Development Services Director finds the completed project conforms to the approved Site Plan, including all conditions of approval.

C.    Warranty Bond. The developer shall file with the City a warranty bond executed by a surety company, or other financial security acceptable to the Development Services Director, to cover any public improvements constructed as part of the approved development. The warranty period shall be one year beginning on the date of initial acceptance of the public improvements by the City. The bond shall guarantee the workmanship of the public improvements and shall be in the amount of 120 percent of the value of the improvements. The warranty bond shall be effective for no less than 18 months.

D.    Completion of Landscape Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the land use approval prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. A security equal to 120 percent of the cost of the landscaping as determined by the Development Services Director may be accepted if winter weather prevents installation of the approved landscaping. The security shall assure installation within six months after occupancy. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the security may be used by the City to complete the installation. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


4.2.800 Development in Accordance with Permit Approval.

A.    Final Approvals. Development shall not commence until the applicant has received all of the appropriate land use and development approvals including but not limited to: Site Plan Review Approval, Design Review Approval, Minimum Development Standards Review Approval, grading permits and building permits. Construction of public improvements shall not commence until the City has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g., utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The City may require the applicant to enter into an agreement (e.g., for phased developments and developments with required off-site public improvements), and may require bonding or other assurances for improvements, in accordance with BDC 4.2.700, Bonding and Assurances for All Developments.

B.    Phased Development. Phasing of development may be approved with a Site Plan Review application, subject to the following standards and procedures:

1.    A proposed phasing plan shall be submitted with the Site Plan Review application.

2.    The proposal shall include a time schedule for developing a site in phases, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than five years from the date of final approval without reapplying for Site Plan Review.

3.    Approval of a phased site development proposal requires satisfaction of all of the following criteria:

a.    The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

b.    The phased development shall not result in requiring the City or other property owners to construct public facilities that are required as part of the approved underlying development proposal; and

c.    An application for phasing may be approved after Site Plan Review approval as a modification to the approved plan, in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015]


Chapter 4.3 SUBDIVISIONS, PARTITIONS, REPLATS AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS,  Revised 2/20

AND INFILL DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS

Sections:

4.3.100    Purpose and Applicability.

4.3.200    General Requirements.

4.3.300    Tentative Plan. Revised 2/20

4.3.400    Final Plat.

4.3.500    Replats.

4.3.600    Property Line Adjustments.

4.3.700    Infill Development Options.


4.3.100 Purpose and Applicability.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to:

1.    Provide rules, regulations and standards governing the review and approval of subdivisions, partitions, replats and property line adjustments;

2.    Carry out the City’s development pattern, as envisioned by the Bend Comprehensive Plan;

3.    Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, and transportation options;

4.    Promote the public health, safety and general welfare through orderly and efficient urbanization;

5.    Reduce or avoid traffic congestion, and secure safety from fire, flood, pollution and other dangers;

6.    Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, provide open space opportunities, and facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply, sewage and drainage; and

7.    Encourage the conservation of energy resources.

B.    Applicability. Units of land shall only be created or reconfigured in conformance with the standards of this chapter and ORS Chapter 92. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.3.200 General Requirements.

A.    Application Processes. The first step for all subdivisions, partitions and replats is the review of a tentative plan. Upon approval of a tentative plan, the applicant must submit engineered plans to the City for construction of any public improvements approved as part of the tentative plan. The construction plans shall be reviewed by the City for conformance with the City’s Standards and Specifications. Upon approval of the construction plans, the applicant shall build the improvements or provide a financial security guaranteeing the future construction of the improvements. Upon completion of the infrastructure construction and fulfillment of any conditions of approval, the final step is the City’s review and approval of a final plat and recordation of the final plat with Deschutes County. [Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.3.300 Tentative Plan. Revised 2/20

A.    Tentative Plan Process. Proposed partitions, subdivisions and replats shall be processed as Type II applications in accordance with BDC 4.1.400.

B.    Informational Requirements. A tentative plan shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor, a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect and contain the information listed below. Some information may be omitted from the tentative plan if it is provided in accompanying materials. No tentative plan shall be considered complete unless all the required information is provided.

1.    General Information Required.

a.    Proposed or existing name of the subdivision.

b.    Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner of record, authorized agents or representatives, engineer or surveyor, and any assumed business names filed or to be filed with the Corporation Division by the applicant.

c.    Date of preparation, true north, scale, and gross area of the proposed subdivision, partition or replat.

d.    Appropriate identification of the drawing as a tentative plan for a subdivision, partition or replat.

e.    Location and tract designation sufficient to define its location and boundaries, and a legal description of the tract boundaries in relation to existing plats and streets.

f.    Certified copy of the recorded instrument under which the applicant claims an ownership interest, or copy of a land sales contract which binds the applicant in the event of tentative approval.

g.    A Title Report and/or a Subdivision Guarantee prepared within the previous 90 days.

h.    If a tract of land has water rights, the application shall be accompanied by a water rights division plan approved by the irrigation district or other water district holding the water rights, or when there is no such district, by the County Watermaster.

i.    A letter or other written documentation from the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District which indicates that the applicant has met with the district to discuss the proposed subdivision, partition or replat and provide the district an opportunity to review the design for options to enhance existing parks and trails, and develop new parks and trails.

j.    If an application is for a subdivision, the application shall be accompanied by a sewer and water analysis prepared by the City of Bend.

2.    Existing Conditions. Information concerning existing on-site conditions and conditions within 150 feet of all property included in the proposed subdivision, partition or replat:

a.    Location, names, and widths of existing improved and unimproved streets and roads, bikeways, and access corridors.

b.    Location of any existing features such as section lines, section corners, City and special district boundary lines, and survey monuments.

c.    Location of existing structures, irrigation canals and ditches, pipelines, waterways, railroads, and any natural features such as rock outcroppings, designated wetlands, wooded areas, and natural hazards.

d.    Location and direction of watercourses, and the location of areas subject to flooding and high water tables, including areas lying below the 100-year flood elevation as indicated on the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Maps as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

e.    Location, width, and use or purpose of any existing easement or right-of-way for utilities, bikeways, and access corridors within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, partition or replat.

f.    Existing sanitary and storm sewer lines, water mains, septic facilities, culverts, and other underground and overhead utilities within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, partition or replat.

g.    Topographic contour lines shown at one-foot intervals for slopes of 10 percent or less. For slopes greater than 10 percent, contour lines shall be shown at two-foot intervals. Slopes greater than 25 percent shall be identified.

h.    Bend Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map classification of lands within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, partition or replat.

3.    Information Concerning Proposed Subdivision, Partition or Replat.

a.    Location, names, width, typical improvements, cross-sections, bridges, culverts, approximate grades, curve radii and centerline lengths and reserve strips of all proposed streets, and the relationship to all existing and projected streets within 150 feet.

b.    Location, width, and purpose of all proposed easements or rights-of-way for utilities, bikeways, and access corridors, and relationship to all existing easements and rights-of-way within 150 feet.

c.    Location of at least one permanent bench mark within the existing or proposed subdivision, partition or replat boundary.

d.    Location, approximate area, and dimensions of each lot, parcel, or designated unit of land and proposed lot or parcel numbers.

e.    Location, approximate area, and dimensions of any lot, parcel, or unit of land proposed for public use, the use proposed, and plans for improvements or development thereof.

f.    Proposed use, location, approximate area, and dimensions of any lot, parcel, or unit of land intended for nonresidential use within a residential land division.

g.    Source, method, and preliminary plans for domestic and other water supplies, sewage disposal, stormwater disposal and other drainage facility plans and all other utilities.

h.    Description and location of any proposed common area and community facility.

i.    Proposed deed restrictions including access restrictions or protective covenants if such are proposed to be utilized.

j.    Statement from each utility company proposed to serve the proposed land division or reconfiguration stating that each such company is able and willing to serve the proposed subdivision as set forth in the tentative plan, and the conditions and estimated costs of such service. Each utility purveyor shall be noted on the tentative plan.

k.    Proposed fire protection system for the land division or reconfiguration, including fire hydrant locations and sizes of water mains.

l.    Solar Access. Provide a statement relative to the solar access to be provided by the subdivision plan in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.5.

4.    Future Subdivision. Where a tract is proposed to be divided into parcels, lots, or units of land of an acre or more, the Review Authority may require an arrangement of parcels, lots, units of land and streets such as to permit future subdivision in conformity to the street requirements and other requirements contained in this code.

C.    Phased Tentative Plan. An overall tentative plan shall be submitted for land for which a phased subdivision is proposed. The Review Authority shall review all phases of a phased tentative plan at the same time. The final plat for each phase shall be filed in accordance with the applicable provisions of BDC 4.3.400(A). The phased tentative plan shall include, but not be limited to, the informational requirements of subsection (B) of this section, as well as the following elements:

1.    Overall tentative plan, including phase or unit sequence, and the schedule for initiation of improvements and projected completion date.

2.    Overall facility development phasing plan, including transportation and utility facilities plans that specify the traffic pattern plan for motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians, water system plans, sewer system plans and utility plans.

3.    Development and phasing plans for any common elements or facilities.

4.    Plan of development pattern for streets, bikeways, and access corridors for adjoining lands as required by the Review Authority.

D.    Development Options. If the subject property and the surrounding area are eligible for Mid-block Development, the proposed development plan design must enable the future development of Mid-block Development, as allowed by BDC 4.3.700, Infill Development Options, for the adjoining properties.

E.    Criteria for Subdivision, Partition or Replat Approval. The Review Authority shall not approve a tentative plan for a proposed subdivision, partition or replat unless the Review Authority finds that the subdivision, partition or replat will satisfy the following criteria of approval:

1.    The proposal provides for the preservation of natural features and resources such as streams, lakes, natural vegetation, special terrain features, and other natural and historic resources to the maximum degree practicable.

2.    The proposal allows for the development of adjacent property in accordance with the provisions of this code.

3.    The proposal meets all standards and requirements of this code.

4.    All required public facilities have adequate capacity, as determined by the City, to serve the proposed subdivision, partition or replat.

5.    The proposal contributes to the orderly development of the Bend area transportation network of roads, bikeways, and pedestrian facilities, and allows for continuation and expansion of existing public access easements within or adjacent to the subdivision, partition or replat.

6.    Each lot, parcel, or designated unit of land is suited for its intended use.

7.    That the placement of utilities is in accordance with the adopted City standards.

8.    The proposal meets the requirements of the Fire Code, adopted flood protection standards, and other adopted standards intended to protect against natural hazards.

9.    The proposal is in substantial conformance with any applicable approved master plan, master facilities plan, refinement plan, and/or special planned district.

10.    The proposal complies with the standards of the zoning district in which the project is located and the standards of the zoning district that implements the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation of the subject property.

11.    The proposal complies with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis.

12.    The proposal complies with BC Title 15, Sewer.

F.    Improvement Requirements for Partitions.

1.    In the approval of a land partition, the Review Authority may require as a condition of approval any improvements that may be required for a subdivision under the provisions of this code. All roads in partitions shall be dedicated to the public without reservation or restriction.

2.    Easement Access. The Review Authority may require the applicant to improve an easement access serving two or more parcels according to the City’s street standards.

G.    Special Partitioning Regulations. The partitioning of a tract of land in which not more than one additional parcel is created and transferred to a public or semi-public agency for the purpose of a road, utility, railroad, electric substation, park, trail or canal right-of-way may be approved by the Review Authority without the parcel to be transferred meeting the minimum lot/parcel size standards of this code and without the need for a variance.

H.    Subdivisions, Partitions, Replats and Property Line Adjustments within the Urban Holding Districts (UH-2 1/2 and UH-10). The following standards shall apply to all subdivisions, partitions, replats and property line adjustments within the Urban Holding Districts (UH-2 1/2 and UH-10) where development is permitted in conformance with Table 2.1.1100.B. New residential development shall not exceed the allowed density of the zone as identified in Table 2.1.1100.A.

1.    Development Options. In order to preserve the urbanizable land within the Urban Holding Zones to the greatest extent practical prior to master planning and/or rezoning, new development involving a subdivision, partition, replat or property line adjustment shall conform to the following development standards listed below.

a.    New subdivisions, partitions and replats shall develop as a Cluster Development. Cluster Development is defined as a residential development pattern consisting of smaller lots not to exceed one-half acre in size, which abut one another and whereby one single-family home is permitted on each lot consistent with the overall maximum density for the area of the original land division. The larger parent parcel is retained for redevelopment and the overall development after the property is rezoned. Cluster development will allow for more efficient use of the land and preserve the greatest potential for redevelopment in the future.

b.    New lots and parcels or lots and/or parcels adjusted through property line adjustment in an Urban Holding Zone shall meet the lot requirements below:

	Minimum lot size: 15,000 sq. ft.

	Maximum lot size: 0.5 acre

	Minimum lot width: 60 feet

	Minimum lot depth: 100 feet

Example: A 40-acre property in the UH-10 could be subdivided into four lots consistent with the allowed density. The Cluster Development provision will require the development of three small lots with a maximum size of one-half acre and the remaining parent parcel. Cluster Development will allow one single-family home to be constructed on each lot. The lots would be served with an on-site sewage disposal system.

c.    A “shadow plat” or redevelopment plan is required prior to approval of the subdivision, partition or replat.

d.    No further land division can occur on the parent parcel until the property is rezoned with an urban zoning designation and an approved development plan.

e.    Exceptions. Properties which are 20 acres or larger and have a Framework Plan designation for future economic use shall be permitted to apply for a two lot partition where the parcel size for one lot is a minimum of five acres. No further land division can occur on the parent parcel until the property is rezoned with an urban zoning designation and an approved development plan.

I.    Special Regulations for Lands Abutting the Surface Mining District. If the subdivision, partition or replat adjoins the SM Zone, the existence and location of such zone shall be entered on plat for the lots or parcels created by the subdivision, partition or replat. [Ord. NS-2361, 2020; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2263, 2016; Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2113, 2009; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.3.400 Final Plat.

A.    Filing Time Period Requirements. Except as provided for in this chapter, the applicant shall prepare and submit to the City a final plat that is substantially in conformance with the approved tentative plan. Final plats shall be processed as Type I applications in accordance with BDC 4.1.300.

1.    If a tentative plan is approved for a single phased development, the final plat shall be filed with the City within two years of the approval date of the tentative plan. A one-year extension may be approved in accordance with BDC 4.1.1310.

2.    If a tentative plan is approved for phased development, the final plat for the first phase shall be filed within two years of the approval date of the tentative plan.

3.    The final plats for any subsequent phase shall be filed within three years of the approved date for the tentative plan, unless a longer period of time is allowed through the tentative plan approval process. In no case shall the final plat be recorded more than five years from the date of the tentative approval.

4.    If the applicant fails to file a final plat within the specified timelines, the tentative plan for those phases shall become null and void.

B.    Submittal of the Final Plat. Prior to recordation with Deschutes County, the final plat shall be submitted to the City for review in the form prescribed by State statute, the Deschutes County Surveyor and this code.

C.    Requirements of Survey and Plat of Land Division or Reconfiguration. Any final plat submitted shall meet the survey and monumentation requirements of the applicable Oregon Revised Statutes.

D.    Information on the Final Plat. In addition to the requirements of the tentative plan approval or otherwise required by law, the following information shall be shown on the final plat:

1.    Name of subdivision or partition.

2.    Name of owner, applicant, and engineer or surveyor.

3.    The date, scale, north point, legend, controlling topography such as bluffs, creeks and other bodies of water, and existing highways and railroads.

4.    Legal description of the tract boundaries.

5.    Reference points of existing surveys, identified, related to the plat by distances and bearings, and reference to a field book or map as follows:

a.    Stakes, monuments, or other evidences found in the ground and used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision, partition or replat.

b.    Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivisions, partitions or replats.

c.    Other monuments found or established in making the survey or required to be installed by provisions of this code.

d.    The exact location and width of rights-of-way and easements intercepting the boundary of the tract.

6.    Tract boundary lines, and street rights-of-way and centerlines, with dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles, radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings. Normal high water lines for any river, creek, or other body of water. Tract boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest 0.01 feet. No ditto marks shall be used.

7.    The width of the streets being dedicated and the curve data shall be based on the street centerline. In addition to the centerline dimensions, the radius and central angle shall be indicated together with the long chord distance and bearing.

8.    Easements shall be noted by short dashed lines, clearly identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. If an easement is not of record, a statement of the easement shall be given. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner’s certificates of dedication.

9.    Lot and parcel numbers beginning with the number “1” and numbered consecutively.

10.    Public lands, including strips and easements, shall be clearly marked to distinguish it from lots intended for sale.

11.    Limitations on rights of access to and from streets, lots, and other parcels of land.

12.    The area of each lot, parcel or unit of land, if larger than one acre, to the nearest hundredth of an acre; and the area of each lot, parcel or unit of land less than one acre, to the nearest square foot.

13.    Appropriate space for all signatures as specified by the Deschutes County Surveyor shall be included on the final plat.

E.    Supplemental Information with the Final Plat. The following data, if applicable, shall accompany the final plat.

1.    Title Report. A preliminary title or subdivision guarantee report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the premises; such report shall show evidence of a clear and marketable title and shall have been prepared within 30 days prior to submitting the final plat for review.

2.    Survey Closure Sheets. A copy of the surveyor’s survey closure sheets.

3.    Deed Restrictions. A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision, partition or replat.

4.    Homeowners Association. A copy of any homeowners association agreements proposed or required for the subdivision.

5.    Dedications. A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents with specific reference to parks, playgrounds, etc.

6.    Taxes. A list of all taxes and assessments on the tract which have become a lien on the land subdivided or partitioned.

7.    Subdivisions, Partitions or Replats Adjoining SM Zones. Any final plat which adjoins a SM Zone must clearly show where such zone is located in relation to the subdivision boundaries.

8.    Condominium Plats. Any final plat for a condominium shall be accompanied by a copy of the condominium declaration.

F.    Criteria for Final Plat Approval. Upon receipt by the Planning Division, the plat and other data shall be reviewed by the Review Authority to determine that the following criteria have been met:

1.    The subdivision, partition or replat as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan, and all conditions of tentative plan approval have been or will be met.

2.    That the final plat contains the following elements:

a.    Streets and roads for public use are dedicated to the public without any reservation or restriction.

b.    Streets and roads held for private use and indicated on the tentative plan have been approved by the City.

c.    The plat contains provisions for dedication to the public of all streets, roads, bikeways, access corridors, parks, sewage disposal, and water supply system, if made a condition of the approval of the tentative plan.

d.    Explanations of all common improvements required as conditions of approval of the tentative plan are recorded and referenced on the plat.

3.    That the developer has either constructed and had accepted by the City the required improvements or the developer has filed with the City a financial security acceptable to the Development Services Director in accordance with subsection (J) of this section in lieu of constructing the improvements.

G.    Final Plat Approval. After the final plat has been reviewed and approved by the City, and when all signatures as required by the Deschutes County Surveyor other than the Development Services Director, City Engineer and County Commissioner appear on the mylar, the Planning Manager and City Engineer shall sign the final plat mylar and return it to the applicant to file with Deschutes County.

H.    Recording of Plat.

1.    Within 60 days of City approval, the applicant shall submit the approved final plat with the Deschutes County Clerk for recordation.

2.    The applicant shall provide exact copies of the recorded plat to the City Engineer and City Planning Division.

3.    The plat shall not be in effect until it has been recorded with the Deschutes County Clerk.

I.    Errors in the Final Plat. If an error in the final plat is discovered after the plat has been filed with the County Clerk, the error shall be corrected by the filing of an affidavit of correction.

J.    Financial Security in Lieu of Construction.

1.    In lieu of completion of the required improvements, the developer may request the City approve a financial security between the developer and the City guaranteeing the construction of the required improvements and specifying the schedule by which the required improvements shall be completed. The acceptance of financial security in lieu of construction is at the discretion of the Development Services Director. To assure the construction of the required improvements, the developer shall provide one of the following:

a.    A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon in a form approved by the City Attorney.

b.    A cash deposit.

c.    An irrevocable standby letter of credit in a form approved by the City Attorney from a federally insured banking institution or savings and loan operating in Oregon that unconditionally promises to pay the funds pledged upon demand by the City. Such obligation must be unaffected by the financial status of the person who has obtained the letter of credit.

d.    Other irrevocable financial security acceptable to the Development Services Director.

2.    The financial security shall be for 120 percent of the cost of the improvements and repairs as determined by the City.

3.    If the developer fails to carry out the provisions of the agreement, the City shall call upon the bond, or letter of credit or cash deposit or other financial security, to finance any cost or expenses resulting from said failure. If the amount of the deposit, letter of credit or bond or other financial security exceeds the cost and expense incurred by completing the improvements, the City shall release the remainder. If the amount of the deposit, letter of credit or bond or other financial security is less than the cost and expense incurred by the City for the improvements and repairs, the developer shall be liable to the City for the difference.

K.    Warranty Bond. Prior to final plat approval, the developer shall file with the City a warranty bond executed by a surety company, or other financial security acceptable to the Development Services Director, to cover a one-year warranty period beginning on the date of acceptance of the public improvements by the City. The bond shall guarantee the workmanship of the public improvements and shall be in the amount of 12 percent of the value of the improvements as determined by the City. The warranty bond shall be effective for no less than 18 months. [Ord. NS-2251, 2015; Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.3.500 Replats.

A.    Applicability.

1.    A replat is the act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in a subdivision.

2.    The relocation of a common boundary line between two lots/parcels within a recorded subdivision or partition shall not be considered a replat. A property line adjustment may occur in a platted subdivision or partition as provided for in BDC 4.3.600.

B.    Replat Process.

1.    A replat tentative plan and plat shall comply with the land division process specified in BDC 4.3.300 and 4.3.400 with the following exceptions:

a.    The word “Replat” shall be shown in the title block;

b.    The name or reference number of the previous plat and any additional recording information shall be retained in the title of the replat;

c.    Blocks, lots/parcels and portions thereof which are being replatted shall be identified where applicable; and

d.    Original plat information being deleted, abandoned or changed by the replat shall be shown lightly sketched or dotted on the drawing with a note of explanation. [Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.3.600 Property Line Adjustments.

A.    Applicability.

1.    The relocation or elimination of a common property line between abutting properties may be granted in accordance with the provisions of this section. The property line adjustment provisions of this section shall not apply to:

a.    A property line adjustment that affects more than two abutting units of land.

b.    A property line adjustment that adjusts a property which was approved and/or created as open space, common area, private park, private road, or other unit of land specifically required and/or designated by a previous land use approval.

B.    Filing Procedures and Requirements.

1.    Property line adjustments shall be processed as Type I applications in accordance with BDC 4.1.300.

2.    Any person proposing a property line adjustment shall prepare and submit an application in accordance with the prescribed procedures and the appropriate filing fee, to the Planning Division.

3.    An application for a property line adjustment shall be accompanied by the following materials:

a.    A scale drawing prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer showing the existing property lines, the proposed property lines, existing water, sewer and utility lines, and the footprint of all existing structures with setbacks to the existing and proposed property lines noted.

b.    Legal descriptions for the existing properties and for the properties as adjusted.

c.    A copy of the deed or other recorded instrument that signifies ownership of the affected properties.

d.    If the properties are not served by the City sewer system, provide documentation from the County Environmental Health Division which indicates that the proposed adjustment will be in compliance with all applicable requirements for sanitary septic systems when such systems exist on the properties affected by the adjustment.

C.    Criteria for Tentative Approval.

1.    No application for property line adjustment shall be approved unless the following criteria are met:

a.    The adjustment does not result in property sizes that are less than those established by the underlying zoning designation.

b.    Nonconforming properties that are less than the minimum size established for the zone shall not be further reduced in size.

c.    Existing structures shall not be made nonconforming with regard to setbacks, lot coverage or other requirements of the underlying zone, or this code.

d.    Existing water and sewer service lines to the adjusted lots or parcels shall be in conformance with current City standards or shall be constructed to conform with current City standards.

e.    The applicant has submitted documentation from the Deschutes County Environmental Health Division that any existing sanitary septic systems on the adjusted properties meet all requirements of the County Environmental Health Division.

D.    Requirements for Final Approval.

1.    In order to obtain final approval of a property line adjustment, the following requirements shall be completed within one year of the tentative approval:

a.    New deeds or other instrument conveying ownership containing the legal descriptions for the adjusted properties shall be recorded with the County Clerk, if applicable.

b.    A survey drawing containing the stamp and signature of a licensed surveyor shall be recorded with the County Surveyor.

c.    Verification of acceptance of water and sewer line construction to the adjusted properties by the City Engineering Division if applicable. [Ord. NS-2150, 2010; Ord. NS-2068, 2007; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.3.700 Infill Development Options.

Small vacant or underdeveloped properties overlooked by traditional development patterns can become economically viable development. Some lots in existing residential areas may have standard widths but may be unusually deep compared to other properties in the area. Essentially unused space at the back of a lot may provide room for one or more lots for infill housing. Infill development, as defined in BDC Chapter 1.2, Definitions, may be developed as “flag lots,” “mid-block developments,” “T-courts,” or “shared courts,” in compliance with the following:

A.    Mid-Block Development. Lots may be developed without frontage onto a public street when lot access is provided by mid-block lanes, as shown in Figure 4.3.700.A. Mid-block lanes are public right-of-way or private access ways and utility easements that provide an opportunity for the redevelopment of underutilized and oversized residential lots. Mid-block lanes must be required when existing lot depths are 150 feet or greater and the surrounding pattern of development will facilitate mid-block lane development. Lots with a depth less than 150 feet may develop using flag lots.

Figure 4.3.700.A

Mid-Block Infill
[IMAGE]


1.    Eligibility for Mid-Block Lanes. To determine if an existing area is eligible for mid-block lane development, the following criteria must be met before applying the mid-block lane standards:

a.    Minimum lot area: twice that required by the underlying zone.

b.    Minimum lot width: 20 feet wider than the width required by the underlying zone.

c.    Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.

d.    Maximum lot size: 10 acres including adjacent properties under common ownership.

2.    Driveway and Lane Width. For the purpose of this code, a shared driveway is defined as an access driveway providing access from a local public street to no more than four dwelling units including accessory dwellings. The minimum width of all shared driveways must be 20 feet. For the purpose of this code the definition of a shared lane or mid-block lane is a narrow private or public street providing lot frontage and access for rear lot development. The minimum improved width of a mid-block lane must be 28 feet. The minimum shared driveway and lane widths shall be observed except as required by the Uniform Fire Code or by the City Standards and Specifications when public utilities are present.

3.    Dedication of Shared Driveways and Mid-Block Lanes. The shared driveways and mid-block lanes must meet the standards for private streets, per BDC Chapter 3.4, Public Improvement Standards. The property owner must record a public access easement, a minimum of 20 feet in width for a shared driveway and 28 feet in width for a mid-block lane. Where the shared driveway or mid-block lane is shared across a property line, a portion of the easement (i.e., 10 to 14 feet) from each property sharing a shared driveway or mid-block lane for vehicle access similar to an alley must be granted. Dedication, as applicable, must be so indicated on the face of the subdivision or partition plat.

4.    Maximum Shared Driveway and Mid-Block Lane Length. The maximum shared driveway length is subject to requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, but must not exceed 150 feet, without connecting to a mid-block lane. The length of a mid-block lane must not exceed 600 feet between intersections of a public street. The mid-block lane and shared driveway access must be constructed to meet Oregon Fire Code and Fire Department emergency access standards and required turning radius for emergency vehicles.

5.    Future Street Plans. Building placement and alignment of shared driveways and lanes must be designed so that future street connections can be made as surrounding properties develop.

6.    Lot Development. Residential lots created by mid-block lane development must be subject to floor area ratio (FAR) in conformance with BDC 2.1.400.

7.    Mid-block lanes do not satisfy the standards of BDC 3.1.200(D), Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks.

B.    Flag Lots.

1.    Eligibility for Flag Lots. Flag lots may be created only when mid-block lanes cannot be extended to serve future redevelopment. Flag lot development is not permitted on collector or arterial streets. 

2.    Development Standards. Flag lots must comply with the following standards:

a.    The minimum lot frontage and pole for a flag lot must be 15 feet. 

b.    When a shared driveway serves two or more properties, the shared driveway width must be a minimum of 20 feet. The shared driveway must have a reciprocal access and maintenance easement recorded for all lots.

c.    There must be no more than two abutting flag poles. 

d.    No fence, structure or other obstacle may be placed within the shared driveway alignment.

e.    Residential lots created as flag lots are subject to floor area ratio (FAR) in conformance with BDC 2.1.400. For calculating FAR the flag pole area of the lot is not counted.

f.    Lot width and depth is measured at the midpoint of opposite lot lines of the flag portion of the lot. For the purposes of flag lots, lot width and depth may be measured in either direction.

g.    The lot lines in the flag portion are either side or rear lot lines.

Figure 4.3.700.B
[IMAGE]


C.    T-Courts. T-courts are intended to facilitate infill development and redevelopment of properties when no other development alternative exists. In addition, T-court development must comply with the following development standards:

1.    T-courts must be private streets. Minimum access way width must be 40 feet and must be recorded as an easement or a tract. The access width must include public or private utility easements as needed.

2.    Minimum pavement width must be 24 feet.

3.    The maximum length of the T-court is 150 feet from the property line of the private tract or easement to the end of the T- court. 

4.    No parking is allowed within the T-court. “No Parking” signs are required and must be maintained.

5.    A pedestrian pathway must be provided at the “T” to abutting streets or where appropriate to connect to adjoining development. If the pedestrian pathway connects to abutting streets, a public access easement must be recorded on the property.

6.    The “T” Court must only provide access to lots and parcels that have frontage on the “T” Court.

7.     Residential lots and parcels created by “T-court” development are subject to floor area ratio (FAR) in conformance with BDC 2.1.400.

Figure 4.3.700.C
[IMAGE]


D.    Shared Courts. Shared courts must comply with the following standards:

1.    Applicability. Shared courts are permitted in RM and RH Zoning Districts and in the Mixed-Use Zoning Districts where standalone residential uses are permitted in Table 2.3.200, Permitted and Conditional Uses. Where the regulations of this section are not specific, the standards of the relevant zoning district prevail.

2.    Permitted and Conditional Uses.

a.    RM and RH Zoning Districts. Residential uses listed in Table 2.1.200, Permitted and Conditional Uses, in compliance with the corresponding zoning district. 

b.    Mixed-Use Zoning Districts. Standalone residential uses permitted in Table 2.3.200, Permitted and Conditional Uses, in compliance with the corresponding zoning district. 

3.    Development Site.

a.    Must not exceed 1.1 acres.

b.    Must comply with the minimum frontage requirements of the underlying zone.

4.    Shared Court Lots and Parcels.

a.    No minimum lot size. 

b.    The private access drive provides frontage for the interior lots or parcels. Property lines abutting the private access drive are considered front property lines. 

c.    The setbacks of the underlying zoning district apply except the following front setbacks apply to property lines abutting the private access drive:

i.    The minimum front setback is five feet for enclosed livable spaces. 

ii.    Garage entrances accessing the private access drive must be set back at five feet from the edge of the property line, or set back a minimum of 20 feet from the property line. If the garage entrance is set back five feet from the property line, it may not be located closer to the front property line than the enclosed livable space of the dwelling unit. See Figure 4.3.700.D. 

5.    Private Access Drive.

a.    Vehicular access must be from the private access drive. For purposes of this subsection, a private access drive provides vehicular access to dwelling units and off-street parking areas within the shared court and is not a street or road. The access must not extend to abutting properties. 

b.    Minimum access width and pavement width must be 24 feet, unless the Oregon Fire Code requires wider widths (i.e., aerial access and fire hydrant placement) and must be recorded as a tract. 

c.    For private access drives that dead end, the maximum length permitted is 150 feet from the nearest curb or edge of pavement to the end of the shared court.

d.    Except for corner development sites, private access drives must not allow through movement of vehicles to different streets unless allowed by the City Engineer, which may impose additional conditions of approval or design requirements.

e.    A pedestrian pathway must be provided at the end of the private access drive when it would connect to abutting streets or where appropriate to other developments. If the pedestrian pathway connects to abutting streets, a public access easement must be recorded on the property. 

6.    Public Utility Easement.

a.    A minimum three-foot-wide public utility easement must be provided on each side of the private access drive when public utilities are proposed to serve the lots. The City Engineer may require wider utility easements. 

7.    City of Bend Water and Sewer Utilities. Conformance is achieved when one of the following options is met:

a.    Utilities are located in the private access drive and include a public sewer main and private water laterals; or 

b.    Utilities are located in the private access drive and all utilities are public.

c.    All public mains must be within a public utility easement in conformance with the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. 

8.    Off-Street Parking.

a.    Dwelling Units: See Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces. Required parking spaces may be provided in tandem on a driveway.

b.    Guest parking: 0.25 spaces per dwelling unit. Where a fractional number of spaces results, the required number of spaces must be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

c.    No parking is allowed within the private access drive. “No Parking” signs are required and must be maintained.

d.    Common off-street parking, including guest parking, may abut the private access drive when located outside of the minimum required dimensions of the private access drive. The off-street parking must be located in a common tract and the homeowners’ association must be responsible for enforcing this requirement. 

e.    Parking is prohibited between the street and the dwelling units.

9.    Design Standards.

a.    Front Door.

i.    Dwelling units that abut a street must have the front door entrance oriented toward the street frontage. A three-foot or wider path that is physically separated from the private access drive must be provided from the sidewalk to the front door. 

ii.    Dwelling units that are on the interior of the shared court development must have the front door entrance oriented toward the private access drive or open to a porch covered by either a roof or living space. A covered walkway or breezeway is not a porch. If the main entrance is from a covered porch, the covered porch must:

(A)    Meet a minimum area of 20 square feet;

(B)    Meet a minimum depth of four feet; and

(C)    Have an entry that faces the private access drive. 

b.    Attached dwelling units abutting a street must include offsets along the street at least every 30 feet for each story. Offsets must step an enclosed building wall back or forward at least two feet and the offset must be a minimum width of four feet.

10.    BDC 3.6.200(D) does not apply to shared court developments. 

11.    Trash Receptacles. Each dwelling unit must provide an enclosure area for trash and recycling or a common receptacle area must be provided. The trash receptacle area may be located in a garage; provided, that it does not interfere with required vehicle parking (nine feet by 20 feet). A common receptacle must not be located within setbacks from property lines shared with existing residential developments and must be screened on at least three sides with a solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height. Receptacles must be located for easy access by trash pick-up vehicles.

12.    Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. Subsequent to final plat approval but prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in a shared court development, a set of conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) for the development must be reviewed and, if approved by the City, recorded with Deschutes County. The CC&Rs run with the land and may be removed or modified only upon approval of the City of Bend. The CC&Rs must create a homeowners’ association that will provide for maintenance of all common areas including the private access drive and common off-street parking areas in the development.

Figure 4.3.700.D (Conceptual)
[IMAGE]


[Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2016, 2006. Formerly 4.5.200]




Chapter 4.4 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:

4.4.100    Purpose.

4.4.200    Approvals Process.

4.4.300    Application Submission Requirements.

4.4.400    Criteria, Standards and Conditions of Approval.

4.4.500    Additional Development Standards for Conditional Use Types.


4.4.100 Purpose.

There are certain uses, which, due to the nature of their impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. These are identified as “Conditional Uses” in this code. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures under which a conditional use may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if other appropriate conditions of approval can be met. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.4.200 Approvals Process.

A.    Application. An application for a new conditional use shall be processed as a Type II procedure, in conformance with BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures. The application shall meet submission requirements in BDC 4.4.300, Application Submission Requirements, and the approval criteria contained in BDC 4.4.400, Criteria, Standards, and Conditions of Approval.

B.    Modification of Approved or Existing Conditional Use. Modifications to approved or existing conditional uses shall be processed in accordance with BDC 4.1.1325, Modification of Approval. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.4.300 Application Submission Requirements.

In addition to the submission requirements in BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, an application for conditional use approval must include the information listed below, as applicable.

A.    Existing site conditions;

B.    Site plan;

C.    Preliminary grading plan;

D.    Landscape plan;

E.    Architectural drawings of all structures;

F.    Drawings of all proposed signs;

G.    A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants;

H.    Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with all applicable approval criteria in BDC 4.4.400, Criteria, Standards and Conditions of Approval. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.4.400 Criteria, Standards and Conditions of Approval.

The City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings with respect to each of the following standards and criteria:

A.    Use Criteria.

1.    The site size, dimensions, location, topography and access are adequate for the needs of the proposed use, considering the building mass, parking, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations;

2.    Any negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval that include but are not limited to those listed in subsection (C) of this section; and

3.    All required public facilities have adequate capacity, as determined by the City, to serve the proposed use.

B.    Site Design Standards. Where appropriate, the criteria for Site Development Review approval listed in BDC 4.2.500(D), Site Plan Review Approval Criteria, shall be met.

C.    Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that any negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. The City may impose as many of these and other applicable conditions on one conditional use application as it finds necessary. These conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation;

2.    Requiring site or architectural design features that minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor and/or dust;

3.    Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width than those required in this Development Code;

4.    Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, and/or location on the site;

5.    Designating the size, number, location and/or design of vehicle access points or parking areas;

6.    Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street(s), sidewalks, curbs, planting strips, pathways, or trails to be improved, so long as findings in the development approval indicate how the dedication and/or improvements, if not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, are roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed development;

7.    Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or improvement of parking and loading areas;

8.    Limiting the number, size, location, height and/or lighting of signs;

9.    Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or intensity of outdoor lighting;

10.    Requiring berms, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;

11.    Requiring and designating the size, height, location and/or materials for fences;

12.    Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, cultural resources, and/or sensitive lands;

13.    Requiring the dedication of sufficient land to the public, and/or construction of pedestrian/bicycle pathways in accordance with adopted plans, so long as findings in the development approval indicate how the dedication and/or construction, if not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, is roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed development. Dedication of land and design and construction shall conform to the provisions of BDC Chapter 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation.

D.    Hydroelectric Facilities. In addition to the general Conditional Use Permit criteria, the following criteria shall apply to any construction or expansion of, or other modification to, hydroelectric facilities in areas where such facilities are permitted as a conditional use:

1.    Conditional Use Criteria for a Hydroelectric Facility. A Conditional Use Permit may be granted for the construction or expansion of, or other modification to, a hydroelectric facility only upon findings by the Hearings Body that the proposal meets each of the following criteria, where applicable:

a.    The facility is located at and physically connected to an existing manmade diversion or impoundment.

b.    The facility will not increase the maximum surface area or capacity of the impoundment created by the existing dam or diversion to which the facility will be connected.

c.    The facility will maintain or enhance, to the greatest extent possible, the existing scenic, visual, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the affected stretch of the stream or river.

d.    The facility will maintain or enhance the existing recreational opportunities on or adjacent to the affected stretch of the stream or river.

e.    The facility will maintain or enhance existing fish and wildlife habitat, and will have no adverse impact upon any threatened or endangered fish, wildlife, or plant species or their habitat.

f.    The facility and its operation will maintain or enhance existing water quality in the affected stretch of the stream or river, except during construction of the facility, during which time adverse impacts on water quality will be minimized. Specifically, the facility and its operation will not:

i.    Deposit, or create a zone for the deposit of, sediments in the stream or river or adjacent to the site;

ii.    Increase the temperature of the stream or river in the affected stretch by any means, including but not limited to removal of vegetation or reduction in stream flow; or

iii.    Create the potential for, or result in, spillage, leakage or discharge of oil, chemicals or other substances or waste products that could reach the stream or river.

g.    The facility and its operation will not increase soil or bank erosion or destroy bank habitat at or on land adjacent to the site, except during construction of the facility, during which time soil or bank erosion and destruction of bank habitat will be minimized.

h.    The facility and its operation will maintain existing public access to the affected stretch of the stream or river.

i.    The facility will not be located at or immediately adjacent to any identified archaeological or historical site, national or State park, wildlife refuge, Bureau of Land Management Outstanding Natural Area or Area of Critical Environmental Concern, Federal Research Natural Area, or U.S. Forest Service Special Interest Area.

j.    The facility and its operation will comply with all applicable noise and pollution regulations of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

k.    The facility and its operation will comply with all applicable State fill-and-removal statutes and regulations.

l.    The following shall be submitted for approval:

i.    Detailed construction plans and profiles of all facility features, including building elevations of the powerhouse and other structures, excavation plans and narrative as to where blasting will occur, where excess material will be deposited, and landscaping and reclamation plans.

ii.    Detailed plans for meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (C) of this section.

iii.    Detailed plans for stream or river enhancement documenting both on-site and off-site enhancement plans consistent with adopted stream- or river-related goals and policies, such as plans and methods for conserving water and enhancing stream flow. The plan shall identify costs, time schedules and coordination activities with affected persons and agencies for such enhancement plans.

iv.    A cash deposit or performance bond in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost of stream or river enhancement and landscaping.

v.    Detailed plans for a water conservation and stream enhancement program to be funded by a portion of revenues generated by the operation of the proposed facility. The program plans shall contain the following:

(A)    A program timetable;

(B)    Projected gross revenues from the proposed facility;

(C)    Projected program expenditures and the percentage of gross revenue they represent;

(D)    Projected water savings and the percentage of known current water losses they represent;

(E)    A declaration by the applicant that at least 50 percent of the conserved water will remain un-diverted by the applicant;

(F)    A declaration by the applicant that water diverted for power generation will not cause water flow in that affected stretch of the stream or river (from the diversion to the tailrace exit) to fall below the minimum stream flow for that stretch as recommended by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife; and

(G)    A declaration by the applicant that he or she will enter into an agreement with the City of Bend, prior to beginning construction of the facility, by which the applicant agrees to fulfill all of the requirements in subsections (D)(1)(a) through (f) of this section. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.4.500 Additional Development Standards for Conditional Use Types.

A.    Concurrent Variance Application(s). A Conditional Use Permit shall not grant variances to regulations otherwise prescribed by the Development Code. Variance application(s) may be filed in conjunction with the conditional use application, and both applications may be reviewed concurrently.

B.    Additional Development Standards. Development standards for specific uses are contained in BDC Chapter 3.6, Special Standards for Certain Uses. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 4.5 MASTER PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ALTERNATIVES

Sections:

4.5.100    Master Plan General Provisions.

4.5.200    Community Master Plan.

4.5.300    Institutional Master Plan.

4.5.400    Employment Master Plans.

4.5.500    Cottage Housing Development.

Prior legislation: Ords. NS-2016, NS-2229, NS-2263 and NS-2271.


4.5.100 Master Plan General Provisions.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of the community master plan, institutional master plan and employment master plan is to promote and facilitate coordinated development. Master plans provide a process to consider future development on larger sites and to analyze future demand on public facilities. Master plans provide an opportunity for innovative and creative development while providing long-term predictability for the applicants, surrounding neighborhoods, and the entire community.

B.    Applicable Standards and Criteria. There are three categories of master plans (community master plan, institutional master plan, and employment master plan) each with a distinct set of standards and criteria. The determination of master plan category will be made by the City based on the most prominent use(s) proposed by the master plan or development proposal. Each master plan or development proposal must only fall into one master plan category and only the standards and criteria applicable to the category of master plan determined by the City are applicable to a proposed master plan or development proposal.

C.    Uses. The uses are the same as those permitted within the zoning district except as follows:

1.    Density transfers may be permitted as part of a major community master plan 20 acres or larger, or as part of a major employment or major institutional master plan in an opportunity area that is 20 acres or larger; however, the density must comply with the density standards in BDC 4.5.200(E)(3);

2.    Uses not permitted in the zoning district may be allowed when consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation’s characteristics; and

3.    Private recreational facilities and private open space areas in compliance with BDC 4.5.200(E)(4) are permitted as part of a community master plan.

D.    Consistency with ORS 227.178. A major master plan is an amendment to an acknowledged Comprehensive Plan and/or land use regulation and is therefore not subject to the 120-day review period under ORS 227.178. The City will use all reasonable resources to render a final decision on all major master plans within 180 days of receiving a complete application. Approval or denial of the major master plan application will be based on the standards and criteria at the time the major master plan was first submitted to the City.

E.    Submittal Requirements. The following information must be submitted as deemed applicable by the Development Services Director based on the size, scale, and complexity of the master plan:

1.    Existing Conditions Submittal Requirements.

a.    Narrative statement that describes the following:

i.    Current uses.

ii.    Site description, including the following items. May also reference submitted maps, diagrams or photographs.

(A)    Physical characteristics;

(B)    Building inventory including size and height;

(C)    Vehicle/bicycle parking, and loading areas;

(D)    Landscaping/usable open space; and

(E)    Lot coverage.

iii.    Infrastructure facilities and capacity, including the following items:

(A)    Water;

(B)    Sanitary sewer;

(C)    Stormwater management; and

(D)    Easements.

b.    Existing Site Conditions Map.

i.    The existing site conditions map must include the following information on site and within 150 feet of the proposed master plan (as applicable):

(A)    The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property. The property boundaries, dimensions and gross area must be identified. Existing aerial photos may be used;

(B)    Ownership of master plan area and ownership of all property within 150 feet of the proposed master plan;

(C)    Topographic contour lines shown at one-foot intervals for slopes of 10 percent or less. For slopes greater than 10 percent, contour lines must be shown at two-foot intervals. Slopes greater than 25 percent must be identified;

(D)    The location, names, and widths of existing public and private streets, alleys, drives, sidewalks, bike lanes, multi-use paths, transit routes and facilities, rights-of-way, and easements. Existing aerial photos may be used;

(E)    The location of existing irrigation canals and ditches, pipelines, drainage ways, waterways, railroads, and any natural features such as rock outcroppings, wooded areas, and natural hazards. Existing aerial photos may be used;

(F)    The location of existing sanitary and storm sewer lines, water mains, septic facilities, culverts, and other underground and overhead utilities;

(G)    Potential natural hazard areas, including any areas identified as subject to a 100-year flood, areas subject to high water table, and areas mapped by the City, County, or State as having a potential for geologic hazards;

(H)    Resource areas, including wetlands on the City’s Local Wetlands Inventory, streams, surface mines, and wildlife habitat identified by the City or any natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection; and

(I)    Locally or federally designated historic and cultural resources on the site and the adjacent parcels.

ii.    The existing site conditions map must include the following information on site:

(A)    The location of existing structures, parking, loading and service areas, and pavement. Existing aerial photos may be used; and

(B)    The location, size and species of trees and other vegetation having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade.

iii.    Date, north arrow, scale, names, and addresses of all persons listed as owners on the most recently recorded deed.

iv.    Name, address, email address, and telephone number of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable.

2.    Proposed Master Plan Submittal Requirements.

a.    Narrative that describes the following:

i.    Development boundary subject to proposed master plan. May also reference submitted maps or diagrams;

ii.    Project description;

iii.    Description, approximate location, and approximate timing of each proposed phase of development. The phasing plan may be tied to necessary infrastructure improvements. May also reference submitted maps or diagrams;

iv.    How the proposed water, sewer, and street system will serve the size and type of development and uses planned for this area;

v.    How the location and sizing of water and sewer facilities on site will be consistent with existing and planned facilities;

vi.    How water flow volumes will be provided to meet fire flow and domestic demands;

vii.    The function and location of any private utility system;

viii.    Compliance with the applicable approval criteria set forth at BDC 4.5.200, Community Master Plan, BDC 4.5.300, Institutional Master Plan, and BDC 4.5.400, Employment Master Plans;

ix.    Types of residential uses and planned densities; and

x.    Bend Comprehensive Plan Map compliance analysis which explains how plan designation acreages in the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map designations for the subject site or sites, including minimum and maximum residential density ranges, are implemented by the master plan, including rearranging the plan designations and/or zoning that retains the same total area of all plan designations on the subject site or within one percent of the same total acres. All other changes must be processed concurrently as a Comprehensive Plan amendment and zone change.

b.    Scaled maps or diagrams that include the following information (as applicable):

i.    Development boundary;

ii.    Phasing plan;

iii.    Conceptual site plan including the following:

(A)    General land uses;

(B)    Approximate building envelopes and square footage;

(C)    Vehicle, biking, and walking circulation system, including cross-sections, and where these facilities will connect with the existing and planned system;

(D)    General location and size of areas to be conveyed for public use (e.g., schools, recreational areas, parks, fire stations, and other public uses) in accordance with the City of Bend, the Bend Parks and Recreation District Parks, Recreation, and Green Spaces Comprehensive Plan, and the School Facility Plan, latest editions, and other open space areas as required by this chapter;

(E)    Transit routes and facilities;

(F)    Parking, loading, and service areas including loading and service areas for waste disposal;

(G)    North arrow and scale; and

(H)    Other information necessary to show how the conceptual site plan meets applicable criteria;

iv.    Water and sewer facilities to serve the master plan area, including line sizes, general location of routes, and how the lines will tie into adjacent areas and facilities;

v.    General location of streets and water and sewer lines illustrated on abutting vacant land and developable land and all contiguous property under common ownership. This illustration is not binding on the abutting properties;

vi.    Grading concept plan (for hillside or sloping properties, or where extensive grading is anticipated);

vii.    Landscape concept plan and tree preservation plan in accordance with BDC Chapter 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls;

viii.    Architectural concept plan (e.g., information sufficient to describe architectural styles, building heights, and general materials); and

ix.    Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style, and materials of signs).

c.    Draft Development Code text, figures, and tables, in a format prescribed by the City, which propose changes to the development standards and zoning district requirements intended to implement the major master plan. The draft text, figures, and tables must also include any proposed districts, street layouts, and cross-sections that vary from standards.

d.    A letter or other written documentation from the Bend Metro Park and Recreation District which indicates that the applicant has met with the District to discuss the proposed master plan, and provided the District an opportunity to review the design for options to enhance existing parks and trails, and develop new parks and trails.

e.    A letter or other written documentation from the Bend-La Pine School District which indicates that the applicant has met with the District to discuss the proposed master plan, and provided the District an opportunity to review the master plan area for compliance with the School Facility Plan, latest edition.

f.    Transportation analysis in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis.

g.    Institutional and employment master plans must submit a transportation and parking demand management (TPDM) plan in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan.

h.    Water and sewer capacity analysis.

i.    Information required by BDC 2.7.600, Water Overlay Zone (WOZ), BDC 2.7.700, Upland Areas of Special Interest Overly Zone, BDC 3.5.200, Outdoor Lighting Standards, and/or BC Chapter 5.50, Noise, as applicable.

j.    Copies of all existing covenants and restrictions, and general description of proposed restrictions or covenants (e.g., for common areas, access, parking, etc.).

k.    A title report prepared within the previous 90 days.

F.    Modifications to Approved Master Plans, PUDs and Special Planned Districts.

1.    The following modifications to a master plan, PUD or special planned district may be approved with a land division or with an application in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review, and Design Review, unless the Development Services Director elevates the application to the Planning Commission for hearing as a Type III application.

a.    Increase or decrease of residential densities relative to that approved in the master plan by no more than 15 percent, when such change conforms to the Bend Comprehensive Plan and its density ranges. In no case shall the density fall below the minimum density established in BDC 4.5.200(E)(3)(b). Master plans 20 acres or larger must comply with the density standards of BDC 4.5.200(E)(3);

b.    A reduction to the amount of open space or landscaping relative to that approved in the master plan by no more than 10 percent, when such change complies with the master plan’s minimum open space requirements;

c.    An increase in lot coverage by buildings relative to that approved in the master plan by no more than 15 percent of the approved lot coverage (e.g., approved lot coverage of 40 percent may increase to 46 percent);

d.    Any changes in the amount of parking relative to that approved in the master plan by no more than 15 percent. A proposed modification that is part of an approved TPDM plan must comply with BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan;

e.    A change in the location or alignment for proposed streets, parking lot configuration, utility easements, landscaping or other site improvements as long as the change is in substantial conformance with the approved master plan; and

f.    Increase or decrease in the size and/or height of a building relative to that approved in the master plan by no more than 10 percent.

2.    In no case will a modification under subsections (F)(1)(a) through (f) of this section be approved that causes a minor master plan that was approved without any deviations to this code to fail to meet a minimum or maximum standard as set in this code.

3.    All other changes require a modification in conformance with BDC 4.1.1325, Modification of Approval. [Ord. NS-2303, 2018; Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.5.200 Community Master Plan.

A.    Purpose. The community master plan is intended to provide complete neighborhoods with varied housing options, services, and amenities needed for daily living, including public schools, parks and open spaces, shops, and services, all within a convenient walking or biking distance. The community master plan is also intended to provide convenient access to public transportation and employment areas.

B.    Applicability.

1.    Community master plans in conformance with this section may be submitted for any property or combination of properties three acres or larger in size.

2.    Community master plans are required for any property or combination of adjacent properties under common ownership totaling 20 acres or larger unless exempted below.

a.    Exemptions.

i.    When a property is 40 acres or larger and is part of a proposed land division or property line adjustment application where all the proposed lots/parcels will be 20 acres or larger, a community master plan will not be required until further development is proposed for the newly created lots/parcels; however, lots or parcels smaller than 20 acres may be created and developed prior to an approved community master plan application if they are intended for schools and/or parks.

ii.    When a property is 20 acres or larger and a majority of it includes an existing development (e.g., golf course), a community master plan will not be required unless there are two land division applications submitted of the parent property within a five-year period. A community master plan will be required to be processed prior to submitting the second land division application during the five-year period.

iii.    The City determines that the master plan category is an institutional master plan or employment master plan.

iv.    The property is part of a special planned district in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

v.    The property is part of a master plan or planned unit development approved prior to April 14, 2017, and remains in effect or has initiated the use according to BDC 4.1.1315.

C.    Review Process.

1.    Needed Housing. If the community master plan includes needed housing as defined by State statutes, the written narrative submitted with the community master plan application must clearly state whether the applicant is electing to use a process with clear and objective standards (minor master plan) or is electing to use a deviation process with changes proposed to one or more of the Bend Development Code standards and/or zoning district requirements and/or with changes proposed to the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map designations and/or zoning (major master plan).

2.    Minor Community Master Plans. Minor community master plans are processed as follows:

a.    Step 1. The approval of a minor community master plan (Type II process).

b.    Step 2. Upon approval of the minor community master plan, and prior to the commencement of Step 3, the applicant must submit a final minor community master plan to the City in an electronic format specified by the City. The final minor community master plan must depict the proposal as approved and must incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision.

c.    Step 3. The approval of a land division(s) and/or Site Plan Review application(s) (Type II process).

3.    Major Community Master Plans. Major community master plans are processed as follows:

a.    Step 1. The Planning Commission makes a recommendation to the City Council on an application for a major community master plan. The text of a major community master plan must be included in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans, in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. The City Council is the final review authority on such applications (Type III process).

b.    Step 2. Upon approval of the major community master plan, and prior to the commencement of Step 3, the applicant must submit a final major community master plan to the City in an electronic format specified by the City. The final major community master plan must depict the proposal as approved and must incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision. The major community master plan denotation for the subject site will be shown on the Zoning Map. The denotation on the Zoning Map may be added or removed administratively by staff upon approval or withdrawal of the major community master plan.

c.    Step 3. The approval of a land division(s) and/or site plan review application(s) (Type II process).

D.    Community Master Plan Approval Criteria.

1.    Minor or Major Community Master Plan. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a proposed minor or major community master plan application based on meeting all of the following criteria:

a.    The community master plan complies with subsection (E) of this section, Standards and Regulations.

b.    Existing water and sewer facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposed development in compliance with the Collection Systems Master Plan and the Water System Master Plan, latest editions, or adequate facilities will be installed prior to occupancy or use.

c.    The community master plan complies with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis.

2.    Minor Community Master Plan. In addition to the approval criteria in subsection (D)(1) of this section the City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a proposed minor community master plan application based on meeting all of the following criteria:

a.    The community master plan land uses and densities are consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map designations.

b.    The applicant has demonstrated how the standards and regulations contained in BDC Title 2, Land Use Districts, and BDC Title 3, Design Standards, can be met through future site plan review or land division applications.

3.    Major Community Master Plan. In addition to the approval criteria in subsection (D)(1) of this section the City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a proposed major community master plan application based on meeting all of the following criteria:

a.    The community master plan land uses and densities must be consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map designations. If rearranging the plan designation locations and/or zoning is proposed as part of the master plan application, the master plan must retain the same total area of all plan designations on the subject site or within one percent of the same total acreage and maintain the density/housing numbers consistent with the allocations prescribed by the existing plan designations except as provided in subsection (E)(3) of this section. Any other changes to the plan designations and density/housing numbers, or other changes to the Comprehensive Plan Map designations, require a Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map amendment to be processed concurrently in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. 

b.    The applicant has demonstrated that the standards and zoning district requirements contained in BDC Title 2, Land Use Districts, and BDC Title 3, Design Standards, are capable of being met during site plan or land division review, except as proposed to be modified by the applicant as part of a major community master plan. Where the applicant has proposed deviations to the above standards and/or zoning district requirements, the applicant has demonstrated:

i.    That granting a deviation to the BDC standards and/or zoning district requirements will equally or better meet the purpose of the regulation proposed to be modified; or

ii.    That granting a deviation to the BDC standards and/or zoning district requirements is necessary due to topographical constraints or other unique characteristics of the property or specific development type proposed by the master plan; and

iii.    That any impacts resulting from the deviation are mitigated to the extent reasonably practical.

c.    In lieu of the approval criteria in BDC 4.6.300, Quasi-Judicial Amendments, major community master plan applications that do not propose a Bend Comprehensive Plan amendment must demonstrate compliance with the following:

i.    Approval of the request is consistent with the relevant Statewide planning goals that are designated by the Planning Director or designee; and

ii.    Approval of the request is consistent with only the relevant policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan Chapter 11, Growth Management, that are designated by the Planning Director or designee.

d.    If the major community master plan proposal contains a zone change request to bring the zoning into compliance with the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation, the zone change is subject to the approval criteria of BDC 4.6.300(C).

e.    If the major community master plan proposal contains a proposed amendment to the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map or text, the amendment is subject to the approval criteria of BDC 4.6.300(B).

E.    Standards and Regulations. Minor and major community master plans must comply with the following standards:

1.    Access to Commercial Goods and Services. Access to commercial goods and services must be provided in compliance with the following standards:

a.    The community master plan must have access to commercial goods and services by walking or biking a distance not greater than a one-half mile radius measured from all points along the perimeter of the master plan boundary to any land planned, zoned or developed for one or more such services. Such commercial uses may be provided within nearby neighborhoods or nonresidential districts as long as the minimum distance standard is met. In satisfying such distance standard, commercial goods and services that are not accessible by walking or biking because of physical or geographic barriers (e.g., rivers, Bend Parkway, canals, and railways) may not be used. Except for minor community master plans that are proposing needed housing as defined by state statutes, the Review Authority may find that this provision is met when the commercial uses are located further away than one-half mile but the purpose and intent of providing reasonable access to the commercial uses has been met.

2.    Multimodal Connections. Multimodal connections must be provided on site in compliance with the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP) and the Bend Parks and Recreation District Parks, Recreation, and Green Spaces Comprehensive Plan, latest editions, and the existing and planned trail systems adjacent to the community master plan must be continued through the entire community master plan.

3.    Housing Density and Mix. Community master plans 20 acres or larger must provide a mix of housing types and achieve minimum housing densities in conformance with the standards of subsections (E)(3)(a) and (b) of this section. To the extent that the Bend Comprehensive Plan Chapter 11, Growth Management, proposes a different mix of housing and/or density standards in the specific expansion area policies, then those policies apply.

a.    Density Calculations and Exceptions. Minimum and maximum densities must be calculated in conformance with BDC 2.1.600(C), except as follows:

i.    Public and Institutional Uses and Miscellaneous Uses in Opportunity Areas. In opportunity areas as shown in the Bend Comprehensive Plan Figure 11-1, a maximum of 20 acres of residential designated land proposed for public and institutional uses and miscellaneous uses (BDC Table 2.1.200) may be excluded from the density calculation and housing mix. The density for the 20 acres must be taken from the residential designation with the lowest maximum density standard in the opportunity area. The master plan must provide the density and housing mix for the residential designated property in excess of 20 acres. No more than 20 acres may be exempted from the density and housing mix in an opportunity area;

ii.    Open Space. Open space in compliance with subsection (E)(4) of this section may be excluded from the applicable density calculation; and

iii.    Comprehensive Plan Designations. Land designated as Commercial, Mixed-Use, Industrial and Public Facilities may be excluded from the applicable density calculation.

b.    Minimum standards are as follows:

i.    RL Comprehensive Plan Designation. At least 50 percent of the maximum gross density of the RL Comprehensive Plan designation, with two- and three-family housing, attached single-family townhomes and/or multifamily residential housing units comprising at least 10 percent of total housing units.

ii.    RS Comprehensive Plan Designation. At least 70 percent of the maximum gross density of the RS Comprehensive Plan designation, with two- and three-family housing, attached single-family townhomes, and/or multifamily residential housing units comprising at least 10 percent of total housing units.

iii.    RM Comprehensive Plan Designation. At least 60 percent of the maximum gross density of the RM Comprehensive Plan designation, with two- and three-family housing, attached single-family townhomes, and/or multifamily residential housing units comprising at least 67 percent of total housing units.

iv.    RH Comprehensive Plan Designation. The minimum density of the RH Comprehensive Plan designation applies. Single-family detached housing is not permitted in the RH Zone.

v.    Density and Housing Mix Transfers.

(A)    Density and housing mix transfers are permitted within the major community master plan boundary when the major master plan is 20 acres or larger; however, the density and housing mix standards of this section shall not be reduced through the major community master plan process.

(B)    Density and housing mix transfers are permitted for major master plans that are 20 acres or larger in an opportunity area as follows:

(1)    The density and housing mix required for RS, RM and RH plan designated areas may be transferred within the opportunity area; and

(2)    The density and housing mix required for RS plan designated areas may be transferred within a walking or biking distance not greater than one mile from the boundary of the opportunity area on existing travel routes (multimodal street or designated multi-use pathway) or any planned travel route shown within the Transportation System Plan. If the density and housing mix for the RS plan designation is transferred to a property not contemplated for residential development under the Comprehensive Plan (i.e., publicly owned properties with a residential plan designation that were not considered available for residential development under the Buildable Lands Inventory), then the receiving property need only provide the number of housing units transferred or the minimum RS density standards, whichever is greater.

(a)    As a condition to approval of any density and housing mix transfer to one or more receiving properties pursuant to this section, the owner(s) of the receiving property(ies) must enter into a written agreement in a form acceptable to the City that will be binding upon the parties to the agreement and all successors in interest and that will run with the land. The agreement must specify the number of dwelling units and housing mix for the RS plan designated areas to be transferred (the stated density may not exceed the maximum permitted density of the Comprehensive Plan designation of the receiving property(ies)). After endorsement of the agreement by the City, the fully executed agreement must be recorded in the Deschutes County Official Records. The agreement’s execution and recordation must take place prior to final master plan approval for the transferring property.

4.    The community master plan must contain a minimum of 10 percent of the gross area as public or private open space such as parks, pavilions, squares and plazas, multi-use paths within a minimum 20-foot wide corridor, areas of special interest, tree preservation areas, or public and private recreational facilities and must comply with the following:

a.    The open space area must be shown on the conceptual site plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument.

b.    The open space must be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

i.    By dedication to the Park District or City as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the Park District or City must be acceptable with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition, and budgetary and maintenance abilities; or

ii.    By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, owners association or other legal entity. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property tax payment, etc.) acceptable to the City. Private open space must be located in a tract and include an open space easement.

c.    Adequate guarantee must be provided to ensure permanent retention of common open space and recreation areas which may be required as conditions of approval.

F.    Duration of Approval.

1.    An approved community master plan will remain valid indefinitely unless withdrawn by all owner(s) of property within the community master plan. The City may deny withdrawal when a switch to otherwise applicable standards would not be in the public interest because of sufficient development under the community master plan. Standards and regulations identified in the approved community master plan will control all subsequent site development as long as the approved community master plan is valid. If alternative standards and regulations are not specifically identified in the approved community master plan, the applicable City standard at the time any development application is submitted will apply.

2.    The duration of approval for a community master plan must coincide with the timeline outlined in the approved phasing plan and in accordance with the time frames studied in the transportation analysis and water and sewer capacity analysis for the community master plan. Site plan review or land division applications submitted consistent with or earlier than as provided in an approved phasing plan will not require an updated transportation analysis and water and sewer capacity analysis as part of the development application. Infrastructure capacity may be reserved for the community master plan site for up to 15 years or as specified in an approved phasing plan.

3.    The time period set forth in this subsection (F) will be tolled upon filing of an appeal to LUBA and must not begin to run until the date that the appellate body has issued a final order. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.5.300 Institutional Master Plan.

A.    Purpose. The institutional master plan is intended to facilitate an efficient and flexible review process for development of institutions which control large areas of land within the City, contain a greater intensity of development than surrounding areas, are a source of substantial employment, and are usually located adjacent to residential neighborhoods. An institutional master plan is intended to permit flexibility, while providing a level of understanding by the community and neighboring properties about the future growth of the institution.

B.    Applicability.

1.    Institutional master plans in conformance with this section may be submitted for any property or combination of properties three acres or larger in size.

2.    Unless exempted below, institutional master plans in conformance with this section are required for any property or combination of adjacent properties under common ownership at the date of adoption of this code for the following:

a.    Institutions of higher education: 10 acres or larger.

b.    All other institutions: 20 acres or larger.

3.    Exemptions. Unless the applicant elects to apply for an institutional master plan, the following are exempt:

a.    The property is part of a special planned district in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

b.    Cemeteries and public maintenance facilities in existence prior to 2016.

c.    The City determines that the master plan category is a community master plan or employment master plan.

C.    Review Process.

1.    Minor Institutional Master Plans. Minor institutional master plans are processed as follows:

a.    Step 1. The approval of a minor institutional master plan (Type II process).

b.    Step 2. Upon approval of the minor institutional master plan, and prior to the commencement of Step 3, the applicant must submit a final minor institutional master plan to the City in an electronic format specified by the City. The final minor institutional master plan must depict the proposal as approved and must incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision.

c.    Step 3. The approval of a land division(s) and/or site plan review application(s) (Type II process).

2.    Major Institutional Master Plans. Major institutional master plans are processed as follows:

a.    Step 1. The Planning Commission makes a recommendation to the City Council on an application for a major institutional master plan. The text of a major institutional master plan must be included in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans, in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. The City Council is the final review authority on such applications (Type III process).

b.    Step 2. Upon approval of the major institutional master plan, and prior to the commencement of Step 3, the applicant must submit a final major institutional master plan to the City in an electronic format specified by the City. The final major institutional master plan must depict the proposal as approved and must incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision. The major institutional master plan denotation for the subject site will be shown on the Zoning Map. The denotation on the Zoning Map may be added or removed administratively by staff upon approval or withdrawal of the major institutional master plan.

c.    Step 3. The approval of a land division(s) and/or site plan review application(s) (Type II process).

D.    Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements of BDC 4.5.100(E), the following information must be submitted as deemed applicable by the Development Services Director based on the size, scale, and complexity of the development:

1.    Narrative that defines and summarizes the organizational mission and objectives. The statement must describe the projective population that will be served by the institution including size and distinctive cohorts (e.g., faculty, staff, clients, patients, and students) and any anticipated changes in the size or composition of that population associated with different phases of development. It must also specify any services or facilities available to the general public.

2.    Summary of the facilities related to the proposed institutional master plan.

3.    Description of the following:

a.    General location of all existing and proposed uses and on-site circulation plans;

b.    Approximate floor area of proposed structures;

c.    Approximate height of proposed structures;

d.    Approximate number and general location of parking spaces on site and those off site in compliance with BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking, and BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan;

e.    A description of on-site housing and any dedicated off-site housing facilities to be developed as part of the institutional master plan, including the total number of users that may be accommodated in such facilities; and

f.    Public safety.

4.    Design guidelines for new and renovated buildings and structures including materials, height, bulk, massing, and colors.

5.    Open space must be shown on the conceptual site plan and may include parks, pavilions, multi-use paths within a minimum 20-foot wide corridor, squares and plazas, areas of special interest, tree preservation areas, and recreational facilities.

E.    Approval Criteria. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed institutional master plan application based on meeting all of the following criteria:

1.    The proposed land uses within the institutional master plan must be consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map designations. If rearranging the plan designation locations and/or zoning are proposed as part of the major institutional master plan application, the major institutional master plan must retain the same total area of all plan designations on the subject site or within one percent of the same total acreage consistent with the allocations prescribed by the existing plan designations. Any other changes to the Comprehensive Plan Map designations require a Comprehensive Plan and zoning map amendment to be processed concurrently in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. 

2.    The applicant has demonstrated that the standards and zoning district requirements contained in BDC Title 2, Land Use Districts, and BDC Title 3, Design Standards, are capable of being met during site plan or land division review, except as proposed to be modified by the applicant as part of a major institutional master plan. Where the applicant has proposed deviations to the above standards and/or zoning district requirements as part of a major institutional master plan, the applicant has demonstrated:

a.    That granting a deviation to the BDC standards and/or zoning district requirements will equally or better meet the purpose of the regulation proposed to be modified; or

b.    That granting a deviation to the BDC standards and/or zoning district requirements is necessary due to topographical constraints or other unique characteristics of the property or specific development type proposed by the master plan; and

c.    That any impacts resulting from the deviation are mitigated to the extent reasonably practical.

3.    The institutional master plan complies with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis, and meets all the approval criteria in BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan.

4.    Existing water and sewer facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposed development in compliance with the Collection Systems Master Plan and the Water System Master Plan, latest editions, or adequate facilities will be installed prior to occupancy or use.

5.    The institutional master plan provides multimodal connections on site in compliance with the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP) and the Bend Parks and Recreation District Parks, Recreation, and Green Spaces Comprehensive Plan, latest editions, and existing and planned trail systems adjacent to the institutional master plan are continued through the entire institutional master plan.

6.    The institutional master plan must provide and maintain a minimum of 10 percent of the gross area as open space in compliance with subsection (D)(5) of this section.

7.    The institutional master plan, when located in an opportunity area and includes residential designated land, complies with the density and housing mix in BDC 4.5.200(E)(3).

8.    In lieu of the approval criteria in BDC 4.6.300, Quasi-Judicial Amendments, major institutional master plan applications that do not propose a Bend Comprehensive Plan amendment must demonstrate compliance with the following:

a.    Approval of the request is consistent with the relevant Statewide planning goals that are designated by the Planning Director or designee; and

b.    Approval of the request is consistent with only the relevant policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan Chapter 11, Growth Management, that are designated by the Planning Director or designee.

9.    If the major institutional master plan proposal contains a zone change request to bring the zoning into compliance with the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation, the zone change is subject to the approval criteria of BDC 4.6.300(C).

10.    If the major institutional master plan proposal contains a proposed amendment to the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map or text, the amendment is subject to the approval criteria of BDC 4.6.300(B).

F.    Periodic Institutional Master Plan Status Report. Every five years or sooner from the date of the institutional master plan approval, the institution must submit an update to the Planning Division. This update must provide a description of all projects that: (1) have been completed since the most recent update; (2) are ongoing, including a description of the status and estimated timetables for completion of such projects; (3) are scheduled to begin in the upcoming 24 months, including estimated timetables for the commencement, progress, and completion of such projects; and (4) are no longer being considered by the institution. In addition, the institution must submit an updated site plan. The update will be presented to the Planning Commission, but will not require a public hearing. The status report will no longer be required if the institutional master plan is built out and additional development is not contemplated.

G.    Duration of Approval.

1.    An approved institutional master plan will remain valid indefinitely unless withdrawn by all owner(s) of property within the institutional master plan. The City may deny withdrawal when a switch to otherwise applicable standards would not be in the public interest because of sufficient development under the institutional master plan. Standards and regulations identified in the approved institutional master plan will control all subsequent site development as long as the approved institutional master plan is valid. If alternative standards and regulations are not specifically identified in the approved institutional master plan, the applicable City standard at the time any development application is submitted will apply.

2.    The duration of approval for an institutional master plan must coincide with the timeline outlined in the approved phasing plan and in accordance with the time frames studied in the transportation analysis and water and sewer capacity analysis for the institutional master plan. Site plan review or land division applications submitted consistent with or earlier than as provided in an approved phasing plan will not require an updated transportation analysis and water and sewer capacity analysis as part of the development application. Infrastructure capacity may be reserved for the institutional master plan site for up to 15 years or as specified in an approved phasing plan.

3.    The time period set forth in this subsection (G) will be tolled upon filing of an appeal to LUBA and must not begin to run until the date that the appellate body has issued a final order. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.5.400 Employment Master Plans.

A.    Purpose. The employment master plan is intended to provide a method by which the City may permit a variety of commercial and/or industrial development types, designs or arrangements that may not be permissible under traditional zoning regulations yet still provide for the ability to plan for full build-out of large employment centers. The employment master plan will provide a mechanism to achieve development which will contribute to the diversification of the City’s economic base.

B.    Applicability.

1.    Employment master plans in conformance with this section may be submitted for any property or combination of properties three acres or larger in size.

2.    Employment master plans in conformance with this section are required for any property or combination of adjacent properties under common ownership totaling 20 acres or larger at the date of adoption of this code, unless exempted below.

3.    Exemptions. Unless the applicant elects to apply for an employment master plan, the following are exempt:

a.    The property is part of a special planned district in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans.

b.    The City determines that the master plan category is a community master plan or institutional master plan.

C.    Review Process.

1.    Minor Employment Master Plans. Minor employment master plans are processed as follows:

a.    Step 1. The approval of a minor employment master plan (Type II process).

b.    Step 2. Upon approval of the minor employment master plan, and prior to the commencement of Step 3, the applicant must submit a final minor employment master plan to the City in an electronic format specified by the City. The final minor employment master plan must depict the proposal as approved and must incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision.

c.    Step 3. The approval of a land division(s) and/or site plan review application(s) (Type II process).

2.    Major Employment Master Plans. Major employment master plans are processed as follows:

a.    Step 1. The Planning Commission makes a recommendation to the City Council on an application for major employment master plan. The text of a major employment master plan must be included in BDC Chapter 2.7, Special Planned Districts, Refinement Plans, Area Plans and Master Plans, in compliance with BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. The City Council is the final review authority on such applications (Type III process).

b.    Step 2. Upon approval of the major employment master plan, and prior to the commencement of Step 3, the applicant must submit a final major employment master plan to the City in an electronic format specified by the City. The final major employment master plan must depict the proposal as approved and must incorporate all conditions of approval contained in the decision. The major employment master plan denotation for the subject site will be shown on the Zoning Map. The denotation on the Zoning Map may be added or removed administratively by staff upon approval or withdrawal of the major employment master plan.

c.    Step 3. The approval of a land division(s) and/or site plan review application(s) (Type II process).

D.    Approval Criteria. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed employment master plan application based on meeting all of the following criteria:

1.    The proposed land uses within the employment master plan must be consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map designations. If rearranging the plan designation locations and/or zoning are proposed as part of a major employment master plan application, the major employment master plan must retain the same total area of all plan designations on the subject site or within one percent of the same total acreage consistent with the allocations prescribed by the existing plan designations. Any other changes to the Comprehensive Plan Map designations require a Comprehensive Plan and zoning map amendment to be processed concurrently in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.6, Land Use District Map and Text Amendments. 

2.    The applicant has demonstrated that the standards and zoning district requirements contained in BDC Title 2, Land Use Districts, and BDC Title 3, Design Standards, are capable of being met during site plan or land division review, except as proposed to be modified by the applicant as part of a major employment master plan. Where the applicant has proposed deviations to the above standards and/or zoning district requirements as part of a major employment master plan, the applicant has demonstrated:

a.    That granting a deviation to the BDC standards and/or zoning district requirements will equally or better meet the purpose of the regulation proposed to be modified; or

b.    That granting a deviation to the BDC standards and/or zoning district requirements is necessary due to topographical constraints or other unique characteristics of the property or specific development type proposed by the master plan; and

c.    That any impacts resulting from the deviation are mitigated to the extent reasonably practical.

3.    Existing water and sewer facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposed development in compliance with the Collection Systems Master Plan and the Water System Master Plan, latest editions, or adequate facilities will be installed prior to occupancy or use.

4.    The proposal complies with BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis, and meets all the approval criteria in BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan.

5.    The employment master plan provides multimodal connections on site in compliance with the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP) and the Bend Parks and Recreation District Parks, Recreation, and Green Spaces Comprehensive Plan, latest editions, and existing and planned trail systems adjacent to the employment master plan are continued through the entire employment master plan.

6.    The employment master plan, when located in an opportunity area and includes residential designated land, complies with the density and housing mix in BDC 4.5.200(E)(3).

7.    In lieu of the approval criteria in BDC 4.6.300, Quasi-Judicial Amendments, major employment master plan applications that do not propose a Bend Comprehensive Plan amendment must demonstrate compliance with the following:

a.    Approval of the request is consistent with the relevant Statewide planning goals that are designated by the Planning Director or designee; and

b.    Approval of the request is consistent with only the relevant policies of the Bend Comprehensive Plan Chapter 11, Growth Management, that are designated by the Planning Director or designee.

8.    If the major employment master plan proposal contains a zone change request to bring the zoning into compliance with the Bend Comprehensive Plan designation, the zone change is subject to the approval criteria of BDC 4.6.300(C).

9.    If the major employment master plan proposal contains a proposed amendment to the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map or text, the amendment is subject to the approval criteria of BDC 4.6.300(B).

E.    Duration of Approval.

1.    An approved employment master plan will remain valid indefinitely unless withdrawn by all owner(s) of property within the employment master plan. The City may deny withdrawal when a switch to otherwise applicable standards would not be in the public interest because of sufficient development under the employment master plan. Standards and regulations identified in the approved employment master plan will control all subsequent site development as long as the approved employment master plan is valid. If alternative standards and regulations are not specifically identified in the approved employment master plan, the applicable City standard at the time any development application is submitted will apply.

2.    The duration of approval for an employment master plan must coincide with the timeline outlined in the approved phasing plan and in accordance with the time frames studied in the transportation analysis and water and sewer capacity analysis for the employment master plan. Site plan review or land division applications submitted consistent with or earlier than as provided in an approved phasing plan will not require an updated transportation analysis and water and sewer capacity analysis as part of the development application. Infrastructure capacity may be reserved for the employment master plan site for up to 15 years or as specified in an approved phasing plan.

3.    The time period set forth in this subsection (E) will be tolled upon filing of an appeal to LUBA and must not begin to run until the date that the appellate body has issued a final order. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.5.500 Cottage Housing Development.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:

1.    Provide a housing type that responds to differing household sizes and ages (e.g., retirees, small families, single-person households), and offers opportunities for affordability;

2.    Provide opportunities for small, single-family dwellings in several residential zoning districts by creating special land division and on-site development regulations that allow this type of use;

3.    Encourage creation of usable open space for residents of the development through flexibility in density and development standards;

4.    Support growth management through efficient use of urban residential land; and

5.    Provide regulations to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses.

B.    Applicability. Cottage housing developments are allowed in the following districts: Standard Density Residential (RS), Medium Density Residential (RM) and Medium-10 Residential (RM-10). Where the regulations of this section are not specific, the standards of the relevant zoning district prevail.

The procedures and criteria of BDC Chapter 4.3 apply to cottage housing subdivisions. If a cottage housing development is proposed with multiple units on an individual lot, site plan and design review apply in accordance with the procedures of BDC Chapter 4.2. All cottage housing developments are reviewed through a Type II process.

C.    Density.

1.    Minimum Density. The minimum density for CHDs is as follows:

a.    RS and RM-10 Districts: four dwelling units per gross acre.

b.    RM District: 12 dwelling units per gross acre.

2.    Maximum Density. The maximum density must not exceed that of the relevant zoning district.

3.    Maximum Density Calculation. RS, RM-10 and RM density calculation is based on the following floor area: 

a.    Dwelling units 600 square feet or smaller: 0.25 of a dwelling unit.

b.    Dwelling units 601 to 1,200 square feet: 0.50 of a dwelling unit.

4.    Exception to Density Maximums. When affordable housing is proposed the provisions of BDC 2.1.600(D) may be applied.

D.    Development Area. Cottage housing developments must contain a minimum of four and a maximum of 12 cottages arranged in a cluster. A cottage housing development may contain more than one cluster.

E.    Existing Uses. On a site to be used for a CHD, existing detached single-family dwellings, which may become nonconforming with respect to the standards of this section, are permitted to remain, but the extent of the nonconformity may not be increased. The nonconforming dwelling units must be included in the maximum permitted cottage density.

F.    Lot Coverage and Floor Area.

1.    There is no maximum lot coverage for cottage housing developments.

2.    There is no minimum lot size for cottage housing developments.

3.    The maximum floor area per dwelling unit is 1,200 square feet. Garages are not included in the calculation of the total floor area. The maximum floor area is defined as the area included within the surrounding walls of a cottage building on all levels.

G.    Setbacks and Building Separation. Because CHDs are a unique type of development, setbacks are measured differently than for a traditional development. The exterior boundary of the CHD development area is considered to be the edge of the development area for the purposes of calculating perimeter setbacks from surrounding properties. For buildings on lots within the CHD, the separation between other on-site buildings is measured, not the distances to interior property lines, unless setbacks from property lines are necessary to meet the building code (interior setbacks).

1.    Perimeter Setbacks.

a.    The minimum front setback is 10 feet. 

b.    The minimum setback from all other exterior boundary property lines is five feet. 

2.    Interior Building Separation. 

a.    There must be a minimum separation of six feet between the eaves of the cottages. On cottage sides with a main entrance, the minimum separation is 10 feet. Structures other than cottages must meet minimum building code setback requirements.

H.    Required Common Open Space. Common open space is intended to be an amenity shared by all residents of the cottage housing development.

1.    Provide a centrally located open space area for the cottage housing development and have cottages abutting at least two sides.

2.    Contain a minimum of 400 square feet per cottage.

3.    At least 50 percent of the cottages must abut a common open space.

4.    Each cottage must be connected to the common open space by a pedestrian pathway.

5.    Areas such as utility vaults, perimeter setbacks and common parking areas and driveways are not counted in the common open space requirements.

6.    Common open space may contain an ASI or drainage swale area, provided the area is usable open space.

7.    Required common open space must be provided at ground level in a contiguous commonly owned tract with an easement indicating that it benefits all lots in the CHD.

8.    Common open space must have a minimum average width of 20 feet.

9.    The common open space areas must be constructed and landscaped prior to filing a final plat or, in the case of a site plan, construction and landscaping will be tied to final occupancy of the first cottage.

10.    The common open space must be recorded as a perpetual open space to benefit all residents of the cottage housing development prior to filing a final plat or prior to obtaining a building permit.

I.    Required Private Open Space. Private open space adjacent to each cottage is intended for the exclusive use by the cottage resident.

1.    Provide a total of 400 square feet of private open space that includes a minimum of 200 square feet of contiguous usable open space adjacent to each cottage with no dimension less than 10 feet. Covered entries and uncovered patios and decks required in subsection (J)(2) of this section are not included in the private open space calculation.

J.    Development Standards.

1.    At least 50 percent of the cottages must be oriented around and have their main entrance facing the common open space.

2.    Each cottage must include a covered entry and/or an uncovered patio or deck. Cottages that abut the common open space must orient the covered entry and/or uncovered patio or deck to the common open space. Conformance with these standards are achieved when each cottage includes one of the following: 

a.    A covered entry of at least 80 square feet with a minimum dimension of six feet on any side;

b.    An uncovered patio or deck of at least 80 square feet with a minimum dimension of six feet on any side. When the cottage abuts the common open space, a landscape buffer no less than three feet in width must be provided between the uncovered patio or deck and the common open space. The buffer must include a fence, wall or similar structure not to exceed three and one-half feet in height, except decorative arbors, gates, and similar features which must not exceed six feet in length; or

c.    A combination of subsections (J)(2)(a) and (b) of this section that is at least 80 square feet with a minimum dimension of six feet on any side of the covered entry and uncovered patio or deck.

3.    Pedestrian pathways in compliance with BDC 3.1.300(B) must be included to provide for movement of residents and guests from parking areas to homes and other amenities. These pathways must be shown on the subdivision tentative plan or site plan and be part of the common areas/tracts.

4.    Individual detached garages cannot exceed 450 square feet of floor area and no more than 18 feet in height. Only one garage is allowed per cottage.

5.    Accessory dwelling units are not permitted in cottage housing developments (CHDs).

6.    Accessory structures for common usage are allowed in the common open space areas. Other accessory structures (except garages) are prohibited.

K.    Parking. Parking for CHDs must be located on the CHD property and identified on the tentative subdivision plan and/or site plan. On-site parking must meet the following standards:

1.    Parking may be located within an enclosed garage, carport or unenclosed parking space.

2.    Parking may be located in common tracts if intended to be shared by the entire CHD in groups of not more than five adjoining spaces separated by at least four feet of landscaping. An enclosed garage or carport intended to be shared by the entire CHD must not exceed 1,200 square feet in size.

3.    Parking must not be located in the perimeter setbacks and must be screened from public streets and adjacent residential uses by a landscape buffer containing landscaping and/or architectural screening. The width of the landscape buffer is the same width as the perimeter setbacks. 

4.    Parking is allowed between or adjacent to structures only when it is located toward the rear of the cottage and is served by an alley or private driveway.

5.    Off-street parking requirements are calculated based on the number of bedrooms per cottage unit:

One bedroom: Minimum one space.

Two bedrooms: Minimum 1.5 spaces.

Three or more bedrooms: Minimum two spaces.

6.    All parking must provide a minimum of 24 feet for maneuvering and backing movements from garages, carports and/or parking areas.

L.    Frontage Requirements. Individual cottage lots created as part of a CHD subdivision are not required to have frontage on a public or private street. However, the development site must have the minimum frontage on a public or private street as required by the underlying zone.

M.    Public Utilities. All lots must be served by individual services from a private or public distribution main. Any deviations from City standards need to be approved by the City Engineer. All individual service lines that cross property must be placed in an easement.

N.    Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. Subsequent to final plat approval but prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in a cottage housing development, set of conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) for the cottage housing development must be reviewed and, if approved by the City, recorded with Deschutes County. The CC&Rs run with the land and may be removed or modified only upon approval of the City of Bend. The CC&Rs must create a homeowners’ association that will provide for maintenance of all common areas in the cottage housing development. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2241, 2015. Formerly 4.5.600]




Chapter 4.6 LAND USE DISTRICT MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS

Sections:

4.6.100    Purpose.

4.6.200    Legislative Amendments.

4.6.300    Quasi-Judicial Amendments.

4.6.400    Intent to Rezone.

4.6.500    Record of Amendments.

4.6.600    Transportation Planning Rule Compliance.


4.6.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code, the Bend Comprehensive Plan, the Bend Comprehensive Plan Map and the Land Use District Map. These will be referred to as “map and text amendments.” Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.6.200 Legislative Amendments.

A.    Applicability, Procedure and Authority. Legislative amendments generally involve broad public policy decisions that apply to other than an individual property owner. These include, without limitation, amendments to the text of the Comprehensive Plan and map, Development Code and changes in the Zoning Map not directed at a small number of properties. They are reviewed using the Type IV procedure in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, and shall conform to BDC 4.6.600, Transportation Planning Rule Compliance. A legislative amendment may be approved or denied.

B.    Criteria for Legislative Amendments. The applicant shall submit a written narrative which explains how the approval criteria will be met. A recommendation or a decision to approve or to deny an application for a legislative amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria:

1.    The request is consistent with the applicable State land use law;

2.    The request is consistent with the applicable Bend Comprehensive Plan goals and policies;

3.    The applicant can demonstrate a public need or benefit for the proposed amendment. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.6.300 Quasi-Judicial Amendments.

A.    Applicability, Procedure and Authority. Quasi-judicial amendments generally refer to a plan amendment or zone change affecting a single or limited group of properties and that involves the application of existing policy to a specific factual setting. Quasi-judicial amendments shall follow the Type III procedure, as governed by BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, using the standards of approval in subsection (B) and/or (C) of this section, as applicable. Based on the applicant’s ability to satisfy the approval criteria, the applicant may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied.

B.    Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Comprehensive Plan Map Amendments. The applicant shall submit a written narrative which explains how the approval criteria will be met. A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria:

1.    Approval of the request is consistent with the relevant Statewide Planning Goals that are designated by the Planning Director or designee;

2.    Approval of the request is consistent with the relevant policies of the Comprehensive Plan that are designated by the Planning Director or designee;

3.    The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the property;

4.    Evidence of change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or inconsistency in the Comprehensive Plan or Land Use District Map regarding the property that is the subject of the application; and

5.    Approval of the request is consistent with the provisions of BDC 4.6.600, Transportation Planning Rule Compliance.

C.    Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Zone Changes. The applicant must submit a written narrative which explains how the approval criteria will be met. A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial zone change must be based on meeting both of the following criteria:

1.    The amendment will bring the zone map into conformance with the Comprehensive Plan map.

2.    The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the property. [Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.6.400 Intent to Rezone.

A.    If the City Council determines that the public health and welfare and convenience will best be served by a proposed change of the zone, the City Council may indicate its general approval in principle of the proposed rezoning by the adoption of a “Resolution of Intent to Rezone.” This resolution shall include any conditions, stipulations, or limitations, which the City Council may feel necessary to require in the public interest as a prerequisite to final action, including those provisions which the City Council may feel necessary to prevent speculative holding of the property after rezoning. The fulfillment of all conditions, stipulations and limitations contained in said resolution, on the part of the applicant, shall make such a resolution a binding commitment on the City Council. Such a resolution shall not be used to justify spot zoning, nor to create unauthorized zoning categories by excluding uses otherwise permitted in the proposed zoning.

1.    Content of Site Plan. Where a site plan is required pursuant to this code, it shall include the location of existing and proposed buildings, structures, accesses, off-street parking, loading spaces and landscaping; topography, existing and proposed; mechanical roof facilities, architectural perspective, layout and all elevations drawn to scale including location, area and design of signs and all landscaping.

2.    Resolution of Intent Binding. The fulfillment of all conditions, stipulations and limitations contained in the resolution of intent, on the part of the applicant, shall make the resolution binding on the City Council. Upon compliance with the resolution by the applicant, the City Council shall by ordinance effect such reclassification.

3.    Resolution of Intent Void Upon Failure to Comply. The failure of the applicant to substantially meet any conditions, stipulations or limitations contained in a resolution of intent, including the time limit placed in the resolution, shall render said resolution null and void, unless an extension is granted by the City Commission upon recommendation of the Planning Commission. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.6.500 Record of Amendments.

The City Recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this code and the Land Use Districts Map in a format convenient for public use. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


4.6.600 Transportation Planning Rule Compliance.

When a development application includes a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment or annexation, the proposal must be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 4.7 TRANSPORTATION ANALYSIS Revised 2/20

Sections:

4.7.100    Purpose. Revised 2/20

4.7.200    Applicability. Revised 2/20

4.7.300    Process. Revised 2/20

4.7.400    Transportation Facilities Report. Revised 2/20

4.7.500    Transportation Impact Analysis. Revised 2/20

4.7.600    Significant Impacts and Mitigation Measures. Revised 2/20

4.7.700    Proportionate Share Contribution. Revised 2/20

Prior legislation: Ord. NS-2016.


4.7.100 Purpose. Revised 2/20

The City will review proposed development to ensure the transportation system provides for:

•    Consistency with the Bend Comprehensive Plan.

•    Orderly construction of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan network of streets and walking, biking and transit facilities.

•    Safety and operations.

Therefore, the City requires applicants to complete an assessment of the transportation system within the study area of the proposed development for adequacy to serve the proposed development and to assess the impacts of the proposed development on the nearby transportation system. The City will use these assessments to ensure safety and operations of the transportation system are met for vehicle, biking, walking and transit and may impose conditions and mitigation requirements on the proposed development in proportion to its impacts. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2263, 2016]


4.7.200 Applicability. Revised 2/20

A.    Applicability. An applicant must submit a Transportation Facilities Report and follow the steps in BDC 4.3.700 when a proposed development involves one or more of the following applications:

1.    Subdivision application;

2.    Site Plan Review application, except for a triplex;

3.    Master Plan;

4.    Bend Comprehensive Plan map amendment;

5.    Other development proposals as determined by the City Engineer that do not include needed housing (e.g., commercial, industrial and institutional development proposals). [Ord. NS-2362, 2020]


4.7.300 Process. Revised 2/20

A.    The following steps describe the process for assessing the transportation system:

Step 1. The applicant must submit a Transportation Facilities Report in accordance to BDC 4.7.400. If the proposed development includes needed housing, the Transportation Facilities Report must clearly state whether the applicant is electing to use a review process for the transportation analysis with clear and objective standards (Clear and Objective Track) or is electing to allow the City Engineer to modify or waive the required information (Discretionary Track). All other proposed developments must use the Discretionary Track.

Step 2. The City Engineer will review and evaluate the Transportation Facilities Report in accordance to BDC 4.7.400(C) to determine if a Transportation Impact Analysis is required. If a Transportation Impact Analysis is not required, the applicant may submit a development application including the Transportation Facilities Report. If a Transportation Impact Analysis is required, Step 3 is triggered. Step 1 and Step 3 may be combined.

Step 3. If required, the applicant must submit a Transportation Impact Analysis in accordance with BDC 4.7.500.

Step 4. If no significant impacts are identified, the applicant may submit a development application including the Transportation Impact Analysis and must pay a proportionate share contribution required under BDC 4.7.700, Proportionate Share Contribution. Proposed developments with significant impacts will be required to propose mitigation in compliance with BDC 4.7.600, Significant Impacts and Mitigation Measures, as part of the development application and pay a proportionate share contribution required under BDC 4.7.700, Proportionate Share Contribution. If mitigation measures have been determined for any significant impacts, then the applicant must include the Transportation Impact Analysis with the mitigation measures identified as part of a development application. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2263, 2016]


4.7.400 Transportation Facilities Report. Revised 2/20

A.    Preparation. The Transportation Facilities Report must be prepared by a licensed professional engineer especially qualified in civil or traffic engineering by the State of Oregon. It is the responsibility of the engineer to provide enough detailed information for the City Engineer to determine if a Transportation Impact Analysis is required.

B.    Contents of the Transportation Facilities Report. The Transportation Facilities Report must contain the following information organized as follows:

1.    Description of the Proposed Development. Provide a description of the proposed development sufficient to understand the proposed development’s size, uses, operations, and interaction with the transportation system. At a minimum, the description must include both qualitative and quantitative descriptions, such as scale of the proposed development, day-to-day operations, deliveries, staffing, customer base (visitors, patients, employees, students, etc.), peak hours of operation, and identification of site access and on-site circulation needs.

2.    Trip Generation. Provide a trip generation description for the proposal with the following applicable information:

a.    Trip Credits and Vested Trips. If trip credits are being used from the existing on-site development or from a separate development approval, the trip generation description must provide supporting documentation of those trip credits, and documentation of the authority to use those trip credits for the proposed development.

b.    Base Trip Generation Rates.

i.    Clear and Objective Track. Average trip generation rates from the latest edition of the publication Trip Generation by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).

ii.    Discretionary Track. The City Engineer will determine which of the following to use for the base trip generation rates:

(A)    Average trip generation rates from the latest edition of the publication Trip Generation by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE);

(B)    Local data. The procedure for identifying local trip generation rates must comply with the guidelines for “Conducting a Trip Generation Study” in the ITE Trip Generation document; or

(C)    Other method approved by the City Engineer.

c.    Bend Comprehensive Plan Amendments. For Bend Comprehensive Plan amendment applications, the trip generation must represent a reasonable build-out scenario supported through citation of nearby existing site trip generation rates and densities in order to ensure reasonable trip generation comparisons. If the Bend Comprehensive Plan amendment is accompanied by a concurrent Site Plan Review application, the trip generation for the site plan review application may be used instead. The amendment must comply with the Transportation Planning Rule, OAR 660-012-0060.

d.    Pass-By Trips.

i.    Clear and Objective Track. Adjustments for pass-by trips will be allowed as provided in the ITE Trip Generation publication. Pass-by trips must always be accounted for in the site access analyses and sufficiently documented. Pass-by trip maps must be created for each pass-by route separately rather than a single combined map.

ii.    Discretionary Track. Adjustments for pass-by trips may be applied depending on the adjacent transportation facility and City Engineer approval. The published average pass-by rate will typically be allowed for those land use categories that are provided in the ITE Trip Generation publication. Pass-by trips must always be accounted for in the site access analyses and sufficiently documented. Pass-by trip maps must be created for each pass-by route separately rather than a single combined map. The City Engineer may approve another method to review adjustments for pass-by trips.

e.    Site Internalization/Trip Sharing. Applications processed as a Discretionary Track may demonstrate how the site reduces vehicle trips through site design, including parking supply, land use mixes, and densities that promote reduced rates based upon those elements. City review of the proposal based on guidance from the state’s Transportation Planning Rule may result in trip generation reductions.

3.    Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan. In compliance with BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, institutional and employment master plans must develop a TPDM plan. All other proposed development applications may choose to develop a TPDM plan. The proposed measures of the TPDM plan will be evaluated to determine trip generation reduction rates. See BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan.

4.    Major Intersections. From each access point (driveway or street) of the proposed development onto and along the transportation system for a distance of one mile, show the major intersections on a map.

5.    Trip Distribution. Provide a trip distribution description and map that contains the following information:

a.    Trip distribution assignments within the study area that replicate overall origin/destination patterns, including the major intersections identified in subsection (B)(4) of this section. Existing field count turning movement patterns are to be used as a guide for trip assignments. The assignment will be adjusted to reflect future funded transportation facilities, improvements or services that are authorized in the Transportation System Plan and for which funding is in the City’s approved Capital Improvements Program (CIP), the Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) or other approved funding plan. See BDC 4.7.500(B)(1) for the study area.

b.    Description of truck delivery routes, including over-dimensional loads if applicable, of travel to and from the site for a distance of one mile. The distance will be extended to identify freight routes for freight-intensive sites or those that generate over-dimensional loads.

6.    Transportation Facilities Evaluation. The report must evaluate and document the following for compliance with this code, the Transportation System Plan and the City of Bend Standards and Specifications:

a.    The existing transportation system infrastructure serving the site within the study area. The evaluation must include any future funded transportation system elements included in the City’s approved five-year Capital Improvement Program, Statewide Transportation Improvement Program or other approved funding plan. See BDC 4.7.500(B)(1) for the study area.

b.    The following right-of-way information along the frontage of the proposed development:

i.    Compliance with the required right-of-way width for the roadway classification.

ii.    Compliance with the required street widths.

iii.    Compliance with the required right-of-way or easement width for all trail and access corridors.

iv.    Compliance with the required street frontage elements including curbs, bike facilities, park strips, sidewalks, driveways and driveway aprons, as well as curb ramps. All applicable elements must be accessible per the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

c.    The following access information:

i.    Legal access and recorded easements for all driveway and access systems serving the site. For all driveways and new intersections created by the proposed development, intersection sight distance measurements must be provided for all movements into and out of the proposed accesses. Field measurements should be used wherever possible, although plan measurements from civil drawings may be used, particularly for planned intersections or driveways. Measurements need to account for vertical and horizontal curvature, grades, landscaping, and right-of-way limitations. Sight distance measurements must comply with City of Bend Standards and Specifications for the posted speed of the road. At the written request of an applicant and as part of the discretionary track development review process, the City Engineer may approve an alternate sight distance standard based on existing constraints.

ii.    For arterial and collector street accesses and new street connections document the location of all existing driveways and street connecting points within 300 feet of the frontage of the property. Provide a driveway conflicting movement diagram and assessment showing overlapping conflicts with nearby existing driveways and street intersections.

d.    The following on-site circulation and/or street plan access information:

i.    The proposed street layout that matches the Transportation System Plan and how it interfaces into abutting and nearby approved development street layouts, abutting and nearby master plans or special planned areas and requirements of this code and provides access for development of adjoining properties.

ii.    Truck circulation and entry/egress assessment including routing, turning movement, and delivery needs for all truck and emergency service vehicles. Identify any proposed special truck accommodations for freight service.

iii.    A demonstration that required public access, shared access, and shared parking easements are in place or will be required to be in place.

e.    The following existing and planned walking, biking and transit facilities and infrastructure serving the site from each access point (driveway or street) of the proposed development onto and along the transportation system for a distance of one-quarter mile:

i.    Location of all sidewalks, curb ramps, bike lanes, paths, crosswalks, pedestrian signal heads, push buttons, related signage, striping, and transit facilities along with pedestrian paths of travel between the transit facility and the site and to the buildings on the site.

ii.    Barriers, deficiencies and high-pedestrian demand land uses including schools, parks, parking, senior housing facilities, and transit facilities.

f.    Truck circulation and entry/egress including routing, turning movement, and delivery needs for all truck and emergency service vehicles. Identify any proposed special truck accommodations for freight service.

7.    Safety Evaluation.

a.    Safety must be evaluated for the study area and a Discretionary Track application may require additional locations as required by the City Engineer. The evaluation must document and review crash data from the ODOT Crash Analysis and Reporting Section (ODOT-CARS). Crash data may be requested directly from ODOT or the Bend Urban Area Metropolitan Planning Organization. Crash data must provide a five-year history of ODOT reported crashes and must be presented in tabular and crash diagram form. Crash data must include the following information:

i.    Crash histories and a calculated crash rate;

ii.    Crash patterns (was there an identifiable pattern to the crashes due to the design characteristics of the intersections) and crash types affecting proposed development trips; and

iii.    Whether any location within the study area is included within published safety studies, such as the Oregon Department of Transportation Safety Priority Index System lists, ODOT Safety Action Plan, or the City’s Arterial and Collector Multimodal Safety Study.

8.    Walking, Biking and Transit.

a.    Public and Private Schools (K-12), Colleges and Universities. Provide an analysis of walking, biking and transit facilities along and across arterial and collector roadways which accommodate safe, accessible and direct access to and from the school. Elementary schools must analyze the facilities within one mile of the school. All other schools, colleges and universities must analyze the facilities within 1.5 miles of the school.

b.    All Other Uses. Provide an analysis of walking, biking and transit facilities, including street crossings and access ways, which accommodate safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access from within new subdivisions, multifamily developments, planned developments, shopping centers, and commercial districts to adjacent residential areas within one mile, to transit facilities within one-quarter of a mile, and to existing or planned neighborhood activity centers within one-half mile of the development. Neighborhood activity centers includes, but are not limited to, parks, shopping areas, or employment centers. Proposed residential developments must also provide the analysis to elementary schools within one mile and all other schools, colleges and universities within 1.5 miles of the proposed development.

C.    City Review and Evaluation.

1.    If any of the infrastructure or facilities are missing or substandard as identified in the Transportation Facilities Report, then the applicant will be required to upgrade the infrastructure to comply with BDC Title 3, Design Standards, and with the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

2.    Based on information provided in the Transportation Facilities Report, the City Engineer will notify the applicant in writing if the report is complete, and if not, what additional evaluation information is required. If no additional information is needed, the City Engineer will notify the applicant whether a Transportation Impact Analysis is required based on the following criteria:

a.    Operations.

i.    Clear and Objective Track and Discretionary Track.

The current or projected increase in trip generation of the roadway system in the vicinity of the proposed development will exceed the minimum operational criteria in BDC 4.7.500(B)(6).

ii.    Discretionary Track.

(A)    Substandard roadway configuration and/or alignment, or capacity deficiencies that are likely to be compounded as a result of the proposed development;

(B)    Proposed street design creates inadequate circulation and does not minimize cut-through traffic or accommodate orderly development of adjacent properties; and

(C)    Potential improvements to accommodate freight.

b.    Safety.

i.    Projected increase in trip generation that will impact the safety of the existing transportation system; and

ii.    A traffic safety hazard is created or exacerbated on any street, roadway segment, or intersection within the study area as a direct result of the proposed development.

c.    Walking, Biking and Transit Facilities.

i.    Impacts to priority walking and biking routes, school routes, transit connectivity and multimodal street improvements identified in the Transportation System Plan;

ii.    Bike and/or pedestrian access to site has gaps and/or the bike lane or sidewalk is dropped, missing, or otherwise unusable; and

iii.    Identified transit facilities and/or their pedestrian paths of travel between the transit facility and the site and to the buildings on site are not complete.

3.    In all instances, a Transportation Impact Analysis must be submitted for any proposed development that:

a.    Considers modification, installation, or removal of any traffic control device;

b.    Forecasts net increase in site traffic volumes greater than 700 average daily vehicle trips or off-site major intersections within one mile are impacted by 50 or more peak-hour vehicle trips; or

c.    Contains a safety issue including one or more fatalities or severe injury crashes, one or more reported crashes per 1,000,000 entering vehicles, or if any location within the study area is included within published safety studies, such as the Oregon Department of Transportation Safety Priority Index System lists, ODOT Safety Action Plan, or the City’s Arterial and Collector Multimodal Safety Study.

4.    No off-site improvements will be required as a condition of approval when a Traffic Impact Analysis is not required for the Clear and Objective Track. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2263, 2016]


4.7.500 Transportation Impact Analysis. Revised 2/20

A.    Preparation. If a Transportation Impact Analysis is required, it must be prepared by a licensed professional engineer especially qualified in traffic engineering by the State of Oregon. The applicant’s engineer must consult with the City Engineer prior to preparing the Transportation Impact Analysis to verify the level of details to be included in the analysis.

B.    Contents of the Transportation Impact Analysis Report. The Transportation Impact Analysis must contain the following information organized as follows:

1.    Study Area.

a.    Clear and Objective Track. The study area must include all site access and adjacent roadways and intersections. The study area must also include all off-site major intersections impacted by 50 or more peak-hour vehicle trips within one mile of the site. The City Engineer must approve the defined study area prior to commencement of the Transportation Impact Analysis.

b.    Discretionary Track. The study area must include all site access and adjacent roadways and intersections. The study area must also include all off-site major intersections impacted by 50 or more peak-hour vehicle trips within one mile of the site. The City Engineer must approve the defined study area prior to commencement of the Transportation Impact Analysis. The City Engineer may choose to waive the study of certain intersections if deemed unnecessary.

c.    Exemption for Clear and Objective Track and Discretionary Track.

i.    Intersections within the study area that had significant capacity improvements constructed within the five years preceding the application date or are included for construction in the City’s five-year CIP are exempt from analysis in a Traffic Impact Analysis. For the purposes of this section, “significant capacity improvements” means construction of intersection improvements that change the form or add significant capacity to an intersection, including changing the intersection form to a roundabout or adding lane capacity.

ii.    Unique situations in BDC 4.7.600(D) are exempt from analysis in a Traffic Impact Analysis.

2.    Study Analysis Years. The analysis must be performed for all study roadways and intersections, unless exempted in subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section, for the following years with and without the proposed development:

a.    Existing conditions (current year);

b.    Year of completion of the final phase (for phased projects, intermediate phases may be required to be analyzed);

c.    For an amendment to a functional plan, the Bend Comprehensive Plan, or a land use regulation the analysis year must reflect the Transportation Planning Rule OAR 660-012-0060 requirements but in no case will the analysis year be less than 10 years from the date of the preparation of the Transportation Impact Analysis. An analysis for an amendment to a functional plan, the Bend Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation must use the City of Bend’s model as determined by the City Engineer.

3.    Study Time Periods. Within each study year, an analysis must be performed for the following time periods:

a.    Weekday p.m. peak hour (i.e., one hour between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.); and

b.    For Discretionary Track applications, additional time periods may be required based on City Engineer direction for the following:

i.    Peak hour of the generator (i.e., peak hour for the proposed development);

ii.    Peak hour of nearby generator sites (e.g., a nonschool site may study a nearby school’s peak hour); and

iii.    Peak hour of cumulative nearby generators.

4.    Traffic Counts.

a.    Clear and Objective Track. Once the study periods have been determined traffic counts must be done as follows:

i.    Counts must be taken Tuesday through Thursday;

ii.    Counts must be no more than 12 months old from the date the Transportation Facilities Report is submitted.

iii.    Counts must include all motorized, nonmotorized, and pedestrian movements.

b.    Discretionary Track. Once the study periods have been determined traffic counts must be done as follows:

i.    Counts must be taken Tuesday through Thursday;

ii.    Counts may need to be adjusted as required by the City Engineer to reflect seasonal, schools, or other variations in traffic;

iii.    Unless approved by the City Engineer, counts must be no more than 12 months old from the date of the proposed development application submittal;

iv.    Additional hours of classified turning movement counts may be required based on City Engineer direction for the following:

(A)    To determine compliance with traffic signal or all-way stop warrants; or

(B)    To determine the extent of over-capacity conditions.

v.    Counts must include all motorized, nonmotorized, and pedestrian movements. If high pedestrian and/or bike traffic is expected to be generated by the proposed development, as determined by the City Engineer, the Transportation Impact Analysis must consider improvements and connectivity to existing and proposed facilities.

5.    Future Traffic Forecasts.

a.    Traffic Forecast for Projects and Project Phasing.

i.    Traffic forecast must include all projects within the study area that have valid approvals for development (master plans, land divisions, site plans, conditional use permits, and similar approvals). They must be identified, and their traffic generation included as cumulative traffic in the study. Proposed projects in the study area that have been submitted to the City for processing, but not yet approved, must also be included. An annual growth rate of 2.5 percent must be applied to existing volumes to account for other general traffic growth in and around the study area.

ii.    For phased developments, the traffic forecasts for the year of completion of each phase must be calculated to be field counts plus traffic from projects within the study area that have received approvals for development (approved master plans, land divisions, site plans, conditional use permits, and similar approvals), plus an annual growth factor of 2.5 percent which would factor the existing counts up to the analysis year.

b.    Build-Out Studies for Bend Comprehensive Plan Amendments and Zone Changes.

i.    Traffic projections for build-out scenarios must use the current transportation model used by the City or other approved model as approved by the City Engineer. The applicant’s engineer must use the model projections post processed using NCHRP 255 and sound professional engineering standards as the basis for determining turning-movement volumes for the required intersection analysis. A manual assignment of the project traffic added to the build-out traffic may typically be used to determine total future traffic, as approved by the City Engineer.

6.    Operations Analysis Methodology.

a.    The operations analysis must include the following:

i.    Software inputs must use field conditions (e.g., measured field peak hour factor, saturation flow rates, lane utilization percentages, lane configurations, actual signal phasing and timing, and truck percentages). For a Discretionary Track application, other references and the City of Bend Standards and Specifications may be required to be used as approved by the City Engineer;

ii.    An operations analysis for roundabouts performed in conformance with the City’s Roundabout Operational Analysis Guidelines;

iii.    An operations analysis for traffic signal and stop controlled intersections performed in conformance with the most recent version of the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) or the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. For a Discretionary Track application, other references may be approved by the City Engineer;

iv.    Identify intersection operations in a table including volume to capacity ratios, delay, and queuing for critical movements as well as for the intersection as a whole including the following:

(A)    Delays for two-way and four-way stop controlled study intersections including delays for lane groups, approaches, and intersections as a whole;

(B)    Ninety-fifth percentile queue projected to block nearby critical system elements such as adjacent traffic signals, roundabouts, or at-grade rail crossings, or line of sight safety impacts are identifiable; and

(C)    Volume to capacity ratio for any approach or for the intersection as a whole for signalized and roundabout controlled study intersections.

v.    Microsimulation modeling and analysis using a calibrated model for the transportation corridor as defined must be performed for interconnected traffic signals. Calibration must include field measured saturation flow rates, existing timing and phasing rotations, peak hour factors, available queue storage and queuing.

b.    The operations analysis must use existing transportation system conditions (intersection control type and street roadway geometry). Committed funded transportation facilities will also be considered in the analyses. Committed funded transportation facilities means transportation facilities, improvements or services that are authorized in a local transportation system plan and for which construction funding is in the approved Capital Improvements Program (CIP), the Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) or other approved funding plan.

c.    Operations Standards. The intersection analyses provided in the Transportation Impact Analysis will be evaluated for safety deficiencies and queuing deficiencies and compliance with this code, the Transportation Planning Rule, the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan, any applicable development agreements, and regional transportation system plans. Intersections under the jurisdiction of the Oregon Department of Transportation will also be evaluated using the ODOT Analysis Procedures Manual for compliance with the Oregon Highway Plan. Intersections under the jurisdiction of Deschutes County that are outside the Urban Growth Boundary must also be evaluated for compliance with Deschutes County Code. Intersections that do not comply with the criteria listed in those documents will be considered to have significant impacts for purposes of BDC 4.7.600.

d.    Projects are considered to have significant impacts on the transportation system for purposes of BDC 4.7.600 as identified below:

i.    Two-Way Stop Control. Average delay for the critical lane group for any major intersection with greater than 100 peak hour trips is greater than or equal to 50 seconds during the peak hour;

ii.    All-Way Stop Control. Average delay for any major intersection as a whole is greater than or equal to 80 seconds during the peak hour;

iii.    If the ninety-fifth percentile queue exceeds the existing available storage or is projected to block nearby critical system elements such as adjacent traffic signals, roundabouts, or at-grade rail crossings, or line of sight safety impacts are identifiable;

iv.    For signalized intersections under the jurisdiction of the City, the volume-to-capacity ratio for the intersection as a whole is greater than or equal to 1.0 during the peak hour; or

v.    For roundabout intersections under the jurisdiction of the City, the volume-to-capacity ratio for the critical movement is greater than or equal to 1.0 during the peak hour.

e.    Intersections under ODOT Jurisdiction.

i.    In addition to the City operations standards, intersections on ODOT facilities will also be required to comply with ODOT mobility targets. Coordination with ODOT is required in the study process.

7.    Arterial and Collector Left Turn, Median Refuge, and Right Turn Lane Assessment.

a.    A median refuge assessment and a left and right turn lane assessment on arterial and collector streets must include the following information:

i.    An assessment using Table 11 of the Safety Effects of Marked Versus Unmarked Crosswalks at Uncontrolled Locations Final Report and Recommended Guidelines (FHWA Publication Number HRT-04-100, September, 2005);

ii.    An assessment using the Left and Right Turn Lane Criteria in the ODOT Analysis Procedures Manual (APM); and

iii.    Provide the ninety-fifth percentile queue length for left turning, right turning and through vehicles.

b.    Projects are considered to have significant impacts for purposes of BDC 4.7.600 as identified below:

i.    Clear and Objective and Discretionary Track. If Table 11 of the Safety Effects of Marked Versus Unmarked Crosswalks at Uncontrolled Locations Final Report and Recommended Guidelines identifies a candidate site(s) for the installation of a marked crosswalk or other needed pedestrian improvements at uncontrolled locations.

ii.    Clear and Objective Track. If the proposed development meets the criteria in the APM or exceeds the ninety-fifth percentile queue length for left or right turning vehicles. The City Engineer may consider this not to be a significant impact due to pedestrian safety, lane extensions or physical geometry.

iii.    Discretionary Track. If the proposed development meets the criteria in the APM or exceeds the ninety-fifth percentile queue length for left or right turning vehicles, then the City Engineer has the final determination whether it is a significant impact for purposes of BDC 4.7.600.

8.    Safety Review.

a.    Projects are considered to have significant impacts for purposes of BDC 4.7.600 if there is one or more fatalities or severe injury crashes, one or more reported crashes per 1,000,000 entering vehicles, or if any location within the study area is included within published safety studies, such as the Oregon Department of Transportation Safety Priority Index System lists, ODOT Safety Action Plan, or the City’s Arterial and Collector Multimodal Safety Study.

9.    Walking, Biking and Transit.

a.    Projects are considered to have significant impacts for purposes of BDC 4.7.600 if:

i.    A project fails to provide accessible and safe pedestrian and bike connections (i.e., curb extensions, pedestrian refuges, striping and/or signage) to schools, adjacent residential areas, transit facilities, adjacent streets and to existing or planned neighborhood activity centers; or

ii.    The project disrupts existing or planned biking or walking facilities or conflicts with the adopted Bend Urban Area Bicycle and Pedestrian System Plan.

10.    Proportionate Share Contribution. Provided proportionate share calculations in compliance with BDC 4.7.700, Proportionate Share Contribution. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2271, 2016; Ord. NS-2263, 2016]


4.7.600 Significant Impacts and Mitigation Measures. Revised 2/20

A.    Applicability. When significant impacts are identified as part of the Transportation Impact Analysis, mitigation measures must be included to address those impacts.

B.    Preparation. Prior to proposing mitigation, the applicant’s engineer must consult with the City Engineer regarding mitigation options. The proposed mitigation and a concept-level drawing of the final intersection form must be prepared and submitted prior to a development application being deemed complete. Mitigation measures may be proposed by the applicant or recommended by ODOT or Deschutes County in circumstances where a state or county facility will be impacted by a proposed development. Deschutes County and/or ODOT must be consulted to determine if improvements proposed for their facilities comply with their standards and are supported by the respective agencies.

C.    Intersection Operation Standards. If the Transportation Impact Analysis shows that the operation standards at the intersection are or will be exceeded, the applicant is required to provide mitigation measures in compliance with subsection (F) of this section.

D.    Unique Situations.

1.    Development proposals within Master Planned Developments or Special Planned Areas, as described in BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, where a Transportation Mitigation Plan has been approved, may exceed the operation standards at affected intersections as long as the proposed development is consistent with the approved Transportation Mitigation Plan.

2.    Widening to accommodate additional travel lanes will not be permitted in the following situations:

a.    Clear and Objective Track and Discretionary Track. Intersections and streets that are already constructed consistent with the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP) including streets identified by the TSP as “not being authorized for lane expansion”;

b.    Clear and Objective Track and Discretionary Track. Intersections and streets located within or directly adjoining the City’s Central Business District or historic district;

c.    Discretionary Track. Where no physical mitigation is available to improve intersection operations to the performance standard; or

d.    Discretionary Track. Where improvements may result in unacceptable tradeoffs to other modes of travel.

E.    Timing of Improvements.

1.    Unless a unique situation is identified in subsection (D) of this section, Unique Situations, mitigation must be in place, or secured in conformance with BDC 4.3.400(J), at the time of final platting of a land division or at the time of final occupancy, whichever occurs first. Mitigation for phased developments must be in place at the time specified in the approved decision. Construction of emergency services access requirements may be needed earlier.

2.    Development proposals within Master Planned Developments or Special Planned Areas, as described in BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, where a Transportation Mitigation Plan has been approved, must refer to the Plan for the extent and timing of improvements.

F.    Mitigation Measures. Mitigation measures must consider all users and mitigate the impacts of the proposed development.

1.    The following mitigation measures may be proposed by the applicant for the Clear and Objective Track and Discretionary Track:

a.    Construct Transportation Mitigation.

i.    The intersection form will be determined through the City’s Intersection Form Evaluation Framework located in the City’s Roundabout Evaluation and Design Guidelines document.

ii.    Mitigation must include the construction of the full intersection infrastructure and control required to bring the intersection into compliance with this code, the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan, and the City of Bend Standards and Specifications.

iii.    Intersection improvements must improve corridor operations in terms of progression and reduced corridor delay, and must be shown to cause no significant adverse impact to the corridor during integrated corridor operations.

iv.    Mitigation in the form of street widening must be constructed in conformance with the street classification of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan and the cross-sections contained in this code or the City of Bend Standards and Specifications. At the written request of an applicant and as part of the discretionary track development review process, the City Engineer may approve an alternate cross section if it meets operations standards.

v.    Walking and biking accommodations must be considered as part of any improvement.

b.    Construct Interim Transportation Mitigation.

i.    Construct Interim Mitigations. Interim mitigation measures may include but are not limited to upgraded operations controls, interconnected signals, signage, striping, pedestrian refuge, etc.

ii.    Improved signal timing and phasing may be achieved by installing the necessary communications and field equipment that would provide the increased capacity necessary to achieve the operation standards. For this to be acceptable as an interim measure, the applicant must demonstrate through a field calibrated corridor operations model that the proposed signal timing and phasing will provide the additional capacity necessary to meet the concurrency standards. Timing and phasing communications and field equipment are subject to approval of the City Engineer and/or ODOT.

2.    The following mitigation measures may be proposed by the applicant for the Discretionary Track:

a.    Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan. Implement an approved TPDM plan in compliance with BDC 4.7.400(B)(3), Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan, and BDC Chapter 4.8, Transportation and Parking Demand Management (TPDM) Plan.

b.    Walking, Biking and Transit. In addition to accommodating walking and biking as part of the intersection and street improvement mitigation, walking, biking and transit improvements may be considered as potential mitigation measures, particularly when they reduce the number of study area generated vehicle trips. Mitigation improvements may include accessible sidewalks, pedestrian refuges, bike lanes, curb extensions, traffic control devices, curb ramps, striping, signage and other elements. Negative impacts of intersection and street mitigation measures on walking and biking infrastructure, such as on crosswalks and roadway shoulders, must be avoided, minimized, and/or mitigated themselves. The City may require accessibility improvements, including compliant curb ramps along the proposed development and including safe and accessible paths of travel to and from the proposed development, depending on the type and impacts of the proposed development.

c.    Payment in Lieu of Construction. If infrastructure construction is required above, the City may elect to accept a payment in an amount equal to the cost estimated by the City for the design, right-of-way acquisition, utility relocation and construction cost of the improvements in lieu of actual construction. The City will use these funds on the impacted corridor to improve multi-modal safety, operations and to relieve congestion. Once the City accepts a payment in lieu of construction, the proposed development may proceed even if the impact of the proposed development causes the operation standards to be exceeded.

d.    Alternate Location Mitigation. Mitigation strategies at alternative locations or affecting alternative modes of travel may be proposed by the applicant and may be accepted by the City Engineer. At a minimum, the proposed improvements must meet the following criteria:

i.    The overall improvements proposed should be proportional to the impacts created by the application;

ii.    The proposed improvement strategies must address a critical need or issue within the study area such as safety, connectivity, system capacity, and parallel routes;

iii.    The locations proposed for improvement must be within the study area;

iv.    The proposed improvements must not already be, or be in the process of being, a condition of approval of another development; and

v.    All applicable analysis requirements for the primary locations(s) apply to the analysis of the alternative location(s).

e.    Suspend the Mobility Standard. The City Manager may suspend the mobility standard for a particular intersection or series of intersections under the City’s jurisdiction when the intersection(s) may be in a condition that interim mitigation is not practical due to the large scale of the improvements or the City desires to maintain the current intersection’s form. In such cases, developments impacting the intersection(s) do not have to analyze or mitigate impacts on the intersection(s). The City Manager will issue a written statement providing the duration and reason for the suspension of the mobility standard, and will maintain a list of all intersections where the mobility standard has been suspended. Suspending the mobility standard is not a limited land use decision or a land use decision. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2289, 2017; Ord. NS-2263, 2016]


4.7.700 Proportionate Share Contribution. Revised 2/20

Each proposed development that submits a Transportation Impact Analysis will be required to contribute a proportionate share of the costs of the final improvements to the transportation system that will be required as a result of the cumulative impact that various developments combined will have on the intersections.

Proposed developments must contribute their proportionate share or contribution for all collector and collector, arterial and arterial, or collector and arterial intersections, and intersections identified on the TSP list for an intersection improvement but not on the System Development Charge (SDC) list within the study area.

The City may use the proportionate share contributions for multi-modal improvements on the transportation corridor and surrounding system if the improvement project benefits safety and operations and helps to reduce congestion.

Proportionate share calculations must be submitted with the Transportation Impact Analysis. Proportionate share calculations are calculated based on the ratio of development trips to growth trips for the anticipated cost of the full Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan intersection infrastructure. The formula is provided below:

	Proportionate Share Contribution = [Net New Trips/(Planning Period Trips–Existing Trips)] x Estimated Construction Cost

Net new trips are the total entering trips that are proposed to be added to the study area intersection by the proposed development.

Exception: Intersections within the study area that are included in the City’s Capital Improvement Plan or that are on the most current SDC fiscally constrained project list are exempt from proportionate share contribution. [Ord. NS-2362, 2020; Ord. NS-2263, 2016]


Chapter 4.8 TRANSPORTATION AND PARKING DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TPDM) PLAN

Sections:

4.8.100    Purpose.

4.8.200    Applicability.

4.8.300    Preparation.

4.8.400    Review Process.

4.8.500    Submittal Requirements.

4.8.600    Approval Criteria.

4.8.700    Ongoing Participation.

4.8.800    Modifications.

4.8.900    Reporting.


4.8.100 Purpose.

A transportation and parking demand management (TPDM) plan includes a wide range of strategies intended to increase walking, biking, and transit use and reduce single-occupant vehicle trips and parking demand. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.200 Applicability.

In compliance with BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, institutional and employment master plans must develop a TPDM plan. All other development applications may choose to develop a TPDM plan. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.300 Preparation.

The TPDM plan must be prepared by a transportation planner, or licensed professional engineer especially qualified in civil or traffic engineering by the State of Oregon. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.400 Review Process.

The TPDM plan must be reviewed concurrently with an associated development application using the review procedures required for the development application. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.500 Submittal Requirements.

In addition to the submittal requirements of BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis, the proposed TPDM plan must include the following information as deemed applicable by the Development Services Director:

A.    TPDM goals, objectives and policies.

B.    Proposed types and approximate number of users (e.g., residents, employees, students, customers, patients, visitors, clients, and deliveries).

C.    Anticipated mode of travel by users (vehicle, biking, walking and transit).

D.    Anticipated parking demand by time of day and/or demand by user.

E.    Anticipated parking utilizing shared spaces.

F.    Proposed number of on- and off-site parking spaces, including carpool, vanpool, car share and bike parking.

G.    Parking and trip demand analysis.

H.    Estimated daily trip generation and peak hour of trips for the proposed use based on the ITE trip generation rates (note: this may not be the p.m. peak of 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.; e.g., an institution of higher education may have a peak hour of use that is different than the p.m. peak hour).

I.    Proposed trip and parking reduction measures in BDC Table 4.8.500 according to the following requirements:

1.    A maximum trip generation reduction rate of 25 percent for the peak hour of use will be considered for combined trip reduction measures. If the TPDM plan including the applicant’s proposed trip reduction measures and rates are approved by the City, the approved trip generation reduction rates will be applied to the applicant’s Transportation Facilities Report in BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis.

2.    A minimum of three parking reduction measures must be proposed.

3.    The number of vehicle parking spaces may be reduced up to 20 percent of the minimum requirements in BDC Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces.

Table 4.8.500 – Trip and Parking Reduction Measures  

	Facility Provision Measures	Trip Generation Reduction Rate	Parking Reduction

	Project provides no more than the minimum required parking and achieves that by providing the maximum on-street parking that is permitted and/or using shared parking agreements.	5%	0%

	Project reserves a minimum of 10% of vehicle parking spaces with designated signage for carpool, vanpool and car share vehicles, with a minimum of one space required. The carpool, vanpool and car share parking spaces must be provided free of charge and located at the most desirable on-site location.	5%	5%

	Provide on-site showers and lockers free of charge.	5%	5%

	Provide enclosed bike lockers and/or fenced, covered bike storage areas and/or a designated bike storage area inside a building.	5%	5%

	Project provides twice as many covered, secured bike parking racks or facilities as required by BDC Chapter 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.	5%	5%

	Ongoing Incentive Measures	Trip Generation Reduction Rates	Parking Reduction

	Project is located within 1/4 mile of a transit facility and employer participates in CET’s Group Bus Program. 	5%	5%

	Implement a carpool, vanpool and/or car share program (e.g., carpool ride-matching for employees, assistance with vanpool formation, provision of vanpool or car share vehicles). The carpool, vanpool and car share parking spaces must be provided free of charge and located at the most desirable on-site location.	5%	5%

	Project charges the actual cost to provide on-site parking on an annual basis for employee/student parking and provides free parking for carpool, vanpool and car share vehicles. The carpool, vanpool and car share parking spaces must be located at the most desirable on-site location.	5%	5%

	Implement parking cash-out program for employees (nondriving employees receive transportation allowance equivalent to the value of subsidized parking).	5%	5%

	Provide a shuttle program or participation in an existing recognized shuttle program subject to any fees for the existing program.	5%	5%

	Flexible Scheduling – Allow employees to reduce their number of weekly commute trips and shift work trips to nonpeak hour times of day. Examples include:	5%	5%

	• Teleworking – Allow employees to work from home or a nonoffice location one or more days a week.

	• Compressed Workweek – Enable employees to compress regularly scheduled hours into fewer work days per week.

	• Flexible Schedule – Allow employees to offset work hours from the typical 9-5 standard and shift commute travel to off-peak hours.

	Provide unbundled parking.	5%	5%

	Provide a bike-share program or free use of bikes on-site that is available to all tenants/employees of the site.	5%	0%

	Provide a guaranteed ride home program.	5%	5%

	Participation in a transportation demand management (TDM) incentive program recognized by the City (e.g., Commute Options Partner Program).	5%	0%

	Other TPDM elements as approved by the City.	Up to 25%	Up to 20%

J.    A description of how the proposed measures will reduce the development’s trips and parking demands.

K.    A description of how the proposed measures will be achieved and maintained over the life of the project.

L.    Site plan that designates the following TPDM measures, if applicable:

1.    External. Carpool, vanpool and car share parking areas, paid parking areas, bike parking areas, and land dedicated, planned or for existing transit facilities and bus shelters.

2.    Internal. Showers/lockers, bike storage areas, information boards/kiosks and on-site support services.

M.    TPDM Plan Designated Contact. The contact is responsible for administering carpool and vanpool ride-matching services and promotional programs and updating information (e.g., transit routes and schedules; carpool, vanpool and car share information; bike lanes, routes and paths and facility information; and alternative commute subsidy information) on a board/kiosk that is located in a prominent location. The City must be provided with a current name and phone number of the designated contact.

N.    Enforcement and monitoring program. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.600 Approval Criteria.

A.    In addition to the approval criteria for the development application, the review authority of the development application will approve, approve with conditions or deny the TPDM plan based on all of the following criteria:

1.    The TPDM plan demonstrates that the measures provide transportation options and reduce the demand for parking; and

2.    The TPDM measures are feasible and appropriate for the project, considering the proposed use or mix of uses and the project’s location, size, and hours of operation. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.700 Ongoing Participation.

The applicant is required to commit to ongoing participation in the TPDM plan in its deeds, codes, covenants and restrictions and is subject to ongoing monitoring and tracking of the activities undertaken to implement the approved measures and their results. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.800 Modifications.

A.    Modifications to an approved TPDM plan may be processed concurrently with a Type II or Type III development application. The applicant may request to reduce the number of vehicle parking spaces more than 20 percent of the minimum requirements in BDC Table 3.3.300, Required Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces, if it can be demonstrated that actual demand for parking spaces during the peak period is less than 85 percent.

B.    A modification to an approved TPDM plan that is not processed concurrently with a Type II or Type III development application will be processed as an individual Type II application.

C.    The Development Services Director may elevate a Type II application for a modification to the Planning Commission for hearing as a Type III application.

D.    Modifications must meet the approval criteria in BDC 4.8.600. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


4.8.900 Reporting.

At the request of the City, a report documenting the TPDM plan’s activities undertaken to implement the approved measures and their results must be submitted to the Development Services Director at the responsibility of the applicant. [Ord. NS-2289, 2017]


Chapter 4.9 ANNEXATIONS

Sections:

4.9.100    Purpose.

4.9.200    Applicability.

4.9.300    Review Processes.

4.9.400    Initiation Procedures.

4.9.500    Submittal Requirements.

4.9.600    Approval Criteria.

4.9.700    Zoning of Annexed Areas.

4.9.800    Effective Date and Notice of Approved Annexation.

4.9.900    Extraterritorial Extension and/or Connection of Water and Sewer Service.


4.9.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and criteria for annexation under the provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes including, but not limited to, ORS Chapter 222. This chapter is intended to achieve orderly and efficient annexation of land to the City that will result in providing a complete range of public services and public facilities, as defined in this code, for the annexed territory and to ensure consistency with the Bend Comprehensive Plan. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.200 Applicability.

Land to be annexed must be contiguous to the existing City limits. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.300 Review Processes.

A.    Annexation. The following general processes apply to all annexation proposals:

1.    Annexations are reviewed using the Type III or Type IV process as determined by the City, based on a consideration of the factors for treating an application as quasi-judicial or legislative. Since annexations are a jurisdictional transfer, the City Council is the sole review authority.

2.    City Council approval of annexations will be by ordinance.

3.    Notice of the City Council hearing to consider the annexation proposal must follow the notification process required for the Type III or Type IV application, except a notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City once each week for two successive weeks prior to the day of hearing, and notices of the hearing must be posted in four public places in the City for a like period.

B.    Area and Master Planning. Unless exempted in subsection (B)(1) of this section, expansion areas as shown in Figure 4.9.300 will require area and/or master plan approval prior to or concurrently with annexation. The exemptions to master planning in BDC Chapter 4.5, Master Planning and Development Alternatives, are not applicable to properties in the Urbanizable Area (UA) District. Development in expansion areas must comply with the applicable Bend Comprehensive Plan Specific Expansion Area Policies in Table 4.9.300.

Figure 4.9.300

Expansion Areas
[IMAGE]




Table 4.9.300 - Specific Expansion Area Policies  

	Expansion Area	Bend Comprehensive Plan Specific Expansion Area Policies

	Northeast – Butler Market Village	11-56 through 11-63

	East Highway 20	11-64

	DSL Property	11-65 through 11-74

	The Elbow	11-75 through 11-84

	The Thumb	11-85 through 11-91

	Southwest	11-92 through 11-99

	West Area	11-100 through 11-108

	Shevlin Area	11-109 through 11-115

	OB Riley Area	11-116 through 11-121

	North Triangle	11-122 through 11-131

1.    Exemptions from Area and Master Planning.

a.    Land not subject to an area plan or master plan as shown in Figure 4.9.300, Expansion Areas.

b.    Public elementary schools on lots or parcels smaller than 20 acres. Notwithstanding BDC 3.4.400(A), an interim septic system may be installed if approved by the Department of Environmental Quality and the School District agrees to connect to the sewer system when it becomes available. Applicant must submit the following in addition to the requirements of BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis:

i.    An analysis of walking, biking and transit facilities to destinations within the UGB for a distance of one mile from the boundary of the school site along and across arterial and collector roadways to accommodate safe, accessible and convenient access to and from the school. Based on the analysis, the City may require, through an annexation agreement or other binding mechanism, improvements to ensure safe and accessible paths of travel to and from the school, which may include walking, biking, provision of transit stops and/or accessibility improvements, including compliant curb ramps along the access routes.

c.    City-initiated annexations of property intended for uses such as publicly owned rights-of-way or City-initiated annexation of additional lands brought into the Urban Growth Boundary for affordable or market rate housing, in programs such as authorized under Oregon House Bill 4079, or other specified uses as authorized by Oregon statute.

d.    For areas subject to these exemptions, applicants may submit annexation and development applications for processing concurrently under the anticipated zoning district. Any development approvals will be final decisions for processing purposes but will not be effective until completion of annexation. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.400 Initiation Procedures.

A.    An annexation proposal for the contiguous territory proposed to be annexed may be initiated by petition in compliance with one of the following initiation procedures:

1.    All of the owners of land in the contiguous territory proposed to be annexed and not less than 50 percent of the electors, if any, residing in the territory, consent in writing to the annexation of their land in the territory and file a statement of their consent with the City;

2.    A majority of the electors registered in the contiguous territory proposed to be annexed consent in writing to the annexation and the owners of more than half of the land in that territory consent in writing to the annexation of their land and those owners and electors file a statement of their consent with the City; or

3.    More than half the owners of land in the contiguous territory proposed to be annexed, who also own more than half the land in the contiguous territory and of real property therein representing more than half the assessed value of all real property in the contiguous territory, consent in writing to the annexation of their land in the territory and file a statement of their consent with the City.

B.    Statements of consent to annexation which are filed within any one-year period are effective and are deemed to be submitted with the petition required in subsection (A) of this section, unless a separate written agreement waiving the one-year period or prescribing some other period of time has been entered into between an owner of land or an elector and the City.

C.    An annexation proposal may be initiated by City Council resolution. The Council may terminate proceedings under this section at any time.

D.    An annexation proposal may be initiated pursuant to the State law health hazard abatement annexation process. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.500 Submittal Requirements.

A.    The application must include:

1.    A completed and signed annexation application packet on forms provided by the City.

2.    A petition including the statement of consent, on City forms, completed by property owners and/or electors residing in the territory that meets the requirements of BDC 4.9.400, Initiation Procedures.

3.    Legal description of the territory including abutting right-of-way to be annexed and a boundary survey certified by a registered engineer or surveyor.

4.    A map showing the territory including abutting right-of-way to be annexed and properties within 300 feet of the territory.

5.    A narrative which addresses the approval criteria in BDC 4.9.600 and the requirements of BDC 4.9.300(B).

6.    A letter or other written documentation from the Bend Park and Recreation District which indicates that the applicant has met with the District to discuss the proposed annexation, and provided the District an opportunity to review the annexation area for options to enhance existing parks and trails, and develop new parks and trails.

7.    A completed and signed Bend Park and Recreation District annexation agreement, unless the property(s) to be annexed is already located within the Bend Park and Recreation District.

8.    A letter or other written documentation from the Bend-La Pine School District which indicates that the applicant has met with the District to discuss the proposed annexation and provided the District an opportunity to review and comment on the proposed annexation.

9.    Territories with irrigation district water rights or other irrigation district facilities must include the following:

a.    A map of all appurtenant water rights.

b.    A surveyed map of any district facility (e.g., canal, head gate, and crossing) that clearly identifies easements, rights-of-way, access roads, etc., for any conveyance facilities that may remain that are either irrigation district owned or privately owned on the property upon annexation.

c.    A signed statement by the applicant, including any letters or other written documentation provided by the irrigation district, confirming that the applicant has met with the irrigation district to discuss the proposed annexation and the extent to which any issues identified in BDC 4.9.600(A)(6) have been resolved or, if they have not yet been resolved, setting forth a plan with a timeline to resolve any issues.

10.    If the City has not yet amended its public facilities and transportation plans for the affected expansion area, inclusion of an applicant initiated amendment to the relevant plan(s) or other evidence that the necessary infrastructure planning under Statewide Planning Goals 11 and 12 will take place prior to or concurrently with annexation. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.600 Approval Criteria.

A.    The City Council may approve, or approve with conditions, the proposed annexation application if all of the following criteria are met:

1.    The annexation proposal is consistent with the Bend Comprehensive Plan policies and plan designations applicable to the territory as determined by the Planning Director or designee.

2.    The annexation proposal is consistent with an approved area plan and/or master plan, unless exempted in BDC 4.9.300(B)(1).

3.    The proposal demonstrates how the annexed territory is capable of being served by public facilities and services with adequate capacity as determined by the City, including sanitary sewer collection, domestic water, transportation, schools, and parks, consistent with the City’s adopted public facility plans, transportation system plan, and applicable district plans, either as provided in an applicable area or master plan or by demonstrating how such public facilities and services will be provided in an orderly, efficient and timely manner.

4.    The proposal demonstrates how public facility and service impacts, including as applicable: on- and off-site improvements, construction and modernization of existing infrastructure (water, sewer, stormwater, transportation) to City standards and specifications, and impacts to existing infrastructure inside the City’s current city limits, will be adequately mitigated through an annexation agreement or other funding mechanism approved by the City Council prior to annexation. The City will use the standards and criteria of BDC Chapter 4.7, Transportation Analysis, for analysis and mitigation of transportation impacts.

5.    Owner(s) have committed to transfer all irrigation district water rights from the property, unless exempted in subsection (A)(5)(a)(i) of this section. The timing of the transfer of irrigation district water rights may be worked out between the owner(s) and the irrigation district, but, in any event, the transfer must occur prior to the platting of a land division or prior to certification of final occupancy for developments subject to site plan review, whichever occurs first. For phased subdivisions or developments, however, the transfer may occur by individual phase prior to the platting of each phase or prior to certification of final occupancy of the development on each phase.

a.    Exemption.

i.    In limited instances where the City Council finds that continued use of irrigation district water rights will not conflict with the Bend Comprehensive Plan specific expansion area policies for the land to be annexed and the transition to urban land uses, an owner may continue to use the irrigation district water rights until certain events occur or certain conditions are met as set forth in a written agreement. Council may also consider, in its discretion, whether the property owner has satisfactorily shown that continued use of irrigation water would be more efficient based on the size of the lot or parcel, lack of environmental harm and sustainable use of water, protection of public health, or cost to the city or other public entities.

6.    Sufficient evidence acceptable to the City has been provided demonstrating that the irrigation district had an opportunity to review the layout and design for any impacts on irrigation district conveyance facilities and to recommend reasonable protections for such facilities consistent with the irrigation district’s adopted rules and regulations, system improvement plans and/or development policies.

7.    The proposal demonstrates that approval of the annexation and zoning districts that implement the underlying Bend Comprehensive Plan map designations is consistent with the provisions of BDC 4.6.600, Transportation Planning Rule Compliance.

8.    The proposal demonstrates how rights-of-way will be improved to urban standards as determined by the City, including rights-of-way in cherry stem annexations. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.700 Zoning of Annexed Areas.

The Bend Comprehensive Plan map provides for the future City zoning classifications of all property within the City’s Urbanizable Area (UA) District. On the date the annexation becomes effective, the UA District will cease to apply and the zoning map will be automatically updated with the zoning district that implements the underlying Comprehensive Plan map designation. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.800 Effective Date and Notice of Approved Annexation.

A.    The effective date of an approved annexation must be set in accordance with ORS 222.040 or 222.180.

B.    Notice of Approved Annexation.

1.    Not later than 10 working days after the passage of an ordinance approving an annexation, the Planning Director will:

a.    Send by certified mail a notice to public utilities (as defined in ORS 757.005), electric cooperatives and telecommunications carriers (as defined in ORS 133.721) operating within the City.

b.    Mail a notice of the annexation to the Secretary of State, Department of Revenue, Deschutes County Clerk, Deschutes County Assessor, affected districts, and owners and electors in the annexed territory. The notice must include:

i.    A copy of the ordinance approving the annexation;

ii.    A legal description and map of the annexed territory;

iii.    The findings; and

iv.    Each site address to be annexed as recorded on Deschutes County assessment and taxation rolls.

c.    The notice to the Secretary of State will also include a copy of the statement of consent as required in BDC 4.9.400, Initiation Procedures.

2.    If the effective date of an annexation is more than one year after the City Council passes the ordinance approving it, the Planning Director will mail a notice of the annexation to the Deschutes County Clerk not sooner than 120 days and not later than 90 days prior to the effective date of the annexation. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]


4.9.900 Extraterritorial Extension and/or Connection of Water and Sewer Service.

The City Council may approve an extraterritorial extension and/or connection of water and sewer services consistent with the requirements of Goal 11, Public Facilities, and OAR 660-011-0060 and 660-011-0065 and may require an annexation contract. The review is a Type III process in accordance with BDC Chapter 4.1, Development Review and Procedures, with the City Council as the sole review authority. [Ord. NS-2302, 2018]

 


Title 5 EXCEPTIONS TO CODE STANDARDS

Chapters:

5.0    Exceptions to Code Standards

5.1    Variances

5.2    Nonconforming Uses and Developments


Chapter 5.0 EXCEPTIONS TO CODE STANDARDS

Sections:

5.0.100    Introduction.


5.0.100 Introduction.

This title provides standards and procedures for variances and nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or development that do not comply with the code). This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The City’s varied geography, and complexities of land development, requires flexibility. This title provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. The variance procedures provide relief from specific code provisions when they have the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other code provisions. The standards for nonconforming uses and development are intended to provide some relief from code requirements for older developments that do not comply. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 5.1 VARIANCES

Sections:

5.1.100    Purpose.

5.1.200    Class A Variances.

5.1.300    Class B Variances.

5.1.400    Class C Variances.


5.1.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide flexibility to development standards, in recognition of the complexity and wide variation of site development opportunities and constraints. The variance procedures are intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. Granting a variance involves discretionary decision-making requiring a Type II procedure. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


5.1.200 Class A Variances.

A.    Purpose. A Class A variance is a variance from the standards of this code relating to on-site development requirements. The Review Authority may grant variances to the following on-site requirements using the approval criteria in subsection (B) of this section, Class A Variance Criteria, provided the request does not exceed 25 percent of the requirement. The applicant shall provide a written narrative or letter describing the reason for the variance, why it is required, alternatives considered, and compliance with the approval criteria.

1.    Building setbacks as required in the base land use district.

2.    Landscape area requirements.

B.    Class A Variance Criteria. A Class A variance shall be granted if the applicant can demonstrate compliance with all of the following criteria:

1.    The variance requested is required due to the lot configuration, or other physical conditions of the site;

2.    The variance does not result in the removal of significant trees as defined by this code;

3.    The variance is consistent with the design standards provided in BDC Chapters 3.1, Lot, Parcel and Block Design, Access and Circulation, 3.2, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls, 3.3, Vehicle Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking, and 3.4, Public Improvement Standards. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


5.1.300 Class B Variances.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for variances to on-site development standards that exceed the criteria in BDC 5.1.200, Class A Variances. The applicant shall provide a written narrative or letter describing the reason for the variance, why it is required, alternatives considered, and compliance with the approval criteria.

B.    Class B Variance Criteria. The City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a Class B variance based upon the following criteria:

1.    The proposed variance will not be materially detrimental to the stated purposes of the applicable code requirements listed herein and to other properties in the same land use district or vicinity;

2.    A hardship exists that is peculiar to the nature of the requested use, lot size or shape, topography, sensitive lands, or other similar circumstances related to the property or use over which the applicant has no control, and which are not applicable to other properties in the vicinity (e.g., the same land use district);

3.    The use proposed is permitted within the underlying zoning district, and City standards will be maintained to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting reasonable economic use of the land;

4.    Existing physical and natural systems, such as but not limited to traffic, drainage, natural resources, and parks, will not be adversely affected any more than would occur if the development occurred in compliance with the subject code standard;

5.    The hardship is not self-imposed and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute pecuniary hardship or inconvenience; and

6.    The variance requested is the minimum variance that would alleviate the hardship. [Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


5.1.400 Class C Variances.

A.    Purpose. A variance request can be specific to certain aspects of development. The purpose of this section is to provide specific criteria for reviewing certain variance requests. The specific situations identified as Class C Variances include:

1.    Variance to vehicular access and circulation standards.

2.    Variance to parking standards.

3.    Variance to maximum or minimum on-site development requirements to reduce tree removal and/or impacts to wetlands (Waterway Overlay Zone).

4.    Variance to maximum height.

5.    Variance to transportation improvement requirements.

6.    Variance for deviations regarding access to State highways.

7.    Floodplain Sub-Zone variances.

The applicant shall provide a written narrative or letter describing the reason for the variance, why it is required, alternatives considered, and compliance with the approval criteria.

B.    Class C Variance Criteria. Class C variance requests are reviewed using the specific criteria listed below.

1.    Variance to Parking Standards. The City may approve a variance to the minimum or maximum standards for off-street parking in BDC Chapter 3.3 upon finding all of the following:

a.    The individual characteristics of the use at that location require more or less parking than is generally required for a use of this type and intensity;

b.    The need for additional parking cannot be met through provision of on-street parking, structure parking or shared parking with adjacent or nearby uses; and

c.    All other parking design and building orientation standards are met, in conformance with the standards in BDC Titles 2, Land Use Districts, and 3, Design Standards.

The City may approve a reduction of required bicycle parking per BDC 3.3.600, Bicycle Parking Standards, if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed use by its nature would be reasonably anticipated to generate a lesser need for bicycle parking.

The City may allow a reduction in the amount of vehicle stacking area required for drive-through and drive-in facilities if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development and other pertinent factors.

2.    Variance to Maximum or Minimum On-Site Development Requirements to Reduce Tree Removal and/or Impacts to Wetlands (Waterway Overlay Zone). The City may grant a variance to the applicable on-site requirements of this code, including building height, for the purpose of preserving a tree or trees on the site of proposed development or avoiding wetland impacts. Modification shall not be more than is necessary for the preservation of trees or wetlands on the site.

3.    Variance to Maximum Height. The City may grant a variance to the maximum height limitations not otherwise exempted by this code when the following criteria are met:

a.    The structure is not located within the Deschutes River Corridor or the Tumalo Creek Corridor.

b.    The proposed height does not create a burden on the City’s Fire Department for fire fighting requirements.

c.    The location, size, and design characteristics of the proposed structure shall have minimal adverse impact on the property values and livability of the permitted development in the surrounding area.

d.    The structure will provide an aesthetically pleasing and functional environment and relate harmoniously to the natural environment and existing development, minimizing visual impacts and preserving natural features to the greatest extent practical.

e.    The requested height is the minimum deviation necessary.

f.    If the structure is located in the CB Zone, the Class B approval criteria shall also apply.

4.    Variance to Transportation Improvement Requirements. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a variance to the transportation improvement standards of BDC Chapter 3.4, Public Improvement Standards, based on the criteria for granting variances provided in BDC 3.4.200(B) (transportation improvement standards).

5.    Variance for deviations regarding access to State Highways shall be subject to review and approval by the Oregon Department of Transportation.

6.    Variances to Floodplain Sub-Zone.

a.    Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size that is contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (B)(6)(a)(i) through (xi) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. The City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a variance based on all of the following criteria:

i.    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

ii.    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

iii.    The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

iv.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community;

v.    The necessity to the development of a waterfront location, where applicable;

vi.    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

vii.    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

viii.    The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for that area;

ix.    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

x.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

xi.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

b.    A variance may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places per this subsection (B)(6).

c.    A variance shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

d.    A variance shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

e.    A variance shall only be issued upon:

i.    A showing of good and sufficient cause;

ii.    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

iii.    A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in this section, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

f.    A variance as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program is based on the general zoning law principle that it pertains to a physical piece of property; it is not personal in nature and does not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. It primarily addresses small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

g.    A variance may be issued for a nonresidential building in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (B)(2) of this section and otherwise complies with BDC 2.7.600, Waterway Overlay Zone (WOZ).

h.    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. [Ord. NS-2177, 2012; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


Chapter 5.2 NONCONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

5.2.100    Nonconforming Uses.

5.2.200    Nonconforming Structures.


5.2.100 Nonconforming Uses.

Where, at the time of adoption of this code, a use of land exists that would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this code and was lawful at the time it was established, the use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:

A.    Expansion Prohibited. No such nonconforming use can be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code. No additional structure, building or sign can be constructed on the lot in connection with such nonconforming use of land.

B.    Location. No such nonconforming use can be moved in whole or in part to any portion of its lot, or any other lot, other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code, unless such move would bring the use into conformance with this code.

C.    Discontinuation or Abandonment. The nonconforming use of land must not be discontinued for any reason for a period of more than 12 months. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

1.    On the date when the use of land is physically vacated;

2.    On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;

3.    On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or

4.    On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts.

D.    Application of Code Criteria and Standards. If the use is discontinued or abandoned for any reason for a period of more than 12 months, any subsequent use of the land must conform to the applicable standards and criteria specified by this code for the land use district in which such land is located.

E.    Nonconforming street access connections that exist prior to the adoption of this code and that do not conform with standards in BDC Chapter 3.1 must be brought into compliance when the following conditions exist:

1.    When a new access permit is requested for the subject property;

2.    When a building permit or land use application is submitted that results in an increase of trip generation by 20 percent or 100 average daily trips (ADT);

3.    When the structure being served by the nonconforming street access is demolished or destroyed by any means to an extent more than 80 percent of its current assessed value or where at least 80 percent of the structure’s square footage is removed or destroyed; or

4.    When the property is subject to site plan review, a land division or a conditional use permit. 

[Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]


5.2.200 Nonconforming Structures.

Where a structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that could not be built under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yard, equipment, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, and the structure was lawful when constructed, the structure may remain on the site so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

A.    Alteration.

1.    If an applicant proposes to reduce the nonconformity of the structure, the application must be reviewed using the applicable review process in BDC Chapter 4.2, Minimum Development Standards Review, Site Plan Review and Design Review.

B.    Reconstruction after Destruction. Should a nonconforming structure or the nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent more than 80 percent of its current assessed value or where at least 80 percent of the structure’s square footage is destroyed, it must be reconstructed only in conformity with all of the Development Code.

C.    Location. Should such development be moved for any reason and by any distance, either within or outside the site on which it was established, it must thereafter conform to all of the regulations of the Bend Development Code. [Ord. NS-2353, 2019; Ord. NS-2016, 2006]



-----------------------------

The Bend Code is current through Ordinance NS-2374, passed June 3, 2020.

Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the Bend Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.bendoregon.gov/ City Telephone: (541) 388-55057

Code Publishing Company