


Charter of the City of Coos Bay  


Chapter I NAME AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1.1 Title of Enactment.

This enactment may be referred to as the Charter of the City of Coos Bay.


Section 1.2 Name of City.

The name of the city hereby incorporated shall be “CITY OF COOS BAY”.


Section 1.3 Boundaries.

The City shall include all territory encompassed by the boundaries of the consolidating cities at the time this charter becomes effective and as hereafter legally modified. The Recorder shall keep an accurate and current description of the boundaries at the City Hall for public inspection.


Chapter II POWERS


Section 2.1 Powers of the City.

The City shall have all powers which the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 2.2 Construction of Charter.

In this charter no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the City would have if the particular power was not mentioned. The charter shall be liberally construed, to the end that the City may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to the laws and to the municipal home rule provisions of the constitution of the State.


Section 2.3 Where Powers Vested.

Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the City are vested in the Council.


Section 2.4 Utilities.

The City, acting by and through its Council, is authorized and empowered to acquire, construct, purchase, own, lease, operate and maintain, within, without, or partly within and without the corporate limits of the City, public utilities and other public enterprises and properties which may be deemed by the Council to be in the public interest, including, but not limited to, airport, dock, wharf, sewer, and water system facilities; and the Council may, by ordinance, authorize the issuance and sale of self-liquidating revenue bonds and self-liquidating notes or contracts payable only from the pledged revenues of public utilities, enterprises and properties for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, extension or repair of any such utility, enterprise or property or any part thereof; shall not be payable from taxes or general fund revenues and shall not be deemed general obligations of the City unless specifically authorized at election of the legal voters of the City, nor shall such self-liquidating obligations be debts of the City within the meaning of any constitutional, statutory or charter limitations.


Section 2.5 Community Promotion.

The City Council may authorize the expenditure of public funds for promoting or advertising the City of Coos Bay or the community of which said City is a part.


Chapter III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


Section 3.1 Council.

The Council shall be composed of a mayor and six council members elected from the City at large.


Section 3.2 City Manager and Municipal Judge.

The Council shall appoint a city manager and may appoint a municipal judge, and both of such officers may be removed by the council without cause. Upon any vacancy occurring in the office of city manager, the council shall appoint a city manager pro tem who shall serve until a city manager is appointed and assumes office.


Section 3.3 Other Officers and Employees.

The city manager shall appoint a recorder, attorney, chief of public safety, engineer, and such other officers as may be provided for by ordinance; and the city manager may remove any such officer at any time without cause. The city manager shall appoint and employ such other employees as the Council deems necessary and the city manager may remove any such employee without cause, subject to such limitations and restrictions as the Council may impose by ordinance or contract.


Section 3.4 Consolidation of Offices.

The Council may, by resolution, consolidate any two or more appointive offices.


Section 3.5 Salaries.

The compensation for the services of city officers and employees shall be whatever amount the Council approves.


Section 3.6 Qualifications.

A person who at the time of election or appointment is a qualified voter within the meaning of the state constitution and has resided within the City one year immediately preceding the election or appointment to fill a vacancy shall be eligible to fill an elective office of the City. No elective office holder of the City may be employed by the City in a position that is not substantially volunteer in nature. Before the names of candidates for elective office are placed on the ballot and before the appointment of an elective officer to fill a vacancy, the candidate for elective office shall present proof of qualifications to the municipal judge whose decision shall be a final determination of both fact and law, but if there is no municipal judge then such determination shall be made by the city attorney.


Chapter IV COUNCIL


Section 4.1 Meetings.

The Council shall hold a regular meeting at least twice each month at a time and at a place in the City which it designates and may adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. The mayor, manager, or three members of the Council may, by giving notice to all members of the Council then in the City, call a special meeting of the Council.


Section 4.2 Quorum.

A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for it to do business, but a smaller number at a regular or special meeting may recess or adjourn the meeting to another time or may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in a manner provided by ordinance.


Section 4.3 Journal.

The Council shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept. A record of the vote of each council member on every ordinance shall be entered in the journal. Upon request of any of its members a record of the vote of each council member on any other question before the Council shall be entered in the journal.


Section 4.4 Mayor’s Function at Council Meetings.

The Mayor shall be chairman of the Council and preside over its deliberations and shall have a vote on any question before the Council. The Mayor shall have authority to preserve order, enforce the rules of the Council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the Council.


Section 4.5 President of the Council.

At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting after each general biennial election the Council by ballot shall elect a president from its membership. In the Mayor’s absence from a Council meeting, the president shall preside over it. Whenever the Mayor is unable, on account of absence, illness or other cause, to perform the functions of the office, the president of the Council shall act as Mayor.


Section 4.6 Vote Required.

Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council present at a council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the Council.


Chapter V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 5.1 Mayor.

The Mayor shall sign all approved records of proceedings of the Council. The Mayor shall have no veto power and shall sign such other documents as the Council may designate.


Section 5.2 City Manager.

Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government, shall have supervision and control over all departments, utilities, enterprises and properties of the city, appoint and remove employees except as this charter otherwise provides, shall have the duty to supervise the enforcement and execution of all ordinances, contracts, leases, franchises and licenses, shall act as purchasing agent for the city, shall prepare and submit annual budget estimates and act as budget officer for the city, and shall perform such other duties as the council may direct or as may be required by law.


Section 5.3 Municipal Judge.

The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city and shall preside over a court to be known as “The Municipal Court of the City of Coos Bay, Oregon”. Such court shall have territorial jurisdiction which includes all areas within the corporate limits of the city and such areas outside those corporate limits as may be permitted by law. When not governed by general ordinances of the city, all proceedings in the municipal court for violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the State of Oregon relating to court procedures, powers, and administration.


Section 5.4 Recorder.

The recorder shall be the fiscal officer of the city, shall serve ex-officio as clerk of the council, attend all its meetings and keep an accurate record of its proceedings in a book provided for that purpose, and shall have such other duties as may be designated by the Council.


Chapter VI ELECTIONS


Section 6.1 Election Procedures.

Except as otherwise provided in this charter or by ordinance, the general laws of the State of Oregon shall apply to the conduct of city elections, recounts the returns therefrom, and contests thereof. The recorder shall be the chief elections officer of the city unless the council provides otherwise. In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the Council.


Section 6.2 Regular Elections.

Unless otherwise provided by general ordinances of the City, regular city elections shall be held at the same times and places as biennial general state elections.


Section 6.3 Special Elections.

The Council may provide for calling and hold special elections by resolution or ordinance.


Section 6.4 Election Returns.

The results of all elections shall be made a matter of record in the journal of proceedings of the Council, which shall contain a statement of the total number of votes cast at each election, the votes cast for each person and for and against each proposition, the name of the person elected to each office, and a reference to each measure enacted or approved. Immediately after receipt of the results of a city election the city elections officer shall make and sign a certificate of election of each person elected and deliver the certificate to such person. A certificate so made and delivered shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of the statements contained in it.


Section 6.5 Term of Office.

The Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years at each biennial general election. At each biennial general election three council members shall be elected, each for a term of four years, and there also shall be elected the number of council members necessary to fill vacancies for an unexpired term of two years. The Mayor or Council members elected or appointed shall serve their respective terms of office until the first regular council meeting following the biennial general election at which their successors shall have been elected; provided, the Mayor and Council members shall hold office until their successors shall have taken their oaths of office.


Section 6.6 Oath of Office.

Before entering upon the duties of the office, each officer shall take an oath or affirmation to support the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon and to faithfully perform the duties of the office.


Section 6.7 Nominations.

A person possessing the qualifications required by this charter may be nominated for an elective city office. The Council, by general ordinance, may prescribe the method and form of nomination.


Section 6.8 What Creates Vacancy.

An elective office shall be deemed vacant by declaration of the Council upon the incumbent’s death, adjudicated incompetence, convictions of felony, resignation, recall from office, ceasing to possess the qualifications necessary for the office, the failure of the person elected or appointed to take the oath of office within three weeks after the time for the term of office to commence, which shall be the first regular council meeting following election or appointment, or absence from meetings of the council for 30 days without the consent of the Council.


Section 6.9 Filling Vacancies.

Vacancies in elective offices of the City shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the entire membership of the Council holding office at the time of the appointment. The appointee's term of office shall begin upon taking the oath of office following appointment and shall continue until a successor has been elected and qualified following the next regular city election. The successor to a council member appointed during the first two years of the term shall serve for the unexpired term of two years.


Section 6.10 Temporary Appointments.

During the temporary disability or absence of any officer, the office may be filled by temporary appointment in the same manner as provided for filling vacancies permanently.


Chapter VII ORDINANCES


Section 7.1 Enacting Clause.

The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter enacted by the council shall be “The City of Coos Bay ordains as follows.”


Section 7.2 Enactment.

Ordinances may be enacted by the City Council using one of the following:

(1) Be read once fully and distinctly in open Council meeting and receive the affirmative vote of the majority of the Council; or

(2) The reading may be by title only (a) if no Council members present at the meeting request to have the ordinance read in full and (b) if a copy of the ordinance is provided for each Council member not later than one week before the meeting at which the ordinance is to be voted upon and three copies are made available in the city recorder’s office for public inspection not later than one week prior to the meeting at which the ordinance is to be voted upon. The ordinance enacted after being read by title alone may have no legal effect if it differs from its terms as it was thus filed prior to such reading; unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open Council meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by the Council.


Section 7.3 When Ordinances Take Effect.

Ordinances making appropriations and annual tax levy, ordinances relative to local improvements and assessments therefor, ordinances called special elections, other special ordinances, and emergency ordinances shall take effect immediately upon their passage by the council. All other ordinances passed by the Council shall take effect on the thirtieth day after enactment unless a later date is fixed therein, in which event they shall take effect at such later date.


Chapter VIII CONDEMNATION AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 8.1 Condemnation.

Any necessity of taking property for the City by condemnation shall be determined by the Council and declared by a resolution of the Council describing the property and stating the uses to which it is to be devoted.


Section 8.2 Public Improvements.

Street, sewer, sidewalk, and such other public improvements as the Council deems necessary may be initiated by motion of the Council. A written remonstrance of the owners of property upon which sixty-seven percent of the estimated cost of the improvement is proposed to be levied shall defeat the motion initiating the improvement, and no further action upon the improvement shall be taken for six months. For the purposes of this chapter “owner” shall mean the record holder of legal title; provided, that if the affected property is being sold under a land sale contract, the holder of equitable title under such contract shall be deemed the “owner”.


Section 8.3 Improvement Procedure.

The procedure for initiating public improvements, for providing for notice to property owners, for a hearing upon the proposed improvements, for the filing of written remonstrances, for the carrying out and construction of public improvements, for determining the amount of the special assessments, their apportionment to various parcels of property, and the property upon which they are to be levied, for the levy of assessments, for the creating and enforcing of assessment liens, and for taking any other action relating to the improvements and assessments shall be governed by general ordinances of the City, or if no such ordinances have been enacted, then by the applicable laws of the State of Oregon relating to special assessments.


Section 8.4 Special Charges.

If special charges, fees, costs, or damages are made a lien or special assessment upon real property by charter or ordinance, then the collection of such charge, fee, cost or damage shall be made in the manner provided by general ordinance or law for the collection of special assessments.


Section 8.5 Sidewalks.

The City may provide by ordinance that the owners of property adjoining any street shall have a duty to construct, repair or maintain free from hazards and obstructions any sidewalk adjacent to their property, and shall be liable for any injuries or damages resulting from failure to comply with such duty; and where the city has established such duties and liabilities, it may limit or restrict the liability of the city, its officers and employees, for damages or injuries to persons or property.


Chapter IX SPECIAL PROVISIONS


Section 9.1 Qualifying for First Election.

For the first election for offices in the consolidated city, the qualifications of candidates, as described in Section 3.6 of Chapter III of this charter, shall be determined by the municipal judges or city attorneys of the consolidated cities.


Section 9.2 Initial Terms of Office.

At the first election under this charter the three candidates for the City Council receiving the largest number of votes shall serve until the 1986 biennial general election, and the three candidates for the council receiving the next largest number of votes and the mayor shall serve until the 1984 biennial general election.


Section 9.3 Pending Proceedings.

All improvement and assessment proceedings, all condemnation and dangerous building proceedings, all vacations, zoning and land use proceedings, all proceedings involving building and other permits, and all proceedings for violation of ordinances, which are pending in any of the cities which are consolidated at the time that this charter shall go into effect, may be completed under the provisions of the various charters, ordinances, laws and other regulations under which such proceedings were commenced.


Section 9.4 Regulations.

All valid and subsisting ordinances, together with any rules, regulations, rates and fees established thereunder, of each of the cities to be consolidated under this charter, which grant franchises, establish use zones and comprehensive plan provisions with implementing ordinances, which establish regulations, sign signals or zones for the control of traffic or parking, which establish or regulate utility services, which create reserve funds, and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this charter, shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed.


Section 9.5 Existing Rights, Authorizations and Obligations.

The enactment of this charter shall not impair any valid and existing right vested in, or liability incurred by, the cities which have become consolidated. All authorized bonds of the consolidated cities, whether or not issued, and all pledges of taxes, revenues or reserve funds for their payment, shall remain in full force and effect until such bonds are retired.


Section 9.6 Ordinances and Regulations.

In the event that provisions of existing ordinances and regulations of the consolidating cities shall be inconsistent, conflicting or cumulative, then the following rules shall apply:

(1) Where the same act, conduct or activity is both prohibited and allowed or licensed, it shall be deemed to be prohibited.

(2) Where an act, conduct or omission constitutes both a criminal and a civil offense, it shall be deemed to be a civil and not a criminal offense.

(3) Where the same property, activity or use is taxed by more than one ordinance of the consolidating cities, then the ordinance imposing the lesser tax or fee shall be the only ordinance which shall be effective as to such use, activity or property, except that sewer user fees shall be those of the former city of Coos Bay until modified.


Section 9.7 Offices, Boards, and Commissions.

In those instances where an ordinance of one of the three existing cities will remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed, and such ordinance provides for the creation of, or appointment to, any office, board or commission, then all such positions shall be deemed vacant when this charter goes into effect, and the vacancy shall be filled according to the provisions of such ordinance, or according to the provisions of this charter if the provision of the ordinance relating to the appointment is inconsistent herewith.


Section 9.8 Water Works.

(1) This section shall become effective only if the City of North Bend continues to exist and the cities of Coos Bay and Eastside are consolidated.

(2) The operation, maintenance, improvement and extension of the system of water works owned jointly with the city of North Bend, Oregon, at the time this charter takes effect shall continue to be entirely under the control of a board known as the COOS BAY/NORTH BEND WATER BOARD. Said water board shall have entire control of all water funds and the disbursements thereof, and shall make annual reports to the council of each city showing the true condition of the water system and its financial condition, together with a statement of its yearly operation. Said board shall have authority to make all contracts for repairs, improvements and extensions to such water system but only to the extent of the water funds available for said purposes. Said board shall have authority to employ all help necessary in its judgment in the operation of such water system and to fix the salary and wages of all employees.

(3) The water board shall consist of four members who shall serve without pay, two of whom shall be residents of the city of Coos Bay and two of whom shall be residents of the city of North Bend. The two members from the city of Coos Bay shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the council each for a term of four years.

(4) The income derived from the operation of a water system owned and operated as herein provided shall be disposed of in the following manner:

(a) The payment of costs and expenses of operation, maintenance and repairs to said water system.

(b) The payment to each city of the amounts necessary to pay the principal of and     interest on any bonds issued to pay for the acquisition of such water system, and 	for improvements and extensions thereto.

(c) In making of improvements and extensions to said system of water works.


Section 9.8(A) Water Works.

(1) This section shall become effective if the cities of Coos Bay and North Bend are consolidated into one city.

(2) The operation, maintenance, improvement and extension of the system of water works previously owned jointly by the cities of Coos Bay and North Bend shall be under the control of a board known as the COOS BAY/NORTH BEND WATER BOARD. Said water board shall have entire control of all water funds and the disbursement thereof, and it shall prepare and file with the city budget officer a proposed annual budget on or before February 1st for the fiscal year beginning the following July 1st. Said board shall have authority to make all contracts for repairs, improvements and extensions to such water system but only to the extent of the water funds available for said purpose. Said board shall have authority to employ all help necessary in its judgment in the operation of such water system and to fix the salary and wages of all employees.

(3) The water board shall consist of five members who shall serve without pay, shall be residents of the city, and shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the Council each for a term of four years commencing January 1st. Of the initial board, two members shall be appointed for terms ending December 31, 1984 and three members shall be appointed for terms ending December 31, 1986.

(4) The income derived from the operation of the water system shall be disposed of in the following manner:

(a) The payment of costs and expenses of operation, maintenance and repair to said water system.

(b) The payment of principal and interest on any bonds, notes or contracts authorized and issued by the city council for the repair, improvement or extension of the water system.

(c) The payment for improvements and extensions to said system of water works.


Section 9.9 Tax Base.

The initial tax base for the consolidated city shall be the sum of the tax bases of the consolidating cities on the effective date of incorporation.


Section 9.10 Effective Date of Incorporation.

The effective date of the incorporation of the consolidated City of Coos Bay shall be the one-hundredth day following the first election of officers. [consolidation of Coos Bay and Eastside December 29, 1983]


Section 9.11 Funds for Police Officers and Firefighters.

From the general fund budget, the city council shall appropriate to the Public Safety Department in each fiscal year the funds necessary to provide at least 1.85 sworn police officers per 1,000 population, and 1.2 firefighters per 1,000 population in the City of Coos Bay. [Section 9.11 added by election held May 17, 1988]


Section 9.12 Sales of Bonds and Warrants.

All selling of bonds or warrants shall be submitted to the people for approval by a majority of votes cast. [Section 9.12 added by election held November 5, 1996]


Section 9.13 Funding Building Inspection Program.

The City Council may, by nonemergency ordinance, establish a building inspection program for the City of Coos Bay. In each fiscal year, the building inspection program shall be entirely funded by user fees; fees so charged shall be exclusively dedicated to funding the building inspection program, including capital costs, and shall be based on the actual cost necessary to administer and continue the program without contribution of any property tax revenue. [Section 9.13 added by election held May 20, 1997]


Section 9.14 Streets and Roads Trust Fund.

(1) There is hereby created a special fund, to be designated by the City of Coos Bay Jurisdictional Exchange Trust, which shall be initially funded by the proceeds of the Year 2000 City of Coos Bay - State of Oregon Exchange of Jurisdiction Agreement, whereby the State of Oregon relinquished jurisdiction over certain portions of the State of Oregon Highway System located within the corporate limits of the City of Coos Bay to the City. The proceeds from the Agreement shall be held in public trust for the people of the City of Coos Bay and be used exclusively for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation of those twenty-three (23) lane miles exchanged pursuant to the Agreement, and to repay any debt incurred or issued for these purposes.

(2) The funds from the proceeds of the Year 2000 City of Coos Bay - State of Oregon Jurisdictional Exchange shall be deposited in an interest bearing account and the income used for the purposes set forth herein. Should any income remain unexpended at the end of any fiscal year, such income may, at the discretion of the City Council, be added to and become part of, the principal of the trust, but in all cases shall only be used for the purposes for which this Trust is established. The City Council may, in its discretion and from time to time, add other funds to the principal of the trust.

(3) The income from, and the principal of, the trust may be pledged to repay revenue bonds or warrants issued to undertake projects for which the Trust is established, provided the question of the issuing of any such revenue bonds or warrants shall be first submitted to a vote of the people. [Section 9.14 added by election held November 7, 2000]


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    Ordinance Interpretation and Preparation

1.10    Initiative and Referendum

1.15    General Penalty


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Code adoption.


1.01.010 Code adoption.

(1) The council of the city of Coos Bay finds that Code Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, has compiled, edited, and published a codification of the permanent and general ordinances of the city of Coos Bay. Copies of the codified Coos Bay Municipal Code are now on file in the office of the Coos Bay city recorder for public inspection.

(2) The council hereby adopts the Coos Bay Municipal Code as the same was compiled, edited, and published by Code Publishing Company, as a codification of the permanent and general ordinances of the city of Coos Bay.

(3) The code shall be known as the “Coos Bay City Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to it either as the “Coos Bay Municipal Code” or the “Coos Bay City Code” in any prosecution or adjudicative proceeding involving any provision of the code. This code should be cited as “CBMC” and specific sections should be cited as “CBMC 3.04.010.”

(4) It shall be sufficient from this point forward to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of the code as “an addition to, amendment, correction or repeal” thereof. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections of the code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code.

(5) Whenever a reference is made to the Coos Bay City Code or the Coos Bay Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or any ordinance of the city codified therein, the reference is to apply to all amendments, corrections, and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made.

(6) Title, chapter, and section headings contained in the code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, or section of the code.

(7) The provisions of the code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number, and which are included within the code. Rather, such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained in the code.

(8) The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid as of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this code, and does not effect the validity of any bond or cash deposit which was posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance.

(9) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. [Ord. 410 §§ 1 – 9, 2009].


Chapter 1.05 ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION AND PREPARATION

Sections:

1.05.010    Powers and duties of the city recorder in preparing ordinances.

1.05.020    Rules of construction.

1.05.030    Gender-neutral drafting.

1.05.040    General and particular provisions.

1.05.050    Effect of amendment of ordinance adopted by reference.

1.05.060    Effect of repeal.

1.05.070    Computation of time.

1.05.080    Severability.


1.05.010 Powers and duties of the city recorder in preparing ordinances.

In preparing ordinances for codification and distribution, the city recorder may not alter the sense, meaning, effect or substance of any ordinance, but, within such limitations, may renumber sections and parts of sections, change reference numbers to agree with renumbered ordinances, sections or other parts, delete references to repealed sections, substitute the proper subsection, section or chapter or other division numbers, change capitalization and spelling for the purpose of uniformity, and correct manifest clerical, grammatical or typographical errors. [Ord. 322 § 1, 2002].


1.05.020 Rules of construction.

As used in the ordinances of the city of Coos Bay, unless the context or a specially applicable definition requires otherwise:

(1) “City” means the city of Coos Bay.

(2) “May not” and “shall not” are equivalent expressions of an absolute prohibition.

(3) “Person” includes individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, joint stock companies and any other entity in law or fact.

(4) “To” means “to and including” when used in a reference to a series of ordinance sections, subsections or paragraphs.

(5) “Shall” is mandatory, and “may” is permissive.

(6) The singular number may include the plural and the plural number, the singular.

(7) Words used in the masculine gender may include the feminine and the neuter.

(8) A reference to a city official charged with a duty shall include that person’s designee. [Ord. 322 § 2, 2002].


1.05.030 Gender-neutral drafting.

It shall be the policy of the city of Coos Bay that all ordinances, rules and resolutions enacted, adopted or amended after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be written in gender-neutral terms, unless it is necessary for the purpose of the ordinance, rule or resolution order that it be expressed in terms of a particular gender. [Ord. 322 § 3, 2002].


1.05.040 General and particular provisions.

In the construction of an ordinance, when a general and particular provision are inconsistent, the particular controls the general provision that is inconsistent with it. [Ord. 322 § 4, 2002].


1.05.050 Effect of amendment of ordinance adopted by reference.

When one ordinance refers to another, either by a general or specific reference, the reference shall include, in addition to the ordinance to which reference was made, any amendments thereto and ordinances enacted specifically in lieu thereof, unless a contrary intent is expressly set forth in the ordinance containing the reference. [Ord. 322 § 5, 2002].


1.05.060 Effect of repeal.

Whenever an ordinance which repealed a former ordinance, either expressly or by implication, is repealed, the former ordinance shall not be revived unless it is expressly so provided. [Ord. 322 § 6, 2002].


1.05.070 Computation of time.

Except as may otherwise be specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done under an ordinance is computed by excluding the first day and including the last unless the last day falls upon any legal holiday or on Saturday, in which case the last day is also excluded. [Ord. 322 § 7, 2002].


1.05.080 Severability.

In the enactment of any ordinance, if any part of the ordinance is determined invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining parts shall remain in force unless:

(1) The ordinance provides otherwise;

(2) The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the invalid part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the invalid part; or

(3) The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of the ordinance. [Ord. 322 § 8, 2002].


Chapter 1.10 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.10.010    State law.

1.10.020    Elector to propose.


1.10.010 State law.

Oregon State law, including, but not limited to, ORS Chapters 221 and 250, including any future amendments thereto, shall govern the initiative and referendum procedures for the city of Coos Bay, except as set forth herein. [Ord. 379 § 2, 2005].


1.10.020 Elector to propose.

An initiative or referendum must be proposed by an elector qualified to vote in the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 379 § 3, 2005].


Chapter 1.15 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.15.010    General penalty – Continuing violations.

1.15.020    Liability of officers.


1.15.010 General penalty – Continuing violations.

(1) Whenever a city ordinance prohibits an act or declares it to be unlawful, or provides that the failure to do an act is unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of the provision is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except as provided in this chapter.

(2) Whenever a state statute and a city ordinance provide penalties for the same offense, the penalty imposed for the city violation shall not exceed the state penalty.

(3) Every day a violation of a provision of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 106 § 1, 1987].


1.15.020 Liability of officers.

No provision of a city ordinance designating the duties of an officer or employee shall be construed to make the officer or employee liable for a fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform the duty, unless the intent of the council to impose the fine or penalty on the officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. [Ord. 106 § 2, 1987].

 


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.05    Establishing Procedures for Municipal Court

2.10    Contract Review Board

2.15    Economic Development Review Board

2.20    Fiber Optics Consortium

2.25    Library and Library Board

2.30    Parks Commission

2.35    Planning Commission

2.40    Design Assistance Team

2.45    Coos Bay/North Bend Tourism and Promotions Committee

2.50    Water Board

2.55    Bonding of Officers and Employees

2.60    Nomination Procedures for Elective City Offices

2.65    Advisory Elections

2.70    Procedures for Claims Filed under Ballot Measure 37


Chapter 2.05 ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

Article I. Powers and Duties of Municipal Judge

2.05.010    Municipal court – Municipal judge as administrative head of municipal court.

2.05.020    Qualifications of municipal judge – Selection – Term of appointment – Removal – Compensation.

2.05.030    Absence or vacancy in office of municipal judge.

2.05.040    Powers of the municipal court.

2.05.050    Sessions of court – Place of holding court – Scheduling – Legal holidays.

2.05.060    Local rules of procedure.

2.05.070    Time for decision.

2.05.080    Contempt of court.

2.05.090    Disqualification.

2.05.100    Administrative search warrants.

Article II. Interpretation and Rules of Construction

2.05.110    Definitions.

2.05.120    Interpretation of ordinances.

2.05.130    Computation of time.

2.05.140    Construction.

2.05.150    Effect of repeal of repealing ordinance.

2.05.160    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

2.05.170    Violations outside city limits.

2.05.180    Continuing violations.

2.05.190    Liability.

2.05.200    Classification of offenses – Penalties.

Article III. Rules of Procedure

2.05.210    Citation – Complaint – Summons.

2.05.220    Persons authorized to issue citations – Complaints by private citizens.

2.05.230    Delivery and filing of the summons and complaint.

2.05.240    Right to counsel.

2.05.250    First appearance – Return of summons.

2.05.260    Effect of defendant’s written statement in explanation or mitigation.

2.05.270    Court-ordered hearing – Judgment on failure to appear.

2.05.280    First appearance.

2.05.290    Discovery.

2.05.300    Trial without jury – Commencement – Burden of proof – Proof of mental state not an element.

2.05.310    Judgment as lien.

2.05.320    Procedure upon order of nuisance abatement.

2.05.330    Appeals.

Article I. Powers and Duties of Municipal Judge


2.05.010 Municipal court – Municipal judge as administrative head of municipal court.

The Coos Bay municipal court is the tribunal exercising power for the enforcement of the ordinances of the city of Coos Bay, and such other enforcement power as may be conferred by the state of Oregon. The municipal judge is the presiding judge of the court and the court’s administrative head, and shall exercise administrative authority and supervision over the municipal court consistent with the Charter of the city of Coos Bay, the U.S. Constitution, the Oregon Constitution, and any other applicable laws and ordinances. To facilitate the exercise of that administrative authority and supervision, the municipal judge may:

(1) Make rules and issue orders appropriate to that exercise;

(2) Require appropriate reports from staff of the municipal court;

(3) Establish time standards for disposition of cases;

(4) Propose a budget for the municipal court;

(5) Undertake any other action authorized by law necessary to effectuate the purposes of the municipal court and the office of municipal judge. [Ord. 275 § 1, 1999].


2.05.020 Qualifications of municipal judge – Selection – Term of appointment – Removal – Compensation.

(1) The municipal judge shall be a person of good character, shall be a citizen of the United States and shall be a resident of the state of Oregon. The municipal judge may be, but is not required to be, an attorney. If the municipal judge is an attorney, then the municipal judge shall be a member, in good standing, of the Oregon State Bar Association.

(2) The municipal judge shall be appointed by majority vote of all sitting councilors. The term of appointment shall be one year, and the person appointed to fill the office may be reappointed for any number of terms, provided such reappointment is confirmed by vote by the city council as provided in this section. [Ord. 275 § 2, 1999].


2.05.030 Absence or vacancy in office of municipal judge.

(1) When the municipal judge is incapacitated or otherwise absent, is disqualified for prejudice, or when there is a vacancy in the office, the council may appoint any person who meets the qualifications for appointment as municipal judge to serve as municipal judge pro tempore. The municipal judge pro tempore may perform the functions of the municipal judge, may hear proceedings and may enter any judgment, order or decree with the same force and effect as if done by the municipal judge.

(2) Any appointment under this section shall be made by resolution of the council, which shall designate the duration of the appointment.

(3) No action or proceeding pending in municipal court shall be affected by the vacancy or absence of the municipal judge. [Ord. 275 § 3, 1999].


2.05.040 Powers of the municipal court.

The municipal court shall have such powers as is conferred upon municipal courts under the Oregon Constitution, the Charter of the city of Coos Bay, and Oregon law. By way of illustration, but not limitation, the municipal court has the power:

(1) To enter judgments, orders and decrees necessary to effectuate the exercise of its power to enforce the ordinances of the city;

(2) To compel compliance with and obedience to its judgments, orders and decrees, in or out of court;

(3) To preserve and enforce order in its immediate presence and in the proceedings before it and to control, in the furtherance of justice, the conduct of the court’s ministerial officers and parties and witnesses connected with any proceeding before it;

(4) To compel the attendance of persons to testify in any proceeding pending in municipal court;

(5) To administer oaths in any pending proceeding, and in all other cases where it may be necessary in the exercise of its powers or the performance of its duties;

(6) To adjourn any proceeding before the court from time to time as may be necessary, unless otherwise expressly prohibited by ordinance or state law. [Ord. 275 § 4, 1999].


2.05.050 Sessions of court – Place of holding court – Scheduling – Legal holidays.

(1) Sessions of municipal court shall be public, and shall be held in the council chambers of the city of Coos Bay.

(2) Municipal court shall be held on the first Thursday of every month, or such other dates as may be designated by the court. If the day appointed for holding court is a legal holiday, the court shall be held the next Thursday following which is not also a legal holiday. The court shall be open to do judicial business at 4:00 p.m.

(3) Municipal court may be held and judicial business may be transacted on any day other than Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except that the court may exercise the powers of a magistrate on any day. [Ord. 275 § 5, 1999].


2.05.060 Local rules of procedure.

The municipal judge may adopt local rules for the conduct of the municipal court which are not inconsistent with the rules of procedure established by this chapter or any rules made applicable to a municipal court by state law. [Ord. 275 § 6, 1999].


2.05.070 Time for decision.

Any question submitted to the court shall be decided and the decision rendered within 30 days after submission, unless prevented by sickness or unavoidable casualty; provided, that the time may be extended by stipulation in writing signed by the parties and filed with the court before the expiration of the 30-day period. [Ord. 275 § 7, 1999].


2.05.080 Contempt of court.

The court may exercise power to punish contempt in the manner provided by ORS 33.015 through 33.155. [Ord. 275 § 8, 1999].


2.05.090 Disqualification.

The municipal judge shall not hear any proceeding if any party moves the court for a change of judge on grounds of prejudice against the party or the party’s attorney. The motion shall be supported by an affidavit by the party, under oath, stating that the municipal judge is prejudiced against the party or the party’s attorney, stating with particularity the fact or facts supporting the existence of prejudice, stating the party cannot or reasonably believes the party cannot have a fair and impartial hearing before the judge, and that the motion to disqualify is not filed for the purpose of delay. Upon receipt of the motion, the municipal judge shall grant the motion if grounds for disqualification actually exist. Failure to allege specific facts supporting the existence of prejudice shall result in a denial of the motion. The motion shall be filed not less than two weeks before the party’s first appearance, and failure to do so shall result in a waiver of a right to seek disqualification. No party shall file more than one motion to disqualify in any proceeding. [Ord. 275 § 9, 1999].


2.05.100 Administrative search warrants.

(1) Authorization. The municipal judge is authorized to issue administrative search warrants authorizing the inspection or investigation at a designated location upon application by the city attorney, building official, police chief or fire chief, or their duly authorized representatives, acting in the course of their official duties, whenever an inspection or investigation of any place is required or authorized by any municipal ordinance or regulation.

(2) Grounds for Issuance.

(a) An administrative search warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant hereunder, the ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the inspection or investigation, the location to be inspected or investigated, and the purpose for which the inspection or investigation is to be made, including the basis upon which cause exists to inspect. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement that entry has been sought and refused or facts or circumstances reasonably showing that the purposes of the inspection or investigation might be frustrated if entry were sought without a warrant.

(b) Cause shall be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or administrative standards for conducting a routine, periodic or area inspection are satisfied with respect to the location or there is probable cause to believe that a condition of nonconformity with a health, public protection or safety ordinance, regulation, rule, standard or order exists with respect to the particular location, or an investigation is reasonably believed to be necessary in order to determine or verify the condition of the location.

(3) Procedure for Issuing Search Warrant.

(a) Before issuing any administrative search warrant, the municipal judge shall examine under oath the applicant and any other witness and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application.

(b) If the municipal judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection or investigation exists and that the other requirements for granting the warrant are satisfied, he or she may issue the warrant, particularly describing the same and identifying the title of the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the place to be entered and the purpose of the inspection or investigation. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the municipal judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any other time of the day or night.

(4) Execution of Search Warrant.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, in executing an administrative search warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry, make a reasonable effort to present credentials, authority and purpose to the occupant or person in possession of the location designated in the warrant and shall show him or her the warrant or copy thereof upon request.

(b) In executing an administrative search warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of his or her authority and purpose, as prescribed in subsection (1) of this section, but may promptly enter the designated location, if, at the time of execution, the location is unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or is reasonably believed to be in such condition.

(c) A public safety officer may be requested to assist in the execution of the administrative search warrant.

(d) An administrative search warrant must be executed and returned to the municipal judge by whom it was issued within 10 days from its date, unless the municipal judge, before the expiration of such time, extends the time for five days by endorsement thereon. After expiration of the time prescribed by this subsection, the warrant, unless executed, is void. [Ord. 275 § 10, 1999].

Article II. Interpretation and Rules of Construction


2.05.110 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

“Building official” means the director of community services, or his or her designee, assigned to enforce the uniform, specialty and other building codes.

“Code” means the city of Coos Bay Municipal Code.

“Codes enforcement officer” means any person designated by the city manager to undertake enforcement of any city ordinance, including, but not limited to, the building official.

“Fire marshal” means the city of Coos Bay fire chief or his or her designee.

“Person” means an individual, association, corporation, partnership, trust, or any other entity at law or in fact.

“Public safety officer” means the city of Coos Bay chief of police or his or her designee. [Ord. 275 § 11, 1999].


2.05.120 Interpretation of ordinances.

(1) All words and phrases in ordinances of the city shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such technical or peculiar and appropriate meaning.

(2) The following grammatical rules shall apply to the ordinances of the city, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

(a) Each mention of gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders;

(b) The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;

(c) Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable;

(d) The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. [Ord. 275 § 12, 1999].


2.05.130 Computation of time.

Except when otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. [Ord. 275 § 13, 1999].


2.05.140 Construction.

The ordinances of the city shall be construed with a view to effect their objectives and to promote justice. [Ord. 275 § 14, 1999].


2.05.150 Effect of repeal of repealing ordinance.

Whenever an ordinance which repeals a former ordinance is repealed, either expressly or by implication, the former ordinance shall not thereby be revived unless it is expressly so provided. [Ord. 275 § 15, 1999].


2.05.160 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

Whenever the ordinances of the city make an act or omission unlawful, such ordinance shall include as unlawful the act or omission of causing, aiding, abetting, or concealing such act or omission. [Ord. 275 § 16, 1999].


2.05.170 Violations outside city limits.

An act made unlawful by any ordinance of the city shall constitute a violation when committed on any property owned or controlled by the city, even though outside the city’s corporate limits. [Ord. 275 § 17, 1999].


2.05.180 Continuing violations.

Whenever an act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, or the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, each day the violation persists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. [Ord. 275 § 18, 1999].


2.05.190 Liability.

(1) A person is guilty of a violation if the act or omission is committed by his or her own conduct or by the conduct of another person for which the persons is liable, or both.

(a) A person is liable for the conduct of another person if:

(i) The person is made liable by the ordinance defining the violation; or

(ii) With the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the violation, the person solicits or commands such other person to commit the violation, or aids or abets or agrees or attempts to aid or abet such other person in planning or committing the violation, or having a legal duty to prevent the commission of the violation fails to make the effort the person is required to make.

(b) In the prosecution for a violation in which liability is based upon the conduct of another person, it is no defense that such other person has not been prosecuted for or convicted of any violation based upon the conduct in question or has been convicted of a different violation.

(2) When an act is required, such that it may be done by an agent as well as the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by the agent, acting under either authorized or apparent authority.

(3) In addition to the liability of a corporation, firm, partnership, association, or joint stock company otherwise imposed by the ordinances of this city, such an organization is guilty of a violation if:

(a) The conduct constituting the violation is engaged in by an officer, employee or agent of the organization acting within the course and scope of their office, employment or agency; or

(b) The conduct constituting the violation is knowingly tolerated by the officers, employees or agents of the organization.

(c) A person is liable for conduct constituting a violation which he or she performs or causes to be performed in the name of or in behalf of a corporation, firm, partnership, association, or joint stock company to the same extent as if such conduct were performed in his or her individual capacity. [Ord. 275 § 19, 1999].


2.05.200 Classification of offenses – Penalties.

(1) Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all violations of city ordinances are classified as infractions.

(2) If provided for in the ordinance defining the violation, the court may order restitution in addition to any penalty or fine. The court may order community service in lieu of a penalty or fine if the defendant demonstrates a manifest and documented inability to pay. [Ord. 275 § 20, 1999].

Article III. Rules of Procedure


2.05.210 Citation – Complaint – Summons.

(1) A citation substantially conforming to the requirements of this section may be used for citing violations of this code.

(2) A citation shall contain the following:

(a) Complaint;

(b) Department record;

(c) Summons.

(3) A summons shall contain the following information:

(a) The name of the court; the name of the person or persons cited; the date on which the citation was issued; the name of the complainant; and the time at which the person cited is to appear in court;

(b) A statement or designation of the violation in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so; and the date and place the violation is alleged to have occurred;

(c) A notice to the person or persons cited that a complaint will be filed with the court based on the violation;

(d) The maximum amount of penalty or bail, if any, fixed for the violation, and a statement notifying the person that a money judgment may be entered up to the maximum amount of the penalty or the cost of nuisance abatement, along with other costs allowed by law if the defendant fails to appear.

(4) A complaint shall contain the following information:

(a) The name of the court; the name of the city in whose name action is being brought; and the name of the defendant or defendants;

(b) A statement or designation of the violation in such a manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so; and the time and place of the alleged violation;

(c) A verification that the complainant swears or affirms that he or she has reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person or persons cited have violated a provision of this code.

(5) The citation may also contain additional information as may be appropriate for administrative departments of the city, including an indication of whether a written warning was previously issued. [Ord. 275 § 21, 1999].


2.05.220 Persons authorized to issue citations – Complaints by private citizens.

(1) A citation may be issued by the codes enforcement officer, public safety officer or fire marshal if he or she has reasonable grounds to believe that the person or persons to be charged are in actual violation of a provision, other than a criminal provision, of this code. A citation may be issued by the public safety officer if the officer has probable cause to believe that the person to be charged with the violation is in violation of a criminal provision of this code.

(2)(a) Any person may seek to have the city issue a citation for violation of this code by filing a complaint with the codes enforcement officer or public safety officer, if such violation is a violation of a criminal provision of this code, alleging under oath and upon personal knowledge material facts which, if proven, would constitute a violation; provided, that such person can testify at trial to material facts in the case.

(b) Any person who, in connection with the issuance of a citation or the filing of a complaint under this subsection, knowingly certifies falsely to matters set forth therein shall be subject to a penalty upon conviction of $1,000. [Ord. 275 § 22, 1999].


2.05.230 Delivery and filing of the summons and complaint.

The codes enforcement officer, public safety officer or fire marshal, as the case may be, shall cause summons to be served on the person cited and shall file the complaint along with proof of service of the summons with the court. [Ord. 275 § 23, 1999].


2.05.240 Right to counsel.

(1) A defendant may be represented by counsel at any trial for a violation, but defense counsel shall not be provided at public expense.

(2) At the defendant’s first appearance in municipal court, the defendant shall be informed by the court of his or her right to have counsel before pleading to the violation, and shall be asked if he or she wishes to obtain counsel before pleading.

(3) At any trial for an infraction, the city attorney may aid the codes enforcement officer, public safety officer or fire marshal in preparing evidence and obtaining witnesses, but shall not appear unless the defendant retains counsel. The court shall give the city attorney timely notice if defense counsel is to appear at trial. [Ord. 275 § 24, 1999].


2.05.250 First appearance – Return of summons.

The defendant shall:

(1) Either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons; or

(2) Prior to such time, deliver to the court the summons together with the amount of the penalty or bail, if any, set forth in the summons, along with a request for a hearing or a written statement in explanation or mitigation; or

(3) Prior to such time, deliver the summons together with a waiver of hearing and plea of guilty, along with the penalty or bail set forth in the summons. [Ord. 275 § 25, 1999].


2.05.260Effect of defendant’s written statement in explanation or mitigation. 

(1) If the defendant submits a written statement in explanation or mitigation and does not request a hearing, the statement shall constitute a waiver of hearing, a consent to judgment by the court and assessment of penalty, if, based on the written statement and testimony or written statements of other witnesses, if any, the court finds the defendant violated the provision of this code with which the defendant has been charged.

(2) If the defendant submits a request for a hearing along with the written statement in explanation or mitigation and requests a hearing, the court shall fix the date and time for hearing and shall mail notice to the defendant at least 15 days in advance of the hearing. [Ord. 275 § 26, 1999].


2.05.270 Court-ordered hearing – Judgment on failure to appear.

(1) In any proceeding where the defendant fails to appear, the court may, in its discretion, direct a hearing be held.

(2) The court may proceed to make a determination without a hearing in the following circumstances:

(a) The defendant fails to appear at the time, date and place specified in the citation and a hearing is not required under ordinance or statute.

(b) The defendant appeared at the time, date and place specified in the citation and requested a hearing or was ordered by the court to appear at a subsequent hearing, and the person fails to appear at the time, date and place set for the hearing or subsequent hearing on the matter.

(c) A determination under this section shall be based on the citation and on any evidence the court may, in its discretion, determine to be appropriate.

(d) Upon making a determination under this section, the court may enter judgment and may impose the penalty, along with a money judgment for costs, assessments and any restitution authorized by ordinance or law.

(i) If the court orders restitution, the court need not make a determination of the defendant’s ability to pay. The defendant may seek review of his or her ability to pay by filing a written request with the court within one year after entry of judgment. The court shall set a hearing on the matter, and may reduce the amount of restitution ordered if the defendant establishes at the hearing that he or she is unable to pay the restitution in whole or in part.

(3) If judgment is entered under this section after the defendant has failed to appear, on motion by the defendant and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve the defendant from the judgment, upon showing that the failure to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. The motion must be made within a reasonable time, but in no event more than one year after entry of judgment in the matter, unless the judgment is for the abatement of a nuisance in which case the motion must be made prior to the time the city has expended funds to abate the nuisance.

(4) No judgment may be entered under this section for failure to appear unless the summons contained a statement notifying the defendant that a money judgment may be entered against the defendant up to the maximum amount of the penalty, along with other costs allowed by law if the defendant fails to appear. [Ord. 275 § 27, 1999].


2.05.280 First appearance.

At the time of first appearance, the court shall apprise the defendant of the nature of the alleged violation, and advise the defendant that he or she may plead guilty or not guilty, or plead guilty with matters in mitigation, as the case may be. Upon a plea of guilty, or a plea of guilty with matters in mitigation, judgment shall be entered. Upon a plea of not guilty, the court shall set a trial date. [Ord. 275 § 28, 1999].


2.05.290 Discovery.

(1) Upon request by the defendant, the codes enforcement officer, public safety officer or fire marshal shall disclose to the defendant the following material and information within his or her possession and control:

(a) The names and addresses of persons whom the city intends to call as witnesses at trial, together with relevant written or recorded statements or memoranda of any oral statements made by such persons;

(b) Any written or recorded statements or memoranda of any oral statements made by the defendant or co-defendant if the trial is to be a joint trial;

(c) Any reports or statements of experts made in connection with the particular case, including results of examinations and of scientific tests, experiments and comparisons which the city intends to offer into evidence at trial;

(d) Any books, papers, documents, photographs, or tangible objects which the city intends to offer into evidence at trial or which were obtained from or belong to the defendant.

(2) Upon request by the city, the defendant shall disclose to the city the following material and information within the possession and control of the defendant:

(a) The names and addresses of persons whom the defendant intends to call as witnesses at trial, together with relevant written or recorded statements or memoranda of any oral statements of such persons;

(b) Any reports or statements of experts made in connection with the particular case, including results of examinations and of scientific tests, experiments and comparisons which the defendant intends to offer into evidence at trial;

(c) Any books, papers, documents, photographs, or tangible objects which the defendant intends to offer into evidence at trial.

(3) All discovery requests shall be made not less than 15 days, and all discovery completed not less than 10 days, prior to trial on the matter.

(4) The following material and information shall not be subject to discovery under this section:

(a) Work product, legal research, records, correspondence, reports or memoranda to the extent that they contain opinions, theories or conclusions of the city attorney, codes enforcement officer, public safety officer, fire marshal or other city official in connection with the investigation, prosecution of the violation, or such documents to the extent they contain opinions, theories or conclusions of the defendant or defendant’s attorney in connection with the defense of the violation;

(b) The identity of a confidential informant where disclosure of the identity of the informant is exempt under Oregon law and failure to disclose the identity of the informant will not infringe on the constitutional rights of the defendant.

(5) The court may order any party who refuses to comply with a discovery request under this section to permit inspection of the material, may grant a continuance, may refuse to permit the witness to testify, may refuse to receive into evidence material not disclosed, or may enter such other order it deems appropriate under the circumstances. Upon a showing of good cause, the court may, after in camera examination, enter an order that specified disclosures be denied, restricted or deferred or make such other order it deems appropriate under the circumstances. The court shall make a record of such examination, which shall then be sealed and preserved in the records of the court, and made available to the appellate court in the event of an appeal. [Ord. 275 § 29, 1999].


2.05.300 Trial without jury – Commencement – Burden of proof – Proof of mental state not an element.

(1) The trial shall be by the court without a jury, and shall not be scheduled for less than 15 days from the date of the citation, unless the defendant waives the 15-day period.

(2) The city shall have the burden of proving the alleged violation, other than a criminal provision of this code, by a preponderance of the evidence.

(3) A defendant may not be required to be a witness at trial.

(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the court may admit the affidavit of any witness into evidence in lieu of taking testimony orally in court. The authority granted under this subsection is subject to all of the following:

(a) In order to allow testimony to be presented by affidavit, the court must adopt rules and procedures allowing for the use of affidavit;

(b) The court shall allow testimony by affidavit only upon signed waiver by the defendant of the right to have the witness present for examination in court;

(c) The court may allow testimony by affidavit under this subsection with respect to any matter including, but not limited to, matter described in ORS 40.460;

(d) Nothing in this subsection requires the defendant or any other witness to waive the right to appear if testimony is taken by affidavit as provided by this subsection.

(5) Unless specifically set forth in the ordinance which is the basis for the violation, proof of a culpable mental state is not an element of a violation.

(6) The determination at trial shall be on the citation and upon any evidence that the court, in its discretion, determines is appropriate. The court may make such further investigation it deems necessary to resolve the case, and may call witnesses or order the production of documents and things that pertain to the matter. [Ord. 275 § 30, 1999].


2.05.310 Judgment as lien.

Any judgment entered shall be a lien against any real property owned by the defendant in the city, shall be entered upon the city’s lien docket and may be foreclosed according to law or ordinance. [Ord. 275 § 31, 1999].


2.05.320 Procedure upon order of nuisance abatement.

(1) If the defendant fails to abate any nuisance within the time directed by the court, the city may cause abatement to occur and seek a money judgment as provided by this section. The court shall retain jurisdiction over the proceeding until final order is entered that the nuisance has been abated.

(2) If the defendant fails to abate a nuisance within the time period provided by the court, the city may cause the nuisance to be abated, and move the court for entry of a money judgment. Upon receipt of the city’s motion, the court shall cause a notice and statement of judgment to be mailed to the defendant at the defendant’s address as indicated on the most recent Coos County tax roll, or personally delivered to the defendant. The notice and statement shall state that objections to the judgment must be filed with the court within 20 days of the date of mailing of the notice and statement of judgment or personal delivery thereof, as the case may be, and that any objection shall state with particularity the grounds for the objection. The fact that a contract was bid for nuisance abatement pursuant to Oregon public contracting law shall be irrebuttable presumption as to the reasonableness of the costs of abatement.

(3) Upon receipt of a timely and properly filed objection to notice and statement of judgment by the defendant, the court shall schedule a hearing on the grounds for the objection. After hearing, or after the expiration of the 20-day period for filing objections, if no objection has been received, the court shall enter judgment for the city. [Ord. 275 § 32, 1999].


2.05.330 Appeals.

(1) A party to a proceeding in municipal court may appeal from any judgment or other final determinative order. Any appeal from the municipal court shall be by writ of review, taken and perfected in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 34.

(2) In addition to any notices required to be served under ORS Chapter 34, notice of the appeal shall also be served upon the city attorney.

(3) When the notice of appeal has been filed with the municipal court, the appellate court shall have jurisdiction over the matter. Failure to serve a notice of appeal on the city attorney shall not preclude jurisdiction in the appellate court.

(4) No undertaking providing for the payment of costs and disbursements is required for an appeal taken under this section. [Ord. 275 § 33, 1999].


Chapter 2.10 CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD

Sections:

2.10.010    Contract review board.

2.10.020    Rules of the board.


2.10.010 Contract review board.

Pursuant to ORS Chapter 279A, the city council of the city of Coos Bay is hereby continued as the local contract review board for the city. The board shall have all powers granted it by ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C. [Ord. 365 § 1, 2005].


2.10.020 Rules of the board.

The board shall have the authority to adopt rules to carry out its powers and duties, including the authority to modify and/or amend such rules. Such rules may be adopted by ordinance or resolution. [Ord. 365 § 2, 2005].


Chapter 2.15 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD

Sections:

2.15.010    Economic development review board created.

2.15.020    Appointment and qualifications.

2.15.030    Operation.

2.15.040    Expenses.

2.15.050    Duties.

2.15.060    Revolving loan fund.

2.15.070    Chapter changes.


2.15.010 Economic development review board created.

There is hereby created the economic development review board of the city of Coos Bay. The board shall consist of five members. The members shall serve for staggered two-year terms; provided, that three of the members first appointed to the board shall serve for one year only. No member shall serve for more than two consecutive terms. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1985].


2.15.020 Appointment and qualifications. 

The city council shall make the appointments to the board. To be eligible to serve, a member must reside in the city, or own property in the city, or have a place of business in the city. To the extent possible, the board shall include persons with financial backgrounds, persons with small business experience, including retail, wholesale, and manufacturing, and persons with training in accounting. [Ord. 43 § 2, 1985].


2.15.030 Operation.

The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, set its own meeting places and dates, and keep its own minutes. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. [Ord. 43 § 3, 1985].


2.15.040 Expenses.

Members of the board shall serve without compensation. Any expenses authorized by the city manager shall be reimbursed. [Ord. 43 § 4, 1985].


2.15.050 Duties.

The board shall study, review, and investigate methods to encourage business expansion and investment in the city through financial assistance programs. It shall make recommendations to the city council and report at least annually on its activities. With the approval of the city council, the board may apply for federal, state, local or private funds for all or any of its purposes. The board may, with the approval of the council, accept any gifts, donations, bequests, grants, or assistance for all or any of its purposes. [Ord. 43 § 5, 1985].


2.15.060 Revolving loan fund.

The board shall administer the revolving loan fund of the city as created and budgeted by the city council. Loans from the fund shall be made by the board on such terms and conditions as it determines subject only to the conditions and considerations set forth herein.

(1) Loans will be made only to those applicants which have or are able to obtain financing from a private institution for the same proposal, with such loans limited to an amount equal to 50 percent of the value of the private loan, and such loan to be managed by the financial institution providing the private financing.

(2) Loans will be made only to applicants which have businesses located or to be located (a) within the city limits on property zoned commercial or industrial, or (b) have businesses located on commercially or industrially zoned property within the Bay Area on lands designated for urban uses or within an urban growth boundary.

(3) Loans will be made only to applicants when employment as a result of such loan will be increased by at least 10 percent.

(4) Preference in approving loans shall be given to:

(a) Projects located within the city limits;

(b) Projects which employ 25 persons or less;

(c) Projects for manufacturing firms which derive at least one-half of their income from nonretail sales;

(d) Projects which are a product of local effort; and

(e) Projects which will utilize local resources. [Ord. 88, 1986; Ord. 43 § 6, 1985].


2.15.070 Chapter changes.

The board may recommend or request changes in this chapter to the city council as it deems advisable or necessary. [Ord. 43 § 7, 1985].


Chapter 2.20 FIBER OPTICS CONSORTIUM

Sections:

2.20.010    Creation.

2.20.020    Effective date.

2.20.030    Purpose.

2.20.040    Powers – Duties.

2.20.050    City manager.


2.20.010 Creation.

It is the intent of the Coos Bay city council to create an intergovernmental entity, to be known as the Fiber South Consortium, by an intergovernmental agreement entered into by the city and other units of local government pursuant to the provisions of ORS 190.003 et seq. [Ord. 276 § 1, 1999].


2.20.020 Effective date.

The effective date of such intergovernmental agreement shall be July 1, 1999, or such later date as shall be the date two participating units of local government shall have adopted an ordinance ratifying the creation of the Regional Fiber Consortium. [Ord. 276 § 2, 1999].


2.20.030 Purpose.

The public purposes for which the Regional Fiber Consortium shall be created shall be:

(1) To assume ownership and control of fiber optic cable obtained by the consortium, or by any member of government, that the government in its discretion deems appropriate to contribute to the consortium.

(2) To provide for the members a fiber optic system, or components thereof, that is consistent with available resources and best serves the public interest in an efficient manner.

(3) To provide a forum for communication and consultation among members and to provide an opportunity for a cooperative and equitable sharing of the expenses, data, expertise, experience, and plans of each unit of local government.

(4) If feasible for and agreeable to some or all of the members, take joint or common action to provide the appropriate level of communication services to the citizens of the various jurisdictions.

(5) To acquire such additional tangible and intangible assets as are deemed necessary to fulfill the other purposes of the consortium. [Ord. 276 § 3, 1999].


2.20.040 Powers – Duties.

The powers, duties, and functions of the Regional Fiber Consortium shall be:

(1) Plan for fiber optic system development for the consortium.

(2) Direct and manage the use of a fiber optic system or systems obtained by the consortium or its members.

(3) When requested, act as the agent of the members in the preparation and negotiation of agreements concerning the acquisition, management, and use of the consortium’s fiber optic system.

(4) Carry out further responsibilities and functions as provided by the members. [Ord. 276 § 4, 1999].


2.20.050 City manager.

The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to evidence this ratification of the creation of the Fiber South Consortium by executing, on behalf of the city of Coos Bay, a copy of an intergovernmental agreement to establish a consortium of local governments for the ownership and operation of a fiber optic system consistent with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 276 § 5, 1999].


Chapter 2.25 LIBRARY AND LIBRARY BOARD

Sections:

2.25.010    Continuation of library.

2.25.020    The library board.

2.25.030    Functions – Powers – Duties.

2.25.040    Library staff.


2.25.010 Continuation of library.

The public library of Coos Bay is continued under the provisions of ORS 357.400 to 357.621. [Ord. 57 § 1, 1986].


2.25.020 The library board.

(1) The public library shall be governed by a library board.

(2) The library board shall have seven members.

(3) Except as provided by subsection (5) of this section, members shall hold office for terms of four years, with the member’s term of office commencing on July 1st in the year of their appointment.

(a) Terms of office shall be staggered, with terms of no more than two members expiring in any year. Members shall be limited to serving no more than two full consecutive terms; however, any person may be reappointed after an interval of one year.

(b) Up to three appointees to the library board may, at any one time, reside in Coos County within the boundaries of School District No. 9, but outside the city limits of Coos Bay.

(4) At the expiration of the term of any member of the library board, the council shall appoint a new member or reappoint the incumbent member.

(5) If a vacancy occurs, the council shall appoint a new member for the unexpired term.

(6) The library board may recommend persons to the mayor or council for appointment to any open position on the library board, based upon criteria determined by the library board to be necessary and proper for effective library board membership.

(7) After each regular appointment, the library board shall meet and shall elect officers from among its members. The library director shall serve as secretary to the library board and shall keep a record of its actions.

(8) Library board members may not be removed during their period of appointment, except for good cause shown. [Ord. 218, 1995; Ord. 57 § 2, 1986].


2.25.030 Functions – Powers – Duties.

(1) The library board shall have such powers and duties which are assigned or delegated to it by the Charter, ordinances, or resolutions of the city of Coos Bay.

(2) The library board shall:

(a) Advise the city manager regarding the selection of the library director and the prescription of duties of the library director.

(b) Formulate bylaws, rules and policies for the governance of the library.

(c) Prepare and submit an annual budget request.

(d) Approve all expenditures from the library budget.

(e) Advise the city council regarding the selection of sites and locations for library buildings or other library facilities.

(f) Subject to the rules of the local contract review board, authorize the library director to enter into contracts for library purposes.

(g) Perform such other activities as are necessary for the maintenance of the library.

(3) The library board shall have the following powers and duties regarding donations of property to the library:

(a) The library board may accept donations of real or personal property, may use any real or personal property offered to the library, and may expend any funds donated to the library for library purposes.

(b) Any donation to the library shall be administered according to the terms of the donation, but shall be held in the name of the city of Coos Bay.

(c) The library board may use funds donated to the library for the purchase or control of personal property necessary for library purposes.

(d) The library board may dispose of any item of personal property donated to the library with a market value less than $2,000. Any item of personal property donated to the library with a market value greater than $2,000 may be disposed of by the library board upon approval by the city council.

(e) The library board may request to have real property donated to the library declared surplus property as provided by Chapter 3.45 CBMC; upon declaration that such real property is surplus property, the property may be disposed of, and the proceeds disbursed to the library. [Ord. 218, 1995; Ord. 57 § 3, 1986].


2.25.040 Library staff.

The city manager, with advice of the library director and as budgeted by the council, shall hire staff, prescribe their duties, and shall determine compensation and working conditions for all employees of the library, including library director. [Ord. 57 § 4, 1986].


Chapter 2.30 PARKS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.30.010    Continuation of commission.

2.30.020    Members – Terms – Composition.

2.30.030    Resignation and removal.

2.30.040    Officers, meetings, rules and procedures.

2.30.050    Functions – Powers – Duties.


2.30.010 Continuation of commission.

The city parks commission, referred to as the “commission” in this chapter, is continued. [Ord. 56 § 1, 1986].


2.30.020 Members – Terms – Composition.

(1) The commission shall consist of eight voting members.

(2) The members shall be appointed by the council to serve four-year terms, except that members in office when the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect shall serve the terms for which they were originally appointed. Vacancies, except the regular expiration of a term, shall be filled by a temporary appointment made by the council for the remainder of the term.

(3) The membership shall be composed of one councilor, one planning commissioner, and the remaining positions may be filled by interested persons. Membership should, if possible, include members with knowledge and expertise not limited to the following areas:

(a) Landscape design profession.

(b) Landscaping business profession.

(c) Design profession.

(d) Parks management.

(4) All members shall be city residents. Members residing outside the city, but who own property within the city shall be considered to have such residential status. The council may allow membership for one nonresident who possesses subject matter expertise needed by the commission. [Ord. 450 § 1, 2013; Ord. 364 § 1, 2005; Ord. 213 § 1, 1995; Ord. 56 § 2, 1986].


2.30.030 Resignation and removal.

(1) A member of the commission may resign at any time by submitting a letter of resignation to the council.

(2) A member may be removed by the council for nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without excuse is considered to be in nonperformance of duty. The possible need for removal may be brought to the attention of the council by the commission. [Ord. 56 § 3, 1986].


2.30.040 Officers, meetings, rules and procedures.

(1) The commission members, by majority vote, shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a one-year term at the beginning of each year, and may reelect the incumbent. The chairperson shall preside over commission meetings and retain the right to vote. The vice-chairperson shall preside in the chairperson’s absence.

(2) The commission shall meet at least once a month. Meetings at other scheduled times may be announced at a prior meeting and thereby made a part of the record. A previously unannounced meeting may be called by the chair at the request of three commissioners or by the public works and development director for a time not earlier than 24 hours after notice is given.

(3) A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting any business.

(4) The commission shall make and maintain rules and regulations for its operation consistent with the City Charter, ordinances, and resolutions, subject to review and approval of the council.

(5) Members of the commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. [Ord. 450 § 2, 2013; Ord. 364 § 2, 2005; Ord. 56 § 4, 1986].


2.30.050 Functions – Powers – Duties.

(1) The commission shall have the powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be assigned to it by the Charter, ordinances, or resolutions of the city.

(2) The commission shall review and recommend to the council, shall coordinate with the planning commission as appropriate, and shall assist staff in the preparation of parks plans, site and building designs, development standards, and recreation services. These general duties shall include, but are not limited to: the identification of potential new sites to be added to the park and recreation system; recommendations on acquisition of park and recreation property including fund raising, grant assistance, or other revenue sources; recommendations on designation of open space; and recommendations on development of pedestrian trails and bikeways for accessibility to and within the park system for recreation and for transportation within the city. [Ord. 56 § 5, 1986].


Chapter 2.35 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.35.010    Establishment.

2.35.020    Membership.

2.35.030    Presiding members.

2.35.040    Compensation.

2.35.050    Quorum.

2.35.060    Meetings.

2.35.070    Powers and duties.


2.35.010 Establishment.

Pursuant to authority contained in the City Charter and state statutes, a planning commission of the city of Coos Bay is established. [Ord. 3 § 1, 1984].


2.35.020 Membership.

(1) The planning commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the city council.

(2) Eligible members shall have been residents of the city for at least one year, except that two members may reside outside the city limits but within Coos County if such persons own property within the city limits. A member may continue to serve the remainder of a term of office at the council’s discretion if a change in eligibility occurs.

(3) The terms of office shall be four years with no more than three terms expiring in any year. There shall be no limitation on reappointments.

(4) Upon expiration of a term of vacancy, the council shall publicly announce the vacancy and solicit applications. Selection shall be made by a ballot vote. If no person receives a majority, the two receiving the most votes shall be voted upon again.

(5) A member may be removed by the city council for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without an excuse approved by the planning commission or who has missed at least one-third of the meetings for any year is presumed to be in nonperformance of duty. The planning commission shall recommend to the council to declare the position vacant. Before making that decision, the council shall afford the commissioner the opportunity to be heard.

(6) The planning commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its operations and procedures consistent with the laws of this state and with the City Charter and ordinances of the city of Coos Bay, subject to review and approval by the city council. Membership shall comply with state statute. [Ord. 507 § 1, 2019; Ord. 3 § 2, 1984].


2.35.030 Presiding members.

(1) At its first meeting of each year, the commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair who shall have voting member status. The term of office shall be one year, although the officers shall hold office at the discretion of the commission. Officers are eligible for re-election.

(2) The vice-chair shall be the presiding officer in absence of the chair. [Ord. 3 § 3, 1984].


2.35.040 Compensation.

Members of the planning commission shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for authorized expenses. The commission shall keep an accurate record of all expenses of the commission. [Ord. 3 § 4, 1984].


2.35.050 Quorum.

A majority of the members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum cannot be obtained because of a conflict of interest, the quorum requirements shall be reduced to three for that issue only. If a quorum of three cannot be achieved by the next planning commission meeting, the issue will be forwarded to the city council. [Ord. 3 § 5, 1984].


2.35.060 Meetings.

The planning commission shall meet at least once a month. Meetings at other than regularly scheduled times may be announced at a prior meeting and thereby made a part of the record. A previously unannounced meeting may be called by the chair or at the request of three commissioners for a time not to be earlier than 24 hours after the notice is given. [Ord. 3 § 6, 1984].


2.35.070 Powers and duties.

The commission shall have the powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be assigned to it by Charter, ordinances, or resolutions of the city and by general laws of the state.

The planning commission shall function primarily as a comprehensive planning body by proposing policy and legislation to the city council and by implementing regulations relating to the growth and development of the community. The function of the planning commission may include the following:

(1) Study and review all elements of the Comprehensive Plan and make recommendations to the city council in order to comply with state law and to respond to changing circumstances.

(2) Formulate and recommend legislation, such as the land development ordinance or any other ordinance, which implements the comprehensive plan; review these ordinances to assure compliance with the plan and state law.

(3) Review and recommend detailed plans which relate to public facilities and services, housing, economic development, transportation, recreation, energy conservation, and natural resources, for the betterment of community growth and assist in the development of funding sources for public projects in these subject areas.

(4) Advance cooperative harmonious relationships with other planning groups, and public, semi-public, civic, and private planning and development activities.

(5) Make and file with the city council minutes of all meetings of the commission. [Ord. 3 § 7, 1984].


Chapter 2.40 DESIGN ASSISTANCE TEAM

Sections:

2.40.010    Purpose.

2.40.020    Design assistance team – Membership.

2.40.030    Meetings, rules, procedure.

2.40.040    Powers and duties of the design assistance team.


2.40.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to amend the duties of the design assistance team (DAT) which serves as an advisory body concerning design review and other matters regarding historic preservation, cultural, architectural, natural, or artistic resources, to the city of Coos Bay community development department, planning commission, city council and, if requested, the urban renewal agency for the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 472 § 1, 2015; Ord. 456 § 1, 2014].


2.40.020 Design assistance team – Membership.

(1) The design assistance team shall consist of up to seven members to be appointed by, and to serve at the pleasure of, the city council. A maximum of two members who do not reside, own a property or business within the Coos Bay city limits may be appointed. Members shall serve without compensation, but are eligible for reimbursement of expenses related to their service.

(2) Membership should, if possible, demonstrate competence, knowledge, or interest in historic preservation with preference given to those with professional experience in the fields of preservation, architecture, art, graphics, or design, archaeology, community history, building trades, real estate, or related specialties.

(3) The city council shall review applications and interview applicants for appointment to the design assistance team.

(4) Terms of appointment shall be four years, and shall be staggered, with no more than four terms expiring in any one year. The initial appointment of four members shall be for three years; the initial appointment for three members shall be for two years. Members shall be eligible for reappointment.

(5) The historic preservation officer shall request that the city council consider declaring the position vacant of any member who is absent from three meetings in a single calendar year without being excused prior to the meeting by the chair of the design assistance team.

(6) A vacancy created in the design assistance team shall be filled for the unexpired term of the predecessor in office. [Ord. 472 § 2, 2015; Ord. 456 § 2, 2014].


2.40.030 Meetings, rules, procedure.

(1) The design assistance team is encouraged to, either individually or as a group, meet with and act as a resource for the city at land use pre-application conferences with applicants and city staff as scheduled by the community development department.

(2) Meetings and records of the design assistance team are subject to Oregon public meetings law and public records law; provided, however, that to the extent not inconsistent with state and local laws, the committee may make and alter rules and regulations for its proceedings and operation.

(3) A majority of the members of the design assistance team shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum cannot be obtained because of a conflict of interest, the quorum requirements shall be reduced to three for that issue only. If a quorum of three cannot be achieved by the next design assistance team meeting, the issue will be forwarded to the city council.

(4) A chair and vice-chair shall be elected annually by and from the seated membership. Officers are eligible for reelection.

(5) The design assistance team shall meet at least four times a year, and as required to conduct business in a timely fashion. Notice of the meetings shall be in accordance with applicable state law. Meeting minutes, applications for certificates of appropriateness, landmark nominations, records of designation, staff reports, and decisions of the committee shall be created and maintained as public records in accordance with applicable local state laws. [Ord. 472 § 3, 2015; Ord. 456 § 3, 2014].


2.40.040 Powers and duties of the design assistance team.

(1) The design assistance team shall function as an advisory body in implementing and interpreting architectural design review, as set forth in the city of Coos Bay land development ordinance.

(2) The design assistance team shall cooperate with the community development department, planning commission, and city council, as well as other local bodies, to further the architectural design and to assure harmonious and integrated planning within Coos Bay.

(3) The design assistance team shall, upon referral by the planning department, planning commission or city council, review specific public and private proposals for consistency and compliance with the city’s land development ordinance.

(4) In no instance shall the design assistance team’s action conflict with the land development ordinance, the building codes, other applicable city ordinances, or state or federal requirements.

(5) The design assistance team may, individually or as a group, meet with and act as a resource for other persons or groups interested in undertaking projects which are directed at preserving historic, cultural, architectural, natural or artistic resources in the Coos Bay area, including those areas subject to the Coos Bay estuary management plan, but shall not, without prior approval by the city council, have the authority to endorse or officially support any particular project. This section shall not be interpreted to limit in any way the ability of a member of the design assistance team from being employed in their professional capacity, including their ability to support their client and/or customer’s particular project with the city.

(6) The design assistance team shall employ the procedures and criteria of the historic preservation ordinance to identify, recognize, and preserve significant properties related to the community’s history; encourage the rehabilitation and ongoing viability of historic buildings and structures; strengthen public support for historic preservation efforts within the community; foster civic pride; and encourage cultural heritage tourism.

(7) The design assistance team shall identify and evaluate properties in the city of Coos Bay and maintain a Historic Resource Survey consistent with the standards of the Oregon State Historic Preservation Office, hereinafter referred to as “SHPO.”

(8) The design assistance team shall support the enforcement of all state laws relating to historic preservation and may comment on local, state, or federal issues, laws, and requests relating to historic preservation.

(9) The design assistance team shall undertake such other advisory duties as may be delegated to it by the director of community development or city council. [Ord. 472 § 4, 2015; Ord. 456 § 4, 2014].


Chapter 2.45 COOS BAY/NORTH BEND TOURISM AND PROMOTIONS COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.45.010    Intent.

2.45.020    Effective date.

2.45.030    Purpose.

2.45.040    Powers, duties and functions of the intergovernmental entity.


2.45.010 Intent.

It is the intent of the city councils of the city of Coos Bay and the city of North Bend to amend the existing intergovernmental agreement entitled “An Agreement Establishing the Coos Bay/North Bend Tourism and Promotions Committee: An Intergovernmental Entity of the City of Coos Bay and the City of North Bend” (the agreement). [Ord. 358 § 1, 2004; Ord. 245 § 1, 1997].


2.45.020 Effective date.

The amendment to the agreement shall become effective upon the later date of execution of the amendment to the agreement by the city of Coos Bay and the city of North Bend. [Ord. 358 § 2, 2004; Ord. 246 § 1, 1997; Ord. 245 § 2, 1997].


2.45.030 Purpose.

The purpose of the amendment to the agreement is to include as an additional board member to the Coos Bay/North Bend tourism and promotions committee a representative of the business community of Charleston. Such additional board member will not have the right to vote. [Ord. 358 § 3, 2004; Ord. 245 § 3, 1997].


2.45.040 Powers, duties and functions of the intergovernmental entity.

The committee shall, to the extent provided by law, have all the powers, duties and functions specifically delegated or necessarily implied to it by the agreement. [Ord. 245 § 4, 1997].


Chapter 2.50 WATER BOARD

Sections:

2.50.010    Qualifications – Appointment – Removal.

2.50.020    Powers and duties of appointees.


2.50.010 Qualifications – Appointment – Removal.

(1) Appointees from the city of Coos Bay to the Coos Bay/North Bend water board shall have resided in the city of Coos Bay for a period of not less than one year prior to appointment.

(2) The term of appointment shall be for four years, with the terms of appointments staggered on a two-year basis. Appointments may be renewed for any number of terms. Terms of appointment shall commence on January 1st. Appointees may not be removed from office, except for good cause shown.

(3) Nominations for appointments shall be made by the mayor, and shall be subject to confirmation by the Coos Bay city council. Such nominations shall be in writing, and submitted for consideration by the council at least two weeks prior to the scheduled date for confirmation. Confirmation may be made by written ballot, and shall require majority vote.

(4) The city recorder shall give written notice to the council at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of an appointee’s term of office.

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, during the initial appointments under this chapter, the first appointee taking office shall serve until December 31, 2004; the second appointee taking office shall serve until December 31, 2002. For each appointment thereafter, the appointees’ terms shall be as provided by subsection (2) of this section.

(6) Should a vacancy occur, the appointee to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. [Ord. 285 § 1, 1999].


2.50.020 Powers and duties of appointees.

The appointees shall discharge the duties conferred upon them pursuant to Section 9.8 of the city of Coos Bay Charter; shall keep the city of Coos Bay apprised of the operations of the Coos Bay/North Bend water board; and shall ensure that a yearly report shall be made by the Coos Bay/North Bend water board to the city, showing the financial condition of the municipal waterworks, along with a financial statement of the Coos Bay/North Bend water board’s yearly operation. [Ord. 285 § 2, 1999].


Chapter 2.55 BONDING OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections:

2.55.010    Bond requirement.

2.55.020    Approval and deposit.

2.55.030    Premium.


2.55.010 Bond requirement.

The council may, by resolution, authorize and approve the execution of a blanket bond covering part or all of the officers and employees having duties involving the handling, receipting for, or custody of money, checks or securities or who have the custody of or are accountable for city supplies or property. The council may, by resolution, require city officers and employees to execute corporate surety bonds in such amounts as the council may determine and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the officer’s or employee’s official duties. [Ord. 65 § 1, 1986].


2.55.020 Approval and deposit.

All bonds shall be approved as to form and execution by the city attorney and shall be deposited with the recorder. [Ord. 65 § 2, 1986].


2.55.030 Premium.

The premium on any bond or bonds shall be paid by the city. [Ord. 65 § 3, 1986].


Chapter 2.60 NOMINATION PROCEDURES FOR ELECTIVE CITY OFFICES

Sections:

2.60.010    Methods of nomination.

2.60.020    Nomination forms – Filing period.


2.60.010 Methods of nomination.

Any person possessing the qualifications required by the City Charter may file for candidacy for city office by either of the following methods:

(1) Nomination may be made by filing a declaration of candidacy accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of not less than 25 qualified voters in the city.

(2) Nomination may be made by filing a declaration of candidacy, accompanied by a fee of $25.00. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1986].


2.60.020 Nomination forms – Filing period.

Filing for candidacy shall conform to state law applicable to the election. [Ord. 378 § 1, 2005; Ord. 60 § 2, 1986].


Chapter 2.65 ADVISORY ELECTIONS

Sections:

2.65.010    Council may submit – Results not binding.

2.65.020    Election dates.

2.65.030    Election statutes applicable.


2.65.010 Council may submit – Results not binding.

The council may submit advisory questions to the voters of the city. Advisory questions may be used to test the opinions of the voters of the city on issues presented by the council. The results are advisory only and have no legal binding effect. [Ord. 59 § 1, 1986].


2.65.020 Election dates.

Advisory questions may be included on a ballot submitted in a general or special election. [Ord. 59 § 2, 1986].


2.65.030 Election statutes applicable.

All statutory provisions relating to notices, ballot form and general conduct of elections shall apply to advisory questions submitted to the voters of the city. [Ord. 59 § 3, 1986].


Chapter 2.70 PROCEDURES FOR CLAIMS FILED UNDER BALLOT MEASURE 37

Sections:

2.70.010    Purpose.

2.70.020    Definitions.

2.70.030    Measure 37 demands – Ripeness – Claim accrual.

2.70.040    Contents of demands for compensation – Filing.

2.70.050    Notice of demand for just compensation.

2.70.060    Claim processing and evaluation.

2.70.070    Recommendation to city council.

2.70.080    Modification, removal or waiver of land use regulation.

2.70.090    Private cause of action.


2.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish the contents of a demand for just compensation under Measure 37, in order that the merits of claims under Measure 37 be adequately evaluated; to provide procedures for processing such demands; to provide a fair, just and expeditious evaluation of Measure 37 claims by the city; and to protect the citizens of the city of Coos Bay from the detrimental effects to public health, safety and welfare that would result from the granting of nonmeritorious claims. The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the city of Coos Bay’s home rule authority under the Oregon Constitution, Article XI, Section 2, and apply to those demands for just compensation that are or may be allowed under Measure 37, enacted by the electors of the state of Oregon as a statute of the state of Oregon on November 2, 2004. [Ord. 362 § 1, 2005].


2.70.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, and the evaluation, assessment and processing of Measure 37 claims, the following mean:

“Appraisal” means a written statement of an opinion of the value of real property prepared by an appraiser licensed by the Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon, and who holds the applicable certification for the type of appraisal.

“City manager” means the Coos Bay city manager, or the city manager’s designee.

“Common and historically recognized public nuisance under common law” means unreasonable interferences with rights common to the general public in the use and enjoyment of land, as recognized in judicial decisions applying common law rules. Under common law rules, an interference is unreasonable if the harm to the public right is significant, and the particular public use interfered with is well suited to the character of the locality and the owner’s proposed use of the property is unsuited to the character of that locality.

“Current owner” means the present fee simple owner of real property that is the subject of the demand for compensation, as reflected in the deed records of Coos County, Oregon, or the present owner of any interest in real property that is the subject of the demand for compensation, as reflected in a written instrument conveying or creating the interest.

“Demand for just compensation” means a written demand for just compensation by current owner pursuant to Measure 37 that fulfills the requirements of this chapter.

“Exempt land use regulation” means an exempt land use regulation, as defined by Measure 37.

“Fair market value of the property” means the minimum amount of cash which could reasonably be expected to be paid for the purchase of a current owner’s real property or interest in real property, by an informed buyer, acting without compulsion, to an informed seller, also acting without compulsion, in an arm’s-length transaction.

“Family member” means a member of the current owner’s family, as defined by Measure 37, including any amendments thereto.

“Interest in real property” means any legally recognized, alienable interest in real property, having monetary value, which is less than a fee simple absolute.

“Just compensation” means an amount of money equal to the reduction in the fair market value of real property that is the direct result of the enactment and enforcement of a land use regulation which provides the basis for a demand for just compensation, as of the date a current owner makes the demand for just compensation. A reduction of the fair market value of property shall exclude any reduction resulting from events, actions or occurrences other than the restriction of uses permitted by the land use regulation, and include, but are not limited to, reductions resulting from depreciation, changes in local, state or national economic conditions, failures by the current owner to gainfully use the real property, lack of public services to the real property, reductions in fair market value resulting from the existence of an historically or commonly recognized public nuisance or private nuisance on or about the property or surrounding property, changes in the value of the real property resulting from fluctuations in the real estate market, or conditions on surrounding property.

“Land use regulation” means a land use regulation as defined by Measure 37, including any amendments thereto.

“Measure 37 claim” means a claim for just compensation arising from the circumstance set forth in Ballot Measure 37, adopted by the people of the state of Oregon on November 2, 2004.

“Real property” means privately held lots, parcels or tracts, as described in the deed conveying the real property, or the interest in real property as conveyed in such lots, parcels or tracts, owned by a current owner. [Ord. 362 § 2, 2005].


2.70.030 Measure 37 demands – Ripeness – Claim accrual.

The current owner of real property may submit a demand for just compensation under Measure 37 if the city enacts or enforces a new land use regulation, other than an exempt regulation, against the property; the land use regulation was enacted after the date the current owner, or, in proper case, a family member of the owner, acquired the real property; the land use regulation restricts uses otherwise permitted on the real property; and the restriction imposed by the land use regulation has the effect of causing a reduction in the fair market value of the real property. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2005].


2.70.040 Contents of demands for compensation – Filing.

(1) In order to adequately, completely and expeditiously assess the validity of a current owner’s demand for compensation, and to protect the public interest when determining whether to modify, remove or not apply a land use regulation, any demand for compensation submitted to the city shall consist of and include the following:

(a) A completed demand, on the form provided by the city, for just compensation signed by the current owner upon forms prescribed by the city manager;

(b) Copies of all deeds and other instruments conveying interests in the affected real property to the current owner;

(c) A title report issued not more than 30 days prior to the submission of the demand for just compensation, which shall include the title history, the date the current owner acquired title to the real property, the interests held by any other current owners, an identification of any restrictions on use of the real property unrelated to the land use regulation against which just compensation is sought, including, but not limited to, any restrictions established by covenants, conditions and restrictions, easements, other private restrictions, or other regulations, restrictions or contracts;

(d) A copy of the land use regulation that is the basis for the demand for just compensation;

(e) For a Measure 37 claim based on descent, proof that the prior owner was a family member of the current owner;

(f) The amount of the alleged reduction in fair market value of the real property that the current owner believes is the amount of just compensation supported by an appraisal based on the use or uses to which the current owner can and intends to put the real property; and

(g) Any other facts the current owner believes are material to the evaluation and assessment of claim for just compensation.

(2) Demands for just compensation shall be submitted to the city manager. No demand for just compensation shall be deemed submitted until all materials required by this section have been provided to the city manager by the current owner. A notice of submission shall be sent to the current owner at the time the city manager determines the current owner’s demand for just compensation has been deemed submitted. [Ord. 362 § 4, 2005].


2.70.050 Notice of demand for just compensation.

(1) The city manager shall mail notice of demand to any other owner with an interest in the current owner’s real property, and to all owners of real property located within 250 feet of the current owner’s real property, as listed on the most recent property tax assessment rolls. The notice shall:

(a) State the basis of the demand, the amount of the compensation sought and the land use regulation which is the basis of the demand;

(b) Identify the current owner’s real property by the street address or other easily understood geographical reference;

(c) State that person noticed may provide written comments on the demand, and provide the date on which written comments are due;

(d) Identify a city representative and telephone number to contact to obtain additional information; and

(e) State that a copy of the demand and the supporting documents submitted by the current owner are available for inspection at no cost, and that copies will be provided at reasonable cost.

(2) Written comments regarding a demand may be submitted to the city manager. Comments must be received by the city manager within 14 days from the date of mailing of the notice of demand for just compensation. [Ord. 362 § 5, 2005].


2.70.060 Claim processing and evaluation.

(1) After the current owner’s demand for just compensation is deemed submitted, the city manager shall review and evaluate the demand and determine whether the demand meets the requirements and satisfies the criteria of Measure 37. The city manager may obtain other appraisals and opinions of the value of the real property for the purposes of evaluating the current owner’s estimate of the reduction in the fair market value.

(2) The current owner has the burden of proof to demonstrate to the city by preponderance of the evidence that just compensation is due under Measure 37.

(3) The city manager shall maintain a record of all costs, including personnel costs, incurred by the city in processing the demand for just compensation. Following final action by the city on the claim at the local level, the city manager shall send to the property owner a bill for the actual costs, including staff and legal costs, that the city incurred in reviewing and acting upon the claim.

(4) If the property owner does not pay the amount due within 30 days, then the city shall pursue collections, including filing a lien on the subject property. [Ord. 362 § 6, 2005].


2.70.070 Recommendation to city council.

(1) The city manager shall forward a recommendation to the city council, supported by findings, that the current owner’s demand for just compensation be denied or granted in whole or in part. If the city manager recommends the demand be granted, in whole or in part, the city manager shall include a recommendation whether just compensation should be paid and the amount of such compensation, or whether the land use regulation be modified, removed or not applied to the real property.

(2) If the city manager’s recommendation is to deny the demand in whole, and no city councilor requests a hearing regarding the claim within 10 days after receiving notice of the recommendation, then the city manager may issue a summary denial.

(3) The city manager shall schedule a public hearing before the city council on any demand for just compensation, other than a demand for which a summary denial has issued under subsection (2) of this section. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the current owner, to all persons entitled to notice under CBMC 2.70.050, and to neighborhood groups and community organizations whose boundaries include the current owner’s real property. Notice may also be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, at the city manager’s discretion.

(4) After the public hearing, the city council shall either deny the demand for just compensation if the demand fails to meet the requirements of Measure 37, or grant the demand, in whole or in part, and adopt a resolution therefor. The resolution shall either direct that the current owner be awarded just compensation in an amount set forth in the resolution, or direct that the land use regulation giving rise to the demand for just compensation be modified, removed, or not applied to the real property, in lieu of paying just compensation. The city council’s decision to modify, remove or waive the land use regulation shall be based on whether the public interest would be better served by either paying just compensation to the current owner or by modifying, removing or waiving the land use regulation. [Ord. 362 § 7, 2005].


2.70.080 Modification, removal or waiver of land use regulation.

(1) If the city council directs that the land use regulation be modified, removed, or waived, then the current owner shall be allowed to use the real property for a use permitted at the time the current owner acquired the property. Successors in interest to the current owner shall acquire their interests in the real property subject to such land use regulations as are in effect prior to the date of the successor’s acquisition of the real property, as provided by Subsection (3)(E) of Measure 37, and such interests shall have the legal status otherwise provided by law.

(2) A copy of the resolution modifying, removing or waiving the land use regulation, or awarding compensation to the owner, shall be recorded in the deed records of the county wherein the real property lies.

(3) If the city council removes or modifies the challenged land use regulation, it may, at its sole discretion, put back into effect all land use regulations pertaining to the property which were in effect at the time the claimant acquired the property. [Ord. 362 § 8, 2005].


2.70.090 Private cause of action.

In order to protect the reasonable expectations of other property owners who have relied upon land use regulations in purchasing real property, if the modification, removal or waiver of the land use regulation pursuant to Measure 37 results in a private nuisance on other owners’ real property, then the affected owner or owners shall have a cause of action in circuit court against the current owner to abate the nuisance or to recover an amount equal to the diminution of value in that owner or owner’s real property as a result of the nuisance. The prevailing party in such an action shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs at trial and upon appeal. [Ord. 362 § 9, 2005].


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    System Development Charges

3.10    Advance Financing of Public Improvements

3.15    Local Improvement Districts

3.20    Economic Improvement Districts

3.25    Certificates of Lien Search

3.30    Recording and Collecting of Liens

3.35    General Obligation Improvement Warrants

3.40    Sale of City Timber

3.45    Sale of Surplus City Property

3.50    Abandoned Personal Property

3.55    Transient Room Tax

3.60    Marijuana and Marijuana-Infused Product Tax

3.65    Transportation Utility Fee


Chapter 3.05 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

3.05.010    Purpose.

3.05.020    Scope.

3.05.030    Definitions.

3.05.040    System development charges established.

3.05.050    Methodology.

3.05.060    Authorized expenditures.

3.05.070    Expenditure restrictions.

3.05.080    Improvement plan.

3.05.090    Adopting and amending the methodology.

3.05.100    Collection of charge.

3.05.110    Delinquent charges – Hearings.

3.05.120    Installment payments.

3.05.130    Exemptions.

3.05.140    Credits.

3.05.150    Notice.

3.05.160    Segregation and use of revenue.

3.05.170    Refunds.

3.05.180    Appeal procedure.

3.05.190    Prohibited connection.


3.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the system development charge (“SDC”) is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal (hereinafter sanitary sewer system); drainage and flood control; transportation; and parks and recreation upon those developments and redevelopments that create the need for, or increase the demands on, capital improvements. [Ord. 382 § 1, 2006].


3.05.020 Scope.

The SDC imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. [Ord. 382 § 2, 2006].


3.05.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“Capital improvements” means public facilities or assets used for wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal; drainage and flood control; transportation; and parks and recreation.

“Development” means all improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage or activities. Development includes redevelopment of property, dividing of land into two or more parcels, and creation or termination of a right of access. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved lands.

“Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to CBMC 3.05.040.

“Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose.

“Owner” means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser(s) under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

“Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that, in accordance with county regulations, is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures, or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, and other development ordinances.

“Permittee” means the person to whom a building permit, development permit, a permit or plan approval to connect to the sanitary sewer system, or right-of-way access permit is issued.

“Qualified public improvement” means a capital improvement that is:

(1) Required as a condition of development approval;

(2) Identified in the plan as adopted pursuant to CBMC 3.05.080 and:

(a) Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or

(b) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

(c) For the purposes of this definition, “contiguous” includes improvements to, or located in, a public way that abuts the parcel.

“Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is established pursuant to CBMC 3.05.040, and for which the city determines that capacity exists.

“System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement.

(1) System development charge includes that portion of a sanitary sewer system connection that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with sanitary sewer facilities.

(2) A system development charge does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. [Ord. 382 § 3, 2006].


3.05.040 System development charges established.

(1) System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the city council.

(2) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter, or other local or state law, an SDC is hereby imposed upon all development within the city and shall be assessed or collected at the time of issuance of building permit or development permit.

(3) An SDC is hereby imposed upon all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to the sanitary sewer and/or drainage and flood control facilities of the city and will also be assessed or collected at the time of issuance of a permit for connection to the sanitary sewer system. [Ord. 382 § 4, 2006].


3.05.050 Methodology.

(1) The methodology used to establish or modify the reimbursement fee shall, where applicable, be based on the cost of then-existing facilities including, without limitation, design, financing and construction costs; prior contributions by then-existing users; gifts or grants from federal or state government or private persons; the value of unused capacity available to future system users, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements; and other relevant factors identified by the city council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

(2) The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall, where applicable, demonstrate consideration of the projected cost of the capital improvements identified in the plan that are needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related. The methodology shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future users.

(3) The methodology used to establish or modify improvement fees or reimbursement fees, or both, shall be adopted by resolution of the city council.

(4) The methodology may be amended only as provided in CBMC 3.05.090. [Ord. 382 § 5, 2006].


3.05.060 Authorized expenditures.

(1) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for such improvements.

(2) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity-increasing capital improvements associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or providing new facilities.

(a) The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or projected development.

(b) A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to CBMC 3.05.080.

(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, SDC revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing SDC methodologies and providing an annual accounting of SDC expenditures. [Ord. 382 § 6, 2006].


3.05.070 Expenditure restrictions.

(1) SDCs shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

(2) SDCs shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. [Ord. 382 § 7, 2006].


3.05.080 Improvement plan.

(1) Prior to the establishment of an SDC by resolution, the city council shall adopt a plan that includes a list of:

(a) The capital improvements that the city intends to fund in whole or in part with the improvement fee revenues; and

(b) The estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement and the percentage of that cost eligible to be funded with improvement fee revenues.

(2) In adopting this plan, the city may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section.

(3) The city may modify such plan and list at any time. If an SDC will be increased by a proposed modification to the list to include a capacity-increasing public improvement, the council will:

(a) Order the methodology to be amended as necessary. Amendments to the methodology shall be made pursuant to CBMC 3.05.090;

(b) Provide at least 30 days’ notice prior to adopting the modification to those who have requested notice pursuant to CBMC 3.05.150; and

(c) Hold a public hearing if a written request for a hearing is received within seven days of the date of the proposed modification.

(4) A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the SDC if the change in amount is based on:

(a) A change in the cost of labor, materials, or real property applied to projects or project capacity as set forth in the capital improvement plan.

(b) A periodic application of the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index. [Ord. 382 § 8, 2006].


3.05.090 Adopting and amending the methodology.

Before adopting or amending the methodology, the council shall:

(1) At least 90 days prior to adoption of the proposed methodology, or amendment to the methodology, provide written notice to persons who have requested notice pursuant to CBMC 3.05.150;

(2) Make the revised methodology available to the public at least 60 days prior to the first public hearing of the adoption or amendment. [Ord. 382 § 9, 2006].


3.05.100 Collection of charge.

(1) The SDC is payable upon issuance of at least one of the following activities:

(a) A building permit or other permit that allows development of a parcel;

(b) A permit or approval to connect to the sanitary sewer system.

(2) SDCs shall be assessed pursuant to the basis adopted by resolution.

(3) If development is commenced or connection is made to the sanitary sewer system without an appropriate permit, the SDC is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

(4) If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the SDC is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased based on changes in the use of the property unrelated to seasonal or ordinary fluctuations in usage.

(5) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall collect the applicable SDC(s) from the permittee when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when application for connection to the sanitary sewer system is made.

(6) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, or until provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to CBMC 3.05.120, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to CBMC 3.05.130. [Ord. 382 § 10, 2006].


3.05.110 Delinquent charges – Hearings.

(1) When, for any reason, the SDC has not been paid, the city manager shall report to the city council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the person responsible for the payment of the fee.

(2) The city shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner or person responsible for payment of the fee, with a copy of the city manager’s report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both personal and mailed notice and by posting notice on the parcel at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.

(3) At the hearing, the council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the city manager as set forth in the report. [Ord. 382 § 11, 2006].


3.05.120 Installment payments.

(1) When an SDC of $2,500 or more is due and collectable, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payments up to 10 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208.

(2) The city manager shall provide application forms for installment payments which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors.

(3) An applicant for installment payment shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4) The city manager shall report to the council the amount of the SDC, the dates on which payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel.

(5) The city manager shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the SDC, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by resolution of the city council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223.

(6) Upon written notification from the permittee and with written evidence from the county, where new development is not constructed and the building permit is cancelled, the city manager is authorized to cancel assessments of SDCs. For property that has been subject to a cancellation of assessment of SDCs, application for any subsequent installment payment contract shall be subject to the code provisions applicable to SDCs and installment payment contracts on file the date the new contract is received by the city. [Ord. 382 § 12, 2006].


3.05.130 Exemptions.

(1) Additions to a single-family dwelling that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the SDC.

(2) An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility is exempt from all portions of the SDC. [Ord. 382 § 13, 2006].


3.05.140 Credits.

(1) When a development occurs that is subject to an SDC, the SDC for the existing use, if applicable, shall be calculated. If this amount is less than the SDC for the use that will result from the development, the difference between the SDC for the existing use and the SDC for the proposed use shall be the SDC. If a change in use results in the SDC for the proposed use being less than the SDC for the existing use, no SDC shall be required. No refund or credit shall be given.

(2) A credit of the improvement fee portion of the SDC only shall be given to the permittee against the cost of the SDC charged, for the cost of a qualified public improvement, upon acceptance by the city of the public improvement. The credit shall not exceed the amount of the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the improvement fee.

(3) If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of the development approval and is required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project, a credit shall be given for the cost of the portion of the improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this subsection. The request shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city. The city may deny the credit provided for in this section if the city demonstrates that the application does not meet the requirements of this section or if the improvement for which credit is sought was not included in the improvement plan pursuant to CBMC 3.05.080.

(4) When construction of a qualified public improvement located in whole or in part or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project, the credit in excess of the improvement fee for the original development project may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project.

(5) Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another.

(6) Credit shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another.

(7) Credits shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit was given. [Ord. 382 § 14, 2006].


3.05.150 Notice.

(1) The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for any SDC. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list as provided in CBMC 3.05.090. The failure of a person on the list to receive notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city.

(2) The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. [Ord. 382 § 15, 2006].


3.05.160 Segregation and use of revenue.

(1) All funds derived from an SDC are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the SDC calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in CBMC 3.05.060.

(2) The city manager shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, for SDCs showing the total amount of SDC revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account in the previous fiscal year. A list of the amounts spent on each project funded, in whole or in part, with SDC revenues shall be included in the annual accounting. [Ord. 382 § 16, 2006].


3.05.170 Refunds.

(1) Refunds may be given by the city upon finding that there was a clerical error in the calculation of the SDC.

(2) Refunds shall not be allowed for failure to timely claim credit or for failure to timely seek an alternative SDC rate calculation at the time of submission of an application for a building permit. [Ord. 382 § 17, 2006].


3.05.180 Appeal procedure.

(1) A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of SDC revenues may appeal the decision of the expenditure to the city council by filing a written request with the city manager describing with particularity the decision and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of the expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

(2) Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the city manager under this chapter must be filed in writing with the city manager within 10 days of the decision.

(3) After providing notice to the appellant, the city council shall determine whether the city manager’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of SDC revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. The decision of the council shall be reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise.

(4) A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the city council pursuant to CBMC 3.05.050 shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption. A person shall contest the methodology used for calculating an SDC only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise. [Ord. 382 § 18, 2006].


3.05.190 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the sanitary sewer system of the city or obtain a building permit unless the appropriate SDCs have been paid, or the installment payment method has been applied for and approved. [Ord. 382 § 19, 2006].


Chapter 3.10 ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

3.10.010    Determination of council action.

3.10.020    Definitions.

3.10.030    Receipt of application.

3.10.040    Public works and development department (PW&DD) director analysis.

3.10.050    Public hearing – Notification.

3.10.060    Public hearing.

3.10.070    Advance financing district resolution of intent.

3.10.080    Public improvement construction.

3.10.090    Advance financing district resolution and final agreements.

3.10.100    Notice of decision.

3.10.110    Advanced financed reimbursement.

3.10.120    Calculation of reimbursement – Intervening properties.

3.10.130    Collection of an advanced financed reimbursement.

3.10.140    Voluntary imposition of lien.

3.10.150    Disposition of an advance financed reimbursement.

3.10.160    Recording.

3.10.170    Public improvements.


3.10.010 Determination of council action.

Advance financing of public improvements prescribed in this chapter is a financial recapture for the original installer of public facilities. The creation of an advance finance district as prescribed herein is a legislative action of the Coos Bay city council and is not subject to land use regulations or determination procedures. [Ord. 397 § 1, 2007].


3.10.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases for the purposes of this chapter and for the purposes of any advance financing agreement entered into pursuant hereto and for any actions taken as authorized pursuant to this chapter or otherwise shall have the meanings set out below:

“Advanced financing” is a method of recapturing costs by a developer, where such developer installs public improvements, and where such public improvements may be utilized by intervening or future properties.

“Advance financing agreement” means an agreement between the developer and the city, as authorized by the council and executed by the public works and development department (PW&DD) director which provides for the installation of and payment for advance financed public improvements and which agreement contains improvement guarantees, provisions for reimbursement by the intervening properties that may utilize such improvement(s), inspection guarantees, and the like as determined in the best interest of the public by the council.

“Advance financing district resolution” means a resolution adopted by the council designating a public improvement to be an advance financed public improvement and creating an advance financing district, and which contains provisions for financial reimbursement by intervening and future properties that may utilize the improvement, as well as such other provisions as determined by the council to be in the best interest of the public.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay, Oregon.

“Council” means the city council of Coos Bay, Oregon.

“Developer” means the city, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, a subdivider, a partitioner of land or any other entity, without limitation, who will bear, under the terms of this chapter, the expense of design, construction, purchase, installation, or other expenses associated with the creation of a public improvement. The rights of a developer, created under this chapter, also apply to the developer’s heirs, successors or assigns.

“Development” means that real property being developed by the developer and for which property the advance financing district resolution is adopted.

“District” means an advance financing district formed under this chapter.

“Future property” means that real property abutting an advance financed public improvement, which was created from an intervening property which was created subsequent to the advanced financing district.

“Intervening property” means that real property abutting an advance financed public improvement, but does not include the development.

“Owner” means the fee holder of record of the legal title to the real property in question. Where such real property is being purchased under a recorded land sales contract, then such purchasers shall also be deemed owners.

“Public improvement” means the following:

(1) The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or opening, and the laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing any street within public right-of-way;

(2) The construction of sidewalks, curbs, or gutters within public right-of-way;

(3) The construction or upgrading of any sanitary or storm sewer main within public right-of-way;

(4) The construction or upgrading of any flood control dike, dam, structure or facility on public property or right-of-way;

(5) Those “local improvements” as provided in ORS 310.140(9)(a) as now written and hereinafter amended;

(6) Any other public improvement authorized by the council. [Ord. 397 § 2, 2007].


3.10.030 Receipt of application.

The council will receive applications for advance financing from the developer, which applications shall be submitted to the PW&DD director. The application shall be accompanied by:

(1) Engineering plans for the proposed public improvement prepared, signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in the appropriate specialty by the state of Oregon.

(2) An estimate of the district boundaries.

(3) Written justification for the district boundaries.

(4) An estimate of the project construction costs prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Oregon.

(5) A fee set by resolution.

The fee will be applied to the cost of administrative analysis of the proposed advance financing district, the cost of notifying the property owners, recording costs, and such other costs reasonably associated with processing the application. When the city is the developer, the PW&DD director shall submit the application without the fee.

The application shall be submitted and approved prior to construction of the public improvement. Applications shall not be considered for public improvements already constructed or under construction at the time of submittal of the application.

The application shall not be considered a land use application and the decision regarding the application shall not be considered a land use decision. [Ord. 397 § 3, 2007].


3.10.040 Public works and development department (PW&DD) director analysis.

Upon receipt of the advance financing application package, the PW&DD director shall make an analysis of the advance financing proposal and shall prepare a report to the council for discussion at a public hearing. Such report shall include a map showing the proposed district with the location and front footage of the development and intervening properties, an estimate of the total cost of the advance financed public improvement and an estimate of the cost for each property within the proposed district. [Ord. 397 § 4, 2007].


3.10.050 Public hearing – Notification.

Not less than 10, nor more than 30, days prior to any public hearing being held pursuant to this chapter, developer and all owners of intervening property shall be notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notification shall be accomplished by regular mail or by personal service. If notification is accomplished by mail, notice shall be deemed made on the date said letter of notification is posted. Failure of any owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any advance financing district ordinance or the council’s action to approve or not to approve the same. [Ord. 397 § 5, 2007].


3.10.060 Public hearing.

After the PW&DD director’s analysis has been completed, an informational public hearing shall be held before the council in which all parties and the general public shall be given the opportunity to express their views and ask questions pertaining to the proposed advance financed public improvement. Since advance financed public improvements do not give rise to assessments, the public hearing is for informational purposes only, and is not subject to remonstrance. The council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether or not an advance financing district ordinance shall be enacted. [Ord. 397 § 6, 2007].


3.10.070 Advance financing district resolution of intent.

After the public hearing, held pursuant to CBMC 3.10.050 and 3.10.060, if the council desires to proceed with the advance financed public improvement, it shall adopt an advance financing district resolution of intent. The resolution of intent shall establish the boundaries of the district and designate the public improvement as an advance financed improvement and provide for advance financed reimbursement by intervening and future property owners pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 397 § 7, 2007].


3.10.080 Public improvement construction.

(1) During the construction phase, the applicant’s engineer shall provide project oversight to ensure the public improvement is constructed per approved plans. The engineer shall also coordinate with city staff to arrange appropriate progress inspections.

(2) After construction is substantially complete, the applicant’s engineer shall submit “as-built” plans and appropriate inspection reports. City staff shall perform the appropriate review of the submitted items and field inspect the public improvement. After the applicant has completed all punch list items and city staff has determined the public improvement(s) meet applicable standards, the developer shall submit the final and complete project costs, prepared and sealed by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Oregon, to the PW&DD director.

(3) Should the cost estimate exceed 10 percent of the original estimate, the maximum increase in the reimbursement will be 10 percent.

(4) The PW&DD director shall verify and analyze said costs; submit a report of the same to the developer, intervening properties and council; and schedule a second hearing for council determination of the prospective advance finance district cost allocations. [Ord. 397 § 8, 2007].


3.10.090 Advance financing district resolution and final agreements.

A public hearing shall be held to consider the resolution creating the advance financing district. The hearing notification shall meet the standards of CBMC 3.10.050. Pursuant to the criteria set forth in CBMC 3.10.110, Advanced financed reimbursement, the resolution shall set the final project costs and the final prospective cost distribution reimbursement for each intervening property. Except when the developer is the city, the advance financing district resolution shall instruct the PW&DD director to enter into an agreement between developer and the city pertaining to the advance financed improvement, and may, in such agreement, require such guarantee or guarantees as the city deems best to protect the public and intervening properties, and may make such other provisions as the council determines necessary and proper. All agreements entered into must contain and have distributed costs to all intervening properties. A copy of the agreement must be filed with the public works and development department and the finance department. [Ord. 397 § 9, 2007].


3.10.100 Notice of decision.

The city shall notify the developer and all intervening property owners of the decision of the council regarding the formation of the district. The notification shall include the distributed costs to all intervening properties. [Ord. 397 § 10, 2007].


3.10.110 Advanced financed reimbursement.

An advance financed prospective cost distribution reimbursement shall be imposed on all intervening properties for projects that utilize an advance financed public improvement district. Such reimbursement shall be due and payable at the time of utilization of the advance financed public improvement in the manner prescribed in the final ordinance creating the district. [Ord. 397 § 11, 2007].


3.10.120 Calculation of reimbursement – Intervening properties.

(1) The reimbursement shall be calculated by dividing the total approved cost of the advanced financed public improvement by the front footage of the development and all intervening properties, which determines unit cost. The unit cost (cost per foot) is then multiplied by the front footage of each intervening property. In addition, the city may use a methodology based on a 50/50 split between frontage and acreage, or may use any other formula for apportioning costs that is just and reasonable.

(2) Reimbursements for odd-shaped lots shall be individually established and consistent with the benefit received by the lot and the reimbursement required of other lots in the area. If inequalities are created through the strict implementation of formulas, the council may modify its impact on a case-by-case basis.

(3) Reimbursements shall be increased by an annual construction index rate or a lower amount, as set forth by council in the advance financing district ordinance. The construction index shall be calculated from the date the council enacts the advance financing district ordinance to the date of payment of the reimbursement. [Ord. 397 § 12, 2007].


3.10.130 Collection of an advanced financed reimbursement.

(1) The reimbursement is immediately due and payable to the city by an intervening property owner upon such property owner’s utilization of the advance financed public improvement for the benefit of such owner’s intervening property.

(2) No permit for connection, construction or development of an intervening property shall be issued until the reimbursement is paid in full or otherwise processed under the terms of CBMC 3.10.140, Voluntary imposition of lien. [Ord. 397 § 13, 2007].


3.10.140 Voluntary imposition of lien.

(1) Whenever reimbursement is due and payable, the intervening property owner may apply, upon forms provided by the PW&DD director, for the voluntary imposition of a lien upon the parcel for the full amount of the advance financed reimbursement and the payment of that lien in 20 equal semi-annual installments, including interest. The applicant must provide a certificate from a licensed title insurance company showing the identity and amount of all other liens already of record against the property and a certificate from the county tax assessor or a certified or licensed appraiser showing the assessed or appraised valuation of the property. The city shall not permit a lien greater than 25 percent of the assessed or appraised value of the property.

(2) Upon receipt of such certificates and application, the PW&DD director shall compute the amount of the reimbursement and shall report to the finance director the amount of the reimbursement, the date upon which the reimbursement is due, the name or names of the applicant/owner and the description of the property; and upon receiving that report, the finance director shall docket the lien in the docket of liens. From the time that docketing is completed, the city shall have a lien upon that land. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. [Ord. 397 § 14, 2007].


3.10.150 Disposition of an advance financed reimbursement.

(1) Developers shall receive the reimbursement collected by the city for their advance financed public improvements within 90 days of receipt by the city. Such reimbursements shall be delivered to developer for a period of 10 years after execution of the advance financing agreement. The time limitation does not apply to the city as developer.

(2) After 10 years from the effective date of the final resolution, all rights to reimbursement by the developer shall cease, unless the developer is the city.

(3) When the city is the developer, the district shall be continued in perpetuity, unless terminated by the council.

(4) The city shall collect an amount for administrative services performed in collecting and distributing reimbursements. Said administrative fee shall be five percent of the amount collected. [Ord. 397 § 15, 2007].


3.10.160 Recording.

All advance financing district resolutions and developer agreements shall be recorded by the city in the deed records of the county. The resolution and agreement shall contain full legal descriptions of the development and intervening properties. Failure to make such recording shall not affect the legality of an advance financing resolution or agreement. [Ord. 397 § 16, 2007].


3.10.170 Public improvements.

Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city. [Ord. 397 § 17, 2007].


Chapter 3.15 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

3.15.010    Short title.

3.15.020    Definitions.

3.15.030    Initiating improvements.

3.15.040    Public works director’s report.

3.15.050    Action on report.

3.15.060    Resolution and notice of hearing.

3.15.070    Remonstrance against formation of local improvement district.

3.15.080    Public hearing.

3.15.090    Creation of district.

3.15.100    Modification.

3.15.110    Alternative procedure.

3.15.120    Construction of improvement.

3.15.130    Costs of improvement.

3.15.140    Assessment method and alternative methods of financing.

3.15.150    Assessment ordinance.

3.15.160    Notice of assessment.

3.15.170    Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

3.15.180    Error in assessment calculation.

3.15.190    Supplemental assessments.

3.15.200    Rebates.

3.15.210    Abandonment of proceedings.

3.15.220    Curative provisions.

3.15.230    Reassessment.

3.15.240    Withholding building permit.

3.15.250    Partition.


3.15.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the local improvement ordinance. [Ord. 131 § 1, 1989].


3.15.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following shall mean:

“Local improvement” includes:

(1) The grading, graveling, paving, or other surfacing of any street, or opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing any street;

(2) The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks;

(3) The installation of street lights;

(4) The installation of underground wiring or related equipment;

(5) The reconstruction or repair of any street improvement;

(6) The construction, reconstruction or repair of any sanitary or storm sewer;

(7) The acquisition, establishment, construction or reconstruction of any off-street motor vehicle parking facility;

(8) The construction, reconstruction, alteration, relocation or repair of any flood control dike, dam, floodway, or drainage facility;

(9) The construction, reconstruction, installation and equipping of a park, playground or neighborhood facility;

(10) Any other local improvement for which an assessment may be made on the property specially benefitted.

“Local improvement district” means the property which is to be assessed for the cost or part of the cost of local improvement and the property on which the local improvement is located.

“Lot” means a lot, block or parcel of land.

“Owner” means the record holder of legal title or the purchaser where land is being purchased under a land sale contract recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land.

“Property benefitted” means all real property specially benefitted by the public improvement and assessable therefor. [Ord. 131 § 2, 1989].


3.15.030 Initiating improvements.

(1) When the council considers it necessary to make a local improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, the council shall direct the director of public works to have a survey made of the improvement and file a written report with the recorder.

(2) When owners of two-thirds of the property that will benefit by improvements request by written petition that the council initiate an improvement and submit a $1,000 bond in favor of the city, the council shall direct the director of public works to have a survey made of the improvement and file a written report with the recorder. The bond shall be forfeited to cover the costs of engineering in the event the improvement district is not formed. [Ord. 131 § 3, 1989].


3.15.040 Public works director’s report.

Unless the council directs otherwise, the public works director’s report shall contain the following:

(1) A plat or map showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvements and the lands to be assessed to pay all or any part of the cost thereof;

(2) Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done;

(3) An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement including legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;

(4) A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the property specially benefitted;

(5) An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefitted properties;

(6) A description of the location and assessed value of each parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefitted by the improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof as herein defined;

(7) A recommendation of the payment schedule and interest to be charged on assessments paid in installments;

(8) A statement showing outstanding assessments against property to be assessed;

(9) Any other information required by the council. [Ord. 131 § 4, 1989].


3.15.050 Action on report.

After the public works director’s report is filed with the recorder, the council may approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require public works to supply additional or different information for the improvement, or abandon the improvement. [Ord. 131 § 5, 1989].


3.15.060 Resolution and notice of hearing.

After the council has approved the report as submitted or as modified, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the recorder to give notice of the council’s intent by publication, not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mailing copies of the notice to the owners of any lots which would be property benefitted by the proposed improvement. The notice shall contain the following:

(1) That the report of the public works director is on file in the office of the recorder and is subject to public examination.

(2) That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date at which time objections and remonstrances to the improvement will be heard by the council, and that the improvement will be abandoned for not less than six months if written remonstrances are filed before or during the hearing by owners of lots representing 67 percent of the estimated assessed cost of the improvement.

(3) A general description of the proposed improvement and a description of the property sufficient for the average reader to determine the general location.

(4) In addition, the notice mailed shall estimate the total cost of the improvement, the portion to be paid by special assessment, and the estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the property benefitted. [Ord. 131 § 6, 1989].


3.15.070 Remonstrance against formation of local improvement district.

(1) If written, signed objections to the establishment of a local improvement district are filed with the recorder by the end of the public hearing on the establishment of the district by the owners of lots which represent 67 percent of the estimated assessed cost of the proposed local improvement, the council shall not make the proposed improvement nor shall the council reinitiate formation of the district until at least six months after the date of the public hearing.

(2) If there is multiple ownership of a lot, each remonstrating multiple owner shall be counted as a fraction to the same extent as the owner’s interest in the lot bears in relation to the other multiple owners, and the same fraction shall be applied to the lot’s proposed assessment for purposes of computing the remonstrance.

(3) Any person acting as agent or attorney with power to act in signing a remonstrance shall, in addition to describing the property affected, file with the remonstrance a copy in writing of the authority to represent the owner of the property. [Ord. 131 § 7, 1989].


3.15.080 Public hearing.

The council shall hear and consider testimony, both oral and written, on the proposed improvement and may continue the hearing as it deems necessary. [Ord. 131 § 8, 1989].


3.15.090 Creation of district.

If written remonstrances are less than the amount required to defeat the proposed improvement, the council may by motion at the close of the hearing or within 60 days thereafter, based on the public testimony, order the improvement district created in accordance with the engineer’s report or abandon the improvement. [Ord. 131 § 9, 1989].


3.15.100 Modification.

After the public hearing, the council may direct a modification of the proposed local improvement by revising the scope of the improvement, by reducing or enlarging the local improvement district which it deems will be benefitted by the improvement, or by making such other modifications in the proceedings as it finds reasonable. In such case, a revised report must be made, notices mailed and published, and a second hearing held, all as set forth in CBMC 3.15.040 through 3.15.090. [Ord. 131 § 10, 1989].


3.15.110 Alternative procedure.

When all of the owners of property to be benefitted by a local improvement have signed a petition directed and presented to the council requesting the local improvement, the council may initiate and construct the local improvement without publishing or mailing notice to the owners of the affected property and without holding a public hearing regarding the proposed local improvement. [Ord. 131 § 11, 1989].


3.15.120 Construction of improvement.

The council may direct the recorder to advertise for bids for such improvements or portions thereof as it has approved, or the city itself may proceed to make said improvement or any portion thereof. If the council finds on opening bids that the cost of the improvement would be substantially in excess of the estimate, it may provide for holding a special hearing to consider objections to proceeding with a higher project cost. [Ord. 131 § 12, 1989].


3.15.130 Costs of improvement.

The costs and expenses of local improvement that may be assessed against the property benefitted shall include, but not be limited to, costs of construction of the improvement, engineering and administrative costs of creating the district and letting the bids, inspection costs, financing costs including interest, costs of acquisition of any easements or other property, and attorneys’ fees. [Ord. 131 § 13, 1989].


3.15.140 Assessment method and alternative methods of financing.

(1) The council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the improvement, may:

(a) Use any just and reasonable method to determine the boundaries of an improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.

(b) Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be assessed among the benefitted properties.

(c) Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the cost of an improvement when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of benefitted properties.

(2) Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using other means of financing improvements, including federal and state grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used, the council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any remaining cost. [Ord. 131 § 14, 1989].


3.15.150 Assessment ordinance.

(1) When the estimated cost is determined on the basis of contract award or city cost or after the work is done and the cost has been actually determined, the council shall decide whether the benefitted property shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The recorder shall prepare the proposed assessment for each lot within the local improvement district and file the assessments in the recorder’s office.

(2) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the Coos County tax assessor’s roll. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the property and fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder. An objection shall state the grounds for the objection. The notice shall also specify the date of the council meeting at which the council will sit as a board of equalization and will conduct a public hearing.

(3) At the hearing the council shall:

(a) Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement.

(b) By ordinance, declare and levy the assessment and direct the recorder to enter a statement thereof in the docket of city liens as provided for in CBMC 3.15.170. [Ord. 131 § 15, 1989].


3.15.160 Notice of assessment.

(1) Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the recorder shall send a notice of assessment to each owner of assessed property by certified mail.

(2) The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days after the date of the publication of notice or pays the assessment in full within 60 days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance. [Ord. 189, 1992; Ord. 131 § 16, 1989].


3.15.170 Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

(1) After the assessment ordinance is adopted, the recorder shall enter into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, a description of the improvement, names of property owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. On entry into the lien docket, the amounts shall become liens and charges on the lots that have been assessed for improvement.

(2) Assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits.

(3) Thirty days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance, interest shall be charged at the rate set by the council, and the city may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in the manner provided by state law.

(4) The city may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The city shall have priority over all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under state law to redeem the property. [Ord. 131 § 17, 1989].


3.15.180 Error in assessment calculation.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error. If there has been an error, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the amendment, the recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by certified mail. [Ord. 131 § 18, 1989].


3.15.190 Supplemental assessments.

If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is determined, and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray expenses of the improvements, the council may declare the insufficiency by motion and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The council shall set a time for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment and direct the recorder to publish one notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the hearing the council shall make a just and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of liens as provided by CBMC 3.15.170. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be published and mailed, and collection of the assessment shall be made, in accordance with CBMC 3.15.160 and 3.15.170. [Ord. 131 § 19, 1989].


3.15.200 Rebates.

On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously levied on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of the improvement, the council shall determine the excess and declare it by ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered in the lien docket as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the person who paid it or that person’s legal representative shall be entitled to payment of the rebate credit. [Ord. 131 § 20, 1989].


3.15.210 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council may abandon proceedings for improvements at any time before final completion of the improvements. If liens have been placed on property under this procedure, they shall be cancelled, and payments made on assessments shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that person’s legal representative. [Ord. 131 § 21, 1989].


3.15.220 Curative provisions.

(1) An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:

(a) Failure of the public works director’s report to contain all information required by CBMC 3.15.040.

(b) Failure to have all the required information in the improvement resolution, assessment ordinance, lien docket, or notices required to be published and mailed.

(c) Failure to list the name of or mail notice to an owner of property as required by this chapter.

(d) Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings or steps specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect on the person complaining.

(2) The council shall have authority to remedy and correct all matters by suitable action and proceedings. [Ord. 131 § 22, 1989].


3.15.230 Reassessment.

When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for an improvement made by the city has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by a court of this state or by a federal court having jurisdiction, or when the council doubts the validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, reassessment, or any part of it, the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law. [Ord. 131 § 23, 1989].


3.15.240 Withholding building permit.

If payments on assessments are delinquent, no building permit shall be issued for improvement of the benefitted real property. [Ord. 131 § 24, 1989].


3.15.250 Partition.

When there has been an approved partition of a parcel and that parcel has outstanding a special assessment remaining wholly or partially unpaid, and full payment or an installment payment is not due, then any owner, mortgagee or lien holder of any property affected by this partition may apply for an apportionment of the special assessment. Apportionment of the special assessment shall be done by resolution of the council, and that resolution shall be filed with the lien docket. Where the special assessment is being paid in installments, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated among those smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with the percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment. Apportionment shall be on the same basis as the original assessment. [Ord. 131 § 25, 1989].


Chapter 3.20 ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

3.20.010    Purpose.

3.20.020    Definitions.

3.20.030    Restrictions.

3.20.040    Initiation.

3.20.050    Notice of council hearing.

3.20.060    Hearing.

3.20.070    Establishing EID.

3.20.080    Assessment method and alternative methods of financing.

3.20.090    Assessment ordinance.

3.20.100    Notice of assessment.

3.20.110    Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

3.20.120    Error in assessment calculation.

3.20.130    Advisory committee.

3.20.140    Amendments.

3.20.150    Partition.


3.20.010 Purpose.

The city council has determined that it is reasonable and necessary to establish economic improvement districts in order to make economic improvements and to assess the cost of these improvements to the benefitted property. [Ord. 137 § 1, 1989].


3.20.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following shall mean:

“Economic improvement” includes:

(1) The planning or management of development or improvement activities.

(2) Landscaping or other maintenance of public areas.

(3) Promotion of commercial activity or public events.

(4) Activities in support of business recruitment and development.

(5) Improvements in parking systems or parking enforcement.

(6) Any other economic improvement activity for which an assessment may be made on property specifically benefitted thereby.

“EID” means an economic improvement district created or proposed under this chapter.

“Lot” means a lot, block or parcel of land.

“Owner” means the record holder of legal title or the purchaser where land is being purchased under a land sale contract recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land. [Ord. 137 § 2, 1989].


3.20.030 Restrictions.

No economic improvement district shall be formed which would:

(1) Levy assessments in an economic improvement district in any year that exceeds one percent of the true cash value of all the real property located within the district.

(2) Include within an economic improvement district any area of the city that is not zoned for commercial or industrial use.

(3) Levy assessments on residential real property or any portion of a structure used for residential purposes. [Ord. 137 § 3, 1989].


3.20.040 Initiation.

(1) An EID may be initiated:

(a) At the request of the council;

(b) At the request of one or more owners of property to be benefitted specifically by the improvement; or

(c) As part of a master economic development plan prepared by or for the city.

(2) At the time of initiation, the council shall determine the economic improvement project to be undertaken, make a preliminary estimate of the cost of the project, and develop a formula for apportioning cost to specially benefitted property. [Ord. 137 § 4, 1989].


3.20.050 Notice of council hearing.

(1) Following initiation of an EID, a public hearing on the proposed EID shall be scheduled before the council.

(2) Not later than 30 days prior to the date of said public hearing, notice shall be mailed or delivered personally to affected property owners within the proposed district boundaries. The notice shall state the proposed intention to construct or undertake the economic improvement project and to assess benefitted property for a part or all of the cost. The notice shall state the time and place of the public hearing and include all the determinations made by the council under CBMC 3.20.040(2). [Ord. 137 § 5, 1989].


3.20.060 Hearing.

(1) At the public hearing the proposed EID project shall be presented to include:

(a) A description of the economic improvement project(s) to be undertaken;

(b) A preliminary estimate of the probable cost of the economic improvement and the proposed formula for apportioning cost to specially benefitted property;

(c) A description of the boundaries of the district in which property will be assessed; and

(d) The number of years, to a maximum of three, in which assessments will be levied.

(2) Affected property owners shall have the opportunity to appear in person or in writing at the hearing to support or object to the proposed improvement assessment. Owners of property upon which 70 percent of the total amount of the proposed assessments are to be levied must consent in writing at or before the hearing; without such consent, the council shall not establish the EID.

(3) The council may continue the hearing as it deems necessary. [Ord. 137 § 6, 1989].


3.20.070 Establishing EID.

(1) At the conclusion of the hearing the council shall determine the scope of the EID project(s) and may modify the project(s) and/or decrease the size of the district.

(2) If the council determines that an economic improvement district should be formed and if the required consent under CBMC 3.20.060(2) has been obtained for the district as proposed or modified, the council shall order the district created.

(3) The council shall determine whether the property benefitted shall bear all or a portion of the cost.

(4) The council shall determine, based on the actual or estimated cost of the economic improvement project, the amount of assessment on each lot in the district.

(5) The council may direct the recorder to advertise for bids for such improvements or portions thereof as it has approved, or the city itself may proceed to make said improvement or any portion thereof. If the council finds on opening bids that the cost of the improvement would be substantially in excess of the estimate, it may provide for holding a special hearing to consider objections to proceeding with a higher project cost. [Ord. 137 § 7, 1989].


3.20.080 Assessment method and alternative methods of financing.

(1) The council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the improvement, may:

(a) Use any just and reasonable method to determine the boundaries of an improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.

(b) Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be assessed among the benefitted properties.

(c) Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the cost of an improvement when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of benefitted properties.

(2) Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using other means of financing improvements, including federal and state grants-in-aid, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used, the council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any remaining cost. [Ord. 137 § 8, 1989].


3.20.090 Assessment ordinance.

(1) When the estimated cost is determined on the basis of contract award or city cost or after the work is done and the cost has been actually determined, the council shall decide whether the benefitted property shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The recorder shall prepare the proposed assessment for each lot within the local improvement district and file the assessments in the recorder’s office.

(2) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the Coos County tax assessor’s roll. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the property and fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder. An objection shall state the grounds for the objection. The notice shall also specify the date of the council meeting at which the council will sit as a board of equalization and will conduct a public hearing.

(3) At the hearing the council shall:

(a) Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the assessment against each lot in the district according to special peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement.

(b) By ordinance, declare and levy the assessment and direct the recorder to enter a statement thereof in the docket of city liens as provided for in CBMC 3.20.110. [Ord. 137 § 9, 1989].


3.20.100 Notice of assessment.

(1) Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the recorder shall send a notice of assessment to each owner of assessed property by certified mail, not later than 20 days after the date the assessment ordinance was enacted.

(2) The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days after the date of the publication of notice or pays the assessment in full within 60 days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance. [Ord. 137 § 10, 1989].


3.20.110 Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

(1) After the assessment ordinance is adopted, the recorder shall enter into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, a description of the improvement, names of property owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. On entry into the lien docket, the amounts shall become liens and charges on the lots that have been assessed for improvement.

(2) Assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits.

(3) Thirty days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance, interest shall be charged at the rate set by the council, and the city may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in the manner provided by state law.

(4) The city may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The city shall have priority over all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under state law to redeem the property. [Ord. 137 § 11, 1989].


3.20.120 Error in assessment calculation.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error. If there has been an error, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the amendment, the recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by certified mail. [Ord. 137 § 12, 1989].


3.20.130 Advisory committee.

The council may appoint an advisory committee for each economic improvement district to advise on allocations of monies for economic development activities within the scope of this chapter. If an advisory committee is created, the council shall strongly consider appointment of owners of property within the economic improvement district to the advisory committee. The advisory committee may be an existing committee or commission. An advisory committee may enter into an agreement with the city to provide the proposed economic improvement. [Ord. 137 § 13, 1989].


3.20.140 Amendments.

(1) When the council considers it necessary to levy assessments upon property in an economic improvement district for longer than the original period of time specified in the assessment ordinance that created the district, the council shall enact an ordinance that provides for continued assessments for an additional specific number of years (not to exceed three years) and grants to property owners in the district the notice and right to remonstrance described in CBMC 3.20.050 and 3.20.060.

(2) When the council considers it necessary to expand the boundaries of the district, each new property owner included will receive notice and have the right to remonstrance as specified in CBMC 3.20.050 and 3.20.060. Boundary changes will be made by the enactment of an ordinance by the council. [Ord. 137 § 14, 1989].


3.20.150 Partition.

When there has been an approved partition of a parcel and that parcel has outstanding a special assessment remaining wholly or partially unpaid, and full payment or an installment payment is not due, then any owner, mortgagee, or lien holder of any property affected by this partition may apply for an apportionment of the special assessment. Apportionment of the special assessment shall be done by resolution of the council, and that resolution shall be filed with the lien docket. Where the special assessment is being paid in installments, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated among those smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with the percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment. Apportionment shall be on the same basis as the original assessment. [Ord. 137 § 15, 1989].


Chapter 3.25 CERTIFICATES OF LIEN SEARCH

Sections:

3.25.010    Recorder to make lien searches.

3.25.020    Contents of lien search certificate.

3.25.030    Search fees.

3.25.040    Separate certificate and fees.

3.25.050    Extent of city liability.


3.25.010 Recorder to make lien searches.

The city recorder shall make searches of the lien records of the city and issue certificates concerning the existence of liens upon property within the city, after receiving applications for the certificates and the fees provided for in this chapter. [Ord. 61 § 1, 1986].


3.25.020 Contents of lien search certificate.

A certificate of lien search authorized by this chapter sets forth any lien or liens that may be recorded in the lien records of the city on the date that the certificate is issued, and shall be directed and issued to the applicant for the certification. [Ord. 61 § 2, 1986].


3.25.030 Search fees.

Before any certificate of lien search is issued, the applicant shall pay to the recorder a fee for making the lien search and for preparing the certificate. All fees collected under this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. The fee will be pursuant to the fee listed in the city’s current fee resolution. [Ord. 466 § 1, 2014; Ord. 221 § 1, 1995; Ord. 144 § 1, 1989; Ord. 61 § 3, 1986].


3.25.040 Separate certificate and fees.

The recorder shall issue a separate certificate and shall collect a separate fee for each distinct and noncontiguous parcel of land for which an application for certificate is made. [Ord. 61 § 4, 1986].


3.25.050 Extent of city liability.

No person, firm or corporation, other than the party to whom a certificate is directed and issued, shall be entitled to rely upon any information contained in a certificate of lien of the city. The city assumes no responsibility and shall have no liability to any third party as a result of issuing any certificate of lien. There shall be no liability for an error in a certificate in excess of the actual loss to the party to whom a certificate has been issued, and such damages shall in no event exceed the amount of the omitted lien or liens existing upon the property in question on the date of the issuance of the certificate. There shall also be no liability if any person to whom a certificate has been issued has knowledge or notice of the lien, or has suffered a loss through his or her own neglect or carelessness. If the city is liable for damages in the issuance of a certificate of lien search, it shall, upon payment of the damage, become subrogated to all the rights of the damaged party and shall be entitled to an assignment of such rights against any and all third parties who may be liable for such damage. [Ord. 61 § 5, 1986].


Chapter 3.30 RECORDING AND COLLECTING OF LIENS

Sections:

3.30.010    Definitions.

3.30.020    Creation and perfection of liens and assessments.

3.30.030    Notice of estimated lien.

3.30.040    Notice of lien.

3.30.050    Interest.

3.30.060    Priority.

3.30.070    Delinquency.

3.30.080    Preparation of delinquency list – Transmission of list.

3.30.090    Authority to sell property for delinquent assessments, assessment liens, or liens.

3.30.100    Collection authority.

3.30.110    Special repayment plan.

3.30.120    Procedure for sale.

3.30.130    Notice of sale.

3.30.140    Conduct of foreclosure sale.

3.30.150    Title of purchaser – Certificate of sale.

3.30.160    Entry in lien docket.

3.30.170    Redemption.

3.30.180    Other foreclosure proceedings.


3.30.010 Definitions.

“Abatement lien” means a lien created as a result of the provision of goods or services by the city after the city council has found that the provision of such goods and services is necessary to protect public health or safety.

“Assessment” means a levy upon the owners of property adjacent to a public improvement to defray the costs of constructing the improvement.

“Assessment lien” means a contractual lien created by an installment repayment contract entered into between an owner and the city for the repayment of costs of a local improvement.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Collection costs” means any and all costs associated with the collection and foreclosure of an assessment or lien, including administrative costs, court costs, and attorneys’ fees.

“Delinquency” means, for an assessment lien, any installment unpaid for a period of one year from the time the installment becomes due and payable; for an assessment and all other liens, any payment unpaid for a period of 60 days from the date the assessment or other lien is entered in the city lien docket.

“Director” means the finance director for the city of Coos Bay, or his or her designee.

“Final lien” means the actual cost, charge, security or other encumbrance owed to the city of Coos Bay for an assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien, as determined by the city council.

“Foreclosure sale” means the legal process whereby the city exercises its power to sell real property to which an assessment or assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien has attached.

“Lien” means all charges, securities or encumbrances upon real property for the payment debt, penalties, or other obligations owed to the city of Coos Bay, other than an assessment, assessment lien for a local improvement, or abatement lien.

“Lien debtor” means the owner of the real property to which an assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien has attached, or the owner’s authorized agent.

“Redemption” means the legal right conferred upon lienors to have the title restored by repurchase. [Ord. 268 § 1, 1998].


3.30.020 Creation and perfection of liens and assessments.

(1) If the city council finds work is to be performed, material furnished or equipment rented for the abatement of a nuisance, substandard building or dangerous building, then the city manager shall determine the estimated cost, based on the contract price or cost to be incurred by the city, and shall prepare a statement of estimated lien. The city manager shall forward the statement of estimated lien to the director, who shall enter the amount as an estimated lien in the city lien docket, which shall continue as an estimated lien until such time as the amount of the final lien has been determined and entered in the city lien docket.

(2) In the case of liens other than assessments, assessment liens, or abatement liens, the city manager shall determine the amount of the charge, security or encumbrance upon real property for the payment debt, penalty, or other obligation owed to the city of Coos Bay, and shall prepare a statement of estimated lien, which shall be forwarded to the director, and entered on the city lien docket as an estimated lien as provided by subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Assessments and assessment liens shall be created and perfected as provided by Chapter 3.15 CBMC and Oregon law. [Ord. 268 § 2, 1998].


3.30.030 Notice of estimated lien.

(1) Upon receipt of a statement of estimated lien, the director shall enter the amount in the city’s lien docket and shall cause a notice and statement of estimated lien to be mailed to the lien debtor at the lien debtor’s address as indicated on the most recent Coos County tax roll, or personally delivered to the lien debtor. The notice and statement shall state that objections to the estimated lien must be filed with the director within 20 days of the date of mailing of the notice and statement of estimated lien or personal delivery thereof, as the case may be, and that any objection shall state with particularity the grounds for the objection.

(2) Upon receipt of a timely and properly filed objection to notice and statement of estimated lien filed by the lien debtor, the city manager shall schedule a review before the city council of the grounds for the objection.

(3) After review before the council, or after the expiration of the 20-day period for filing objections, if no objection has been received, the city manager shall prepare a resolution, stating the amount of the final cost and providing that the final cost is a final lien on the property. After adoption by the council, the city manager shall forward the resolution to the director for entry as the final lien on the city’s lien docket.

(4) Notice of assessments and assessment liens shall be made as provided by Chapter 3.15 CBMC and Oregon law. [Ord. 268 § 3, 1998].


3.30.040 Notice of lien.

After entry of the final assessment, final assessment lien, final abatement lien, or other final lien on the lien docket, the director shall prepare a notice of lien in substantially the following form:

NOTICE OF LIEN

City of Coos Bay Lien Docket Number:

To: [name of property owner or owners] [address]

NOTICE IS GIVEN that the City of Coos Bay, an Oregon municipal corporation, claims a lien on the following described real property:

The City of Coos Bay submits the following account of the basis of the lien:

(1) [state basis for lien, including ordinance and section number]

(2) The labor performed consisted of [describe activity], and the materials supplied and their prices are listed as follows:

	Item	    	Price

OR

(2) The [services provided][penalty assessed][describe the services provided or action for which penalty was assessed] and the amount of the [debt][penalty] is as follows:

	[Service][Action    ]	Amount

(3) The City of Coos Bay lien on [insert property description], in the amount of [*] dollars ($[*]), represents the value of [state basis of lien] for which the City of Coos Bay has not received payment.

(4) No part of the [*] dollars ($[*]) set forth above has been paid by [name of property owner], which, after all just offsets, leaves an unpaid balance of [*] dollars ($[*]) still due and owing the City of Coos Bay.

OR

(4) [*] dollars ($[*]) of the [*] dollars ($[*]) has been paid by [name of the property owner], which leaves an unpaid balance of [*] dollars ($[*]) still due and owing the City of Coos Bay

Dated this __ day of _____________, 20__. 

__________________________ [*], Mayor

City of Coos Bay

ATTEST: _________________________[*]

Recorder, City of Coos Bay

The director shall mail a copy of the notice of lien by first class mail to the lien debtor at the lien debtor’s address as indicated on the most recent Coos County tax roll, and shall enter the amount of the final lien on the city’s lien docket. [Ord. 268 § 4, 1998].


3.30.050 Interest.

Except as otherwise specifically provided by ordinance, resolution, assessment contract or other instrument entered into between the lien debtor and the city, all liens shall bear interest at the statutory rate from the date of the entry of the final lien on the city’s lien docket. [Ord. 268 § 5, 1998].


3.30.060 Priority.

All liens, including but not limited to assessments, assessment liens, abatement liens and all other liens, are liens upon the land against which the lien is entered, and shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances. [Ord. 268 § 6, 1998].


3.30.070 Delinquency.

Assessment liens are due and payable as provided by the installment repayment contract, and are delinquent after one year from the date that any installment payment becomes due and payable and remains unpaid; abatement liens and all other liens are due and payable at the time of entry in the city lien docket, and are delinquent if unpaid after 60 days from the time of entry in the city lien docket. [Ord. 268 § 7, 1998].


3.30.080 Preparation of delinquency list – Transmission of list.

(1) Not less than once annually, the director shall prepare a list of each assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien which is delinquent. The list shall describe each lien which is delinquent, and shall contain the name of the person identified as the owner in the Coos County tax rolls, a legal description of the property, the amount of the assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien, and any other facts deemed by the director to be relevant in evaluating the property for foreclosure.

(2) The director shall forward the delinquency list to the city council. After review, the council shall, by resolution, direct the city attorney to commence foreclosure proceedings on properties determined to be suitable for foreclosure. [Ord. 268 § 8, 1998].


3.30.090 Authority to sell property for delinquent assessments, assessment liens, or liens.

The city may cause the sale of real property for any assessment lien for a local improvement at any time after one year from the date an installment on any such assessment lien becomes due and payable, or for any assessment, abatement lien or other lien at any time after 60 days from the time the lien is entered as a final lien on the city lien docket. [Ord. 268 § 9, 1998].


3.30.100 Collection authority.

The director shall collect all unpaid assessments, assessment liens, abatement liens and other liens, take all steps necessary to enforce delinquent assessments, assessment liens, abatement liens and other liens, and maintain all records pertaining to collections proceedings. [Ord. 268 § 10, 1998].


3.30.110 Special repayment plan.

(1) The director may enter into special repayment plans with any person who has a delinquent assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien and who is unable to bring their delinquency current within one year from the date of delinquency. Any person seeking to enter into a special repayment plan shall apply to the director, in writing, and submit proof demonstrating the person’s inability to pay the delinquency in cash and to maintain the repayment schedule for future payments.

(2) The special repayment plan shall be based on the applicant’s ability to pay. The plan shall be reviewed every three years, and shall be revised based on the applicant’s then-current ability to pay. The special repayment plan payments may extend the repayment schedule for the assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien, but shall not otherwise modify the amount of principal, interest, or other terms of the assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien.

(3) Payments under the special repayment plan shall first be applied to interest then due, then to interest past due, and then to principal. The minimum payment under any repayment plan shall be equal to the interest then accruing on the unpaid assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien, plus a billing charge. At the conclusion of the repayment plan, the payment schedule of the original assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien shall be reinstituted.

(4) All repayment plans shall be in writing, and shall contain a provision which provides for immediate foreclosure in event the lien debtor fails to meet his or her obligation under the repayment plan, unless the lien debtor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that an emergency condition caused the default. [Ord. 268 § 11, 1998].


3.30.120 Procedure for sale.

The city attorney shall proceed to collect all unpaid assessments, assessment liens, abatement liens or other liens identified in the resolution adopted pursuant to CBMC 3.30.080 by advertising and selling the lots or tracts in the manner provided by law for the sale of real property on execution, except that the sale may be made at such place within the city of Coos Bay as may be designated in the notice of sale. [Ord. 268 § 12, 1998].


3.30.130 Notice of sale.

(1) Contents of Notice. Notice of the sale shall be printed once a week for four successive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation within Coos County. The notice of sale shall contain the following information:

(a) The name and address of the director;

(b) The legal description of the real property to be sold, along with the street address;

(c) The name of the lien debtor;

(d) The unpaid amount of the assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien;

(e) The date, time and place of the sale.

(2) Persons to Whom Notice Provided.

(a) The director shall, at time of publication, send a copy of the first of the four published notices by registered or certified mail to the following persons:

(i) The lien debtor at the lien debtor’s address as reflected on the Coos County tax rolls;

(ii) To the occupant, if any, of the real property to be sold.

(b) At least 60 days prior to sale, the director shall provide a notice containing the information set out in subsection (1) of this section to the following persons:

(i) To any person who, pursuant to ORS 86.785, has filed for record in the office of the Coos County clerk a duly acknowledged request for a copy of any notice of sale;

(ii) To any person having a recorded lien or other interest of record in the real property to be sold.

(c) The director shall retain and file the return receipt with the lien debtor’s file. [Ord. 268 § 13, 1998].


3.30.140 Conduct of foreclosure sale.

(1) Each parcel of land to be foreclosed upon shall be sold separately, for a sum equal to, but not greater than, the unpaid assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien, plus interest, penalties, costs of advertising and costs of sale, including attorneys’ fees.

(2) Any foreclosure sale may include in the sale any and all unpaid assessments, assessment liens, abatement liens and other liens against the property; provided, that each assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien and other lien has been identified in the notices required under CBMC 3.30.130.

(3) If more than one bid is submitted, the parcel shall be sold to the bidder first offering the amount sufficient to satisfy the amount set forth in subsection (1) of this section. The city may purchase the property by bidding the amount of the assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien and other lien, plus costs of advertising and costs of sale, provided no other bid is received. All foreclosure sales shall be for cash only, unless the property is purchased by the city, which may purchase the property without the payment of money.

(4) Any real property which remains unsold may be re-offered for sale not sooner than three months after the expiration date of the sale. Any re-offering shall comply with the notice requirements of CBMC 3.30.130. [Ord. 268 § 14, 1998].


3.30.150 Title of purchaser – Certificate of sale.

(1) A sale of property pursuant to this chapter conveys to the purchaser all estates, interests, liens or other claims of any persons, except any assessments or liens of another governmental unit that are not included in the sale, subject to the lien debtor’s redemption rights, as provided by ORS 223.565 through 223.593.

(2) Immediately after a sale of property, the director shall make and deliver to the purchaser a certificate of sale, setting forth a description of the property; the amount of the sale; the purpose for which the sale was made; the nature of assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien for which foreclosure was instituted; the name of the purchaser; and that the sale is subject to the lien debtor’s redemption rights for one year from the date of the certificate. [Ord. 268 § 15, 1998].


3.30.160 Entry in lien docket.

Within three days of the date of sale, the director shall enter on the city lien docket the following information:

(1) The name of the purchaser;

(2) The amount paid for the parcel. [Ord. 268 § 16, 1998].


3.30.170 Redemption.

(1) The lien debtor, the lien debtor’s legal representative or successor in interest, or any person having a lien on the property by virtue of a judgment, decree or mortgage or the holder of a tax lien may redeem the property by paying in cash to the city, any time within one year from the date of the certificate, the purchase price, plus a penalty equal to 10 percent of the purchase price, along with interest on the purchase price at the rate of 10 percent per annum from the date of the certificate, and the amount of any taxes, assessments, or other liens upon the property that are paid after purchase by the purchaser at the sale. Redemption shall discharge the property from the effect of the sale, and if the property is redeemed by a lien creditor, the amount paid to redeem the property shall be deemed a part of the judgment, decree, mortgage or tax lien, as the case may be, and shall bear interest and may be enforced and collected as part of the judgment, decree, mortgage or tax lien.

(2) After one year from the date of the certificate of sale, if the property has not been redeemed, the director shall execute a deed of conveyance to the purchaser, or the purchaser’s heirs or assigns, containing a description of the property, the date of the sale, a statement of the amount of the bid, a statement of the amount of the assessment, assessment lien, abatement lien or other lien, and a statement that the final assessment or other final lien was unpaid at the time of sale and no redemption has been made.

(3) The effect of the deed shall be to convey to the purchaser, and the purchaser’s heirs or assigns, title in fee simple, excepting only liens for other governmental unit assessments. [Ord. 268 § 17, 1998].


3.30.180 Other foreclosure proceedings.

In lieu of the procedure set forth in this chapter, the city may seek judicial foreclosure as provided by law. [Ord. 268 § 18, 1998].


Chapter 3.35 GENERAL OBLIGATION IMPROVEMENT WARRANTS

Sections:

3.35.010    Estimate of work completed – Basis of partial payments.

3.35.020    Withholding upon default.

3.35.030    Minimum amount for payment.

3.35.040    Form of payment – General obligation warrant.

3.35.050    Payment not approved.


3.35.010 Estimate of work completed – Basis of partial payments.

If the city enters into a contract for the construction of a public improvement within the city, the cost of which is to be assessed against the property benefitted by the improvement, and performance has been in good faith commenced by the contractor who executed the contract, the city engineer shall make a monthly written estimate, based upon the contract price, of the value of the completed work. The estimate shall be made to the city manager. Based on the estimate, partial payment, less any amounts previously paid, shall be made to the contractor. Payment in excess of 90 percent of the total value of the completed work shall not be made prior to the completion and final acceptance, by the council, of all work under the contract. [Ord. 62 § 1, 1986].


3.35.020 Withholding upon default.

If the contractor is in default under any of the contract provisions at the time the monthly estimate is made, the city may withhold any partial payment otherwise due, pending removal of the default by the contractor, or the enforcement of any rights accruing to the city under the contract or by reason of the default. Neither the making nor withholding of a partial payment shall invalidate any of the provisions of the contract, or release the surety on the contract. [Ord. 62 § 2, 1986].


3.35.030 Minimum amount for payment.

If the amount due the contractor under the estimate for any given month is less than $300.00, no payment shall be made for that month. [Ord. 62 § 3, 1986].


3.35.040 Form of payment – General obligation warrant.

The partial payment shall be made by delivery to the contractor of a general obligation warrant or warrants drawn against a special fund created as provided by ORS 287.502 to 287.515, for the payment of the cost of the improvement for which the general obligation warrant may be issued. The warrant or warrants shall be issued only in amounts authorized by this chapter. The warrants shall be in convenient denominations and bear interest from their dates, at a rate to be determined by council resolution. [Ord. 62 § 4, 1986].


3.35.050 Payment not approved.

The partial payments by warrant do not constitute acceptance or approval of any part of the work covered by the payment and do not relieve the contractor or surety of responsibility for defective workmanship or material, or for any breach of the contract, nor shall the partial payment operate as a waiver of any right against the contractor or surety which the city might have if the partial payment had not been made. [Ord. 62 § 5, 1986].


Chapter 3.40 SALE OF CITY TIMBER

Sections:

3.40.010    Definitions.

3.40.020    Criteria for eligibility to bid on city timber sale contracts.

3.40.030    Prohibition against indirect substitution.

3.40.040    Applicable city timber.

3.40.050    Surplus timber.

3.40.060    Reporting requirements.

3.40.070    Purchaser disqualification and termination of contracts.

3.40.080    Log branding and marking requirements.

3.40.090    Enforcement.


3.40.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“City timber” means any timber owned by the city of Coos Bay.

“Export” means unprocessed timber loaded on a vessel or other conveyance with a foreign destination or present at a facility such as a port or dock with intent to load it on a vessel or other conveyance with a foreign destination.

“Performance bond” means the security required by a city timber sale contract which ensures satisfactory performance of contract requirements by the timber sale purchaser. A performance bond may be in the form of a surety bond, cash, negotiable securities, irrevocable letter of credit, or an assignment of surety.

“Person” means an individual, a partnership, a public or private corporation, an unincorporated association, or any other legal entity. The term includes any subsidiary subcontractor, parent company or other affiliate. Business entities are considered affiliates when one controls or has the power to control the other or when both are controlled directly or indirectly by a third person.

“Purchaser” means a person who has entered into a timber sale contract with the city.

“Unprocessed timber” or “unprocessed city timber” means trees or portions of trees or other roundwood not processed to standards and specifications suitable for end product use. The term does not include timber processed into any one of the following:

(1) Lumber or construction timbers, meeting current American Lumber Standards Grades or Pacific Lumber Inspection Bureau Export R or N list clear grades, sawn on four sides, not intended for remanufacture;

(2) Lumber, construction timbers, or cants for remanufacture, meeting current American Lumber Standards Grades or Pacific Lumber Inspection Bureau Export R or N list clear grades, sawn on four sides, not to exceed 12 inches (nominal) in thickness;

(3) Lumber, construction timbers, or cants for remanufacture, that do not meet the grades referred to in subsection (2) of this definition and are sawn on four sides, with wane less than one-fourth of any face, not exceeding eight and three-fourths inches in thickness;

(4) Chips, pulp, or pulp products;

(5) Veneer or plywood;

(6) Poles, posts, or piling cut or treated with preservatives for use as such;

(7) Shakes or shingles;

(8) Aspen or other pulpwood bolts, not exceeding 100 inches in length, exported for processing into pulp;

(9) Pulp logs or cull logs processed at domestic pulp mills, domestic chip plants, or other domestic operations for the purpose of conversion of the logs into chips;

(10) Firewood cut in pieces 48 inches or less in length. [Ord. 170 § 1, 1991].


3.40.020 Criteria for eligibility to bid on city timber sale contracts.

(1) In addition to all other requirements of law, any person submitting a bid for the purchase of city timber must certify that:

(a) The person will not export directly or indirectly unprocessed city timber; and

(b) The person will not sell, transfer, exchange or otherwise convey unprocessed city timber to any other person without obtaining a certification from the person that meets the requirements of CBMC 3.40.060.

(2) A person shall not be disqualified for having exported unprocessed timber from private lands within 24 months of the date of submission of this bid. [Ord. 192 § 1, 1993; Ord. 170 § 2, 1991].


3.40.030 Prohibition against indirect substitution.

In addition to all other requirements of law, no person who is prohibited from purchasing timber directly from the city may purchase city timber from any other person. Acquisitions of Western Red Cedar which are domestically processed into finished products to be sold into domestic or international markets are exempt from the prohibition contained in this section. [Ord. 170 § 3, 1991].


3.40.040 Applicable city timber.

All unprocessed timber which originates from city lands is prohibited from export. [Ord. 170 § 4, 1991].


3.40.050 Surplus timber.

The prohibitions against export shall not apply to specific quantities of grades and species of unprocessed timber originating from city land which the United States Secretary of Agriculture or Interior has determined by rule to be surplus to the needs of timber manufacturing facilities in the United States. [Ord. 170 § 5, 1991].


3.40.060 Reporting requirements.

(1) Before the city will issue final acceptance of timber sale contract requirements, a purchaser of city timber must:

(a) Notify the city of the delivery destination of all timber purchased under that contract.

(b) Prior to selling, trading, exchanging, or otherwise conveying city timber to any other person, the purchaser of city timber shall obtain a certification of the person’s eligibility to purchase city timber, and their intent to comply with the terms and conditions contained in this section. Obtaining certification shall not relieve the purchaser’s responsibility to provide the city with an accounting of the delivery destination of that timber.

(2) Any performance bond required by a city timber sale contract may be retained by the city, until satisfactory notification of city timber delivery destination has been received.

(3) Failure to provide the city with a final accounting of the delivery destination of city timber will be considered a violation of these export regulations. Violators will be subject to the penalties contained in CBMC 3.40.070. [Ord. 170 § 6, 1991].


3.40.070 Purchaser disqualification and termination of contracts.

(1) The city shall keep a record of any person who violates the requirements of this chapter.

(2) A person whose name appears on the record for violations as stated in subsection (1) of this section, and who again violates the requirements of this chapter, shall be disqualified from bidding on or purchasing city timber for a period of five years following the date of the violation. Any appeals of disqualification shall be handled as provided in ORS 279.045.

(3) The city may cease operations on and/or terminate any city timber sale contract entered into with a person who has violated the requirements of this chapter, and assess damages according to the following formula:

D = (OSV + AC) – (PR + RSV), where:

(a) D = Damages and Expenses.

(b) OSV = Original Sale Value (timber only, does not include project value). The original sale value shall be adjusted to reflect estimated overruns or underruns on recovery sales.

(c) AC = Administrative Costs. These costs include both the field and office costs required for the preparation of the defaulted parcel for resale. These costs also include rehabilitation or regeneration delay costs, legal service costs, interest, and other costs allowed by law.

(d) PR = Payments Received.

(e) RSV = Remaining Sale Value. The value of the remaining timber shall be determined using the city’s estimate of remaining volume, multiplied by the dollar values stated in the contract. [Ord. 170 § 7, 1991].


3.40.080 Log branding and marking requirements.

(1) All city timber originating from city timber sales shall be branded with an assigned and registered brand before removal from the sale area. Unless prevented by the size or condition of the wood, both ends of all logs originating from city timber sales shall be hammer branded and both ends shall be painted with a paint type and color determined by the city.

(2) If properly marked city timber is subdivided into smaller pieces for any other purpose than immediate processing, each piece must be branded with the city brand specifically used for this purpose and signifying the unprocessed timber is city timber ineligible for export. [Ord. 170 § 8, 1991].


3.40.090 Enforcement.

Investigation of suspected violations of these rules and/or surveillance of unprocessed timber in transit and at port facilities may be conducted by the city, or contracted by the city to other state or federal agencies. Any alleged violations of the export prohibition provisions of this chapter will be referred by the city to the appropriate federal or state agency or city department for prosecution or other legal action. [Ord. 170 § 9, 1991].


Chapter 3.45 SALE OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

3.45.010    Alternative procedure.

3.45.020    Designation as surplus.

3.45.030    Committee review.

3.45.040    Determining price for surplus properties.

3.45.050    Offers to purchase.

3.45.060    Annual review of sales prices.


3.45.010 Alternative procedure.

In addition to the procedure set forth under Oregon law for sale of city properties, but not in lieu thereof, the city of Coos Bay hereby adopts an alternative procedure for the sale of city property classified as surplus. [Ord. 139 § 1, 1989].


3.45.020 Designation as surplus.

Each lot or parcel owned by the city of Coos Bay which has been designated by the council as surplus property, to wit: property that has no public use, shall be listed with the finance department as available for sale. [Ord. 139 § 2, 1989].


3.45.030 Committee review.

The finance and administration advisory committee, or such other committee as the council may designate, shall review annually all properties owned by the city and recommend to the council any changes in designation. [Ord. 139 § 3, 1989].


3.45.040 Determining price for surplus properties.

(1) The finance and administration advisory committee, or such other committee as the council designated, shall review the tax assessed value of each lot and parcel designated as surplus, solicit opinions of value from licensed real estate persons, and at the committee’s discretion, view the property, in determining the selling price for each lot or parcel.

(2) The council may direct an appraisal be done on any particular lot or parcel, and the committee may recommend to the council that such an appraisal be done.

(3) When the committee has established a recommended price for a lot or parcel, taking into consideration any outstanding city assessments thereon, the committee shall report to the council which shall approve or modify the price.

(4) Once the price has been established for a lot or parcel, it will be advertised and listed for sale with the finance department on a cash basis. [Ord. 139 § 4, 1989].


3.45.050 Offers to purchase.

(1) The city manager is authorized and directed to market the properties and to accept any cash offer at the listed price.

(2) If the city receives an offer at less than the listed price, or on other than a cash basis, the city manager shall evaluate the offer. If he determines that it is worth further consideration, he shall refer the offer to the finance and administration advisory committee, or such other committee as the council has designated.

(3) Upon consideration of the offer, the committee may recommend to the council to accept or reject the offer.

(4) Upon review of the city manager and committee recommendation, and following a public discussion thereon, the council may agree to sell the property upon which the offer was received at less than the listed price or upon other than a cash basis. [Ord. 139 § 5, 1989].


3.45.060 Annual review of sales prices.

The finance and administration advisory committee, or such other committee as the council designates, shall annually review the sales and the marketing program, and may recommend changes to the council, including adjustment of prices on lots or parcels as it deems appropriate. Based on the committee recommendation, the council may adjust prices set and otherwise direct changes in the method of sale. [Ord. 139 § 6, 1989].


Chapter 3.50 ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY

Sections:

3.50.010    Definitions.

3.50.020    Storage.

3.50.030    Disposition of abandoned property.

3.50.040    Repealed.

3.50.050    Repealed.


3.50.010 Definitions.

“Abandoned” means any property which has been left upon the real property of the city or upon, or attached to, any public dock of the city, without the owner, or person leaving the same, having first obtained the permission of the city therefor, or where any property shall have been left upon the real property, or upon or attached to any dock of the city, with the permission of the city but where the owner thereof has refused to remove said property after having been given 30 days’ notice to remove the same by the city, or whenever property is found without an owner claiming it, or, by reason of arrest, confiscation, impoundment, or by any other means, comes into the hands of the city.

“Interested person” means the owner, conditional vendor, mortgagee or other person having an ownership interest in property or a legal claim to property coming into the hands of the city.

“Property” means all personal property except motor vehicles, weapons seized pursuant to state law, property the disposition of which is governed by court order, or intangible personal property. [Ord. 67 § 1, 1986].


3.50.020 Storage.

The city shall store the property at City Hall or another authorized storage place pending investigation of ownership and disposition. The owner or operator of a place in which property has been stored by the city shall not release property without first having obtained a written release from the city. [Ord. 67 § 2, 1986].


3.50.030 Disposition of abandoned property.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (8) of this section, personal property taken into the custody of the city after seizure, abandonment or for any other reason shall be held by the police department at the expense and risk of the owner of the property. 

(2) Except when the property is forfeited or held as evidence, the owner or other person with right of possession may reclaim personal property held by the police department. The police department shall require satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and payment of any costs incurred by the city in securing and storing the property. 

(3) Prior to any disposition of found or abandoned property, the police department shall cause a notice in substantially the following form to be posted at two locations at City Hall and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city:

The Coos Bay Police Department has in its physical possession the unclaimed personal property described below. If you have any ownership interest in any of that unclaimed property, you must file a claim with the Coos Bay Police Department within 30 days from the date of publication of this notice, or you will lose your interest in that property. 

(Inventory of found and abandoned property)

(4) If the property remains unclaimed 30 days after the publication of the notice, the police department may use, sell, donate, transfer, destroy, or dispose of the unclaimed found or abandoned personal property. The police department will use its professional judgment in determining whether a person claiming ownership has provided sufficient proof of ownership. 

(5) The city may dispose of dangerous or perishable items immediately and without any notice if it is determined by the city that such action is in the public interest. Any fireworks that are confiscated as being unauthorized for private use will be destroyed in accordance with department procedures at the discretion of the chief of police. 

(6) Forfeited property may be destroyed, donated to charity, sold or appropriated by the police department at the discretion of the chief of police. 

(7) Property not subject to forfeiture or held as evidence may be returned on presentation of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession after final disposition of the case, including any appeals, subject to approval of the district attorney. 

(8) Other procedures and standards may apply to specific types of property, such as motor vehicles and signs. Where the city provides a different procedure for the disposition of specific types of abandoned personal property, this section shall not apply to such property. [Ord. 447 § 1, 2012].


3.50.040 Presale procedures.

Repealed by Ord. 447. [Ord. 67 § 4, 1986].


3.50.050 Sales procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 447. [Ord. 67 § 5, 1986].


Chapter 3.55 TRANSIENT ROOM TAX

Sections:

3.55.010    Title.

3.55.020    Definitions.

3.55.030    Tax imposed.

3.55.040    Collection of tax by operator – Rules for collection.

3.55.050    Operator’s duties.

3.55.060    Exemptions.

3.55.070    Registration of operator – Form and contents – Execution.

3.55.080    Returns and payments.

3.55.090    Delinquency penalties.

3.55.100    Deficiency determinations – Fraud, evasion, operator delay.

3.55.110    Redetermination and refund.

3.55.120    Security for collection of tax.

3.55.130    Administration.

3.55.140    Transient occupancy tax appeal board.

3.55.150    Violations.

3.55.160    Penalty.


3.55.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the transient room tax ordinance of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 315 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 1, 1976].


3.55.020 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

“Accrual accounting” means a system of accounting where the operator enters the rent due from a transient on the operator’s records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

“Cash accounting” means a system of accounting where the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on the operator’s records until the rent is paid.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Coos Bay, Oregon.

“Entitled to occupancy” means the person so entitled is obligated to pay rent to the operator of the motel for each day during which the person has the right of occupancy in the motel. This term does not mean the person simply has reservations for a room, but that the person is obligated to pay rent for the room for each day such right exists.

“Finance director” means the city of Coos Bay finance director, or his or her designee.

“Motel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes, by way of illustration and not limitation, any motel, inn, tourist home or house, hotel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, space in mobile home or trailer parks, or similar structure or portions thereof so occupied.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or rooms in a motel, or space in a mobile home or trailer park or portion thereof for lodging or sleeping purposes.

“Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the motel in any capacity. Where the operator performs functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered compliance by both.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, municipal or other public corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or other group or entity in law or fact.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a motel, valued in money; or the monetary value of goods, labor, credits, property, or other consideration given in exchange instead of money, without any deduction.

“Rent package plan” means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the charge made for rent when food is not a part of a package plan.

“Tax” means the transient occupancy tax hereinafter imposed, either as the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which the operator is required to report collections.

“Tenancy” means the letting of real estate as a landlord to tenant pursuant to a lease agreement creating a residential landlord-tenant relationship.

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to exercise occupancy in a motel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the motel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a motel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. An individual who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient. [Ord. 374 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 315 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 2, 1976].


3.55.030 Tax imposed.

Effective April 1, 2019, the transient lodging tax will be increased from seven percent to nine and one-half percent. Each transient lodging tax collector shall pay the established TLT of the rent to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the lodging establishment at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the operator’s records when rent is collected, if the operator keeps his records on the cash accounting basis, or when earned, if the operator keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. The transient lodging tax collector shall pay the TLT with the rent to the city. TLT amounts shall be rounded down to the nearest cent. The transient lodging tax collector shall maintain records of all rent charged and TLT payments received. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the TLT shall be paid by the transient lodging tax collector to the tax administrator with each installment unless the transient lodging tax collector pays the entire amount with the first payment. If for any reason the tax is not paid to the operator of the motel, the finance director may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services, and commodities other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and parking spaces in mobile home parks or trailer parks. [Ord. 508, 2019; Ord. 315 § 3, 2001; Ord. 195 § 1, 1993; Ord. 2663 § 3, 1976].


3.55.040 Collection of tax by operator – Rules for collection.

(1) Every operator renting rooms in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempt under the terms of this chapter, shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.

(2) In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. [Ord. 315 § 4, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 4, 1976].


3.55.050 Operator’s duties.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from each transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records and any receipt tendered by the operator. No operator of a motel shall advertise or shall enter into agreement providing that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that when added, any part will be refunded, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. [Ord. 315 § 5, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 5, 1976].


3.55.060 Exemptions.

The tax shall not be imposed upon:

(1) Any individual in actual occupation in a motel for more than 30 successive calendar days;

(2) Any individual whose rent has a value less than $2.00 per day;

(3) Any individual who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents such facilities incidental to the owner’s use thereof;

(4) Any individual whose rent is paid for occupancy in a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home, or home for aged people;

(5) Any individual whose rent is paid for occupancy in a public dormitory owned and operated by a public educational institution when such occupancy is executed for educational purposes only. [Ord. 315 § 6, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 6, 1976].


3.55.070 Registration of operator – Form and contents – Execution.

Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in the city of Coos Bay shall register with the city on a form provided by the finance director. Persons starting business must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business. Registration shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the operator’s place or places of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance director may require. [Ord. 315 § 7, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 7, 1976].


3.55.080 Returns and payments.

(1) The tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. Such tax collected by any operator is due and payable to the finance director as follows:

(a) For the first 12 months following registration as an operator of a motel in the city, payment for any given month will be made by the last day of the following month; or

(b) Whenever the operator has been delinquent in two or more consecutive payments, for a period designated by the finance director, payment for any given month will be made by the last day of the following month; or

(c) For all other operators, payment will be made on a quarterly basis, with payment for each quarter to be made by the last day of the month following the close of the quarter. The quarters are:

	1st Quarter	January, February, March

	2nd Quarter	April, May, June

	3rd Quarter	July, August, September

	4th Quarter	October, November, December

(2) Taxes are delinquent if not paid by the last day of the month following the close of the period referenced in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Returns shall be filed in such form as the finance director may prescribe and are due at the time the tax is paid. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The finance director may require returns to show the total occupancies upon which tax was collected or otherwise due.

(4) The operator shall deliver the return, together with remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the finance director at the city of Coos Bay finance office either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, date of postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies. [Ord. 374 § 4, 2005; Ord. 315 § 8, 2001; Ord. 83 § 1, 1986; Ord. 2663 § 8, 1976].


3.55.090 Delinquency penalties.

(1) An operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit the tax prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the tax due, in addition to the tax.

(2) An operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who fails to pay a delinquent remittance before the expiration of 30 days following the date on which the remittance became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty equal to 15 percent of the tax due, plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent first penalty.

(3) If the finance director determines that nonpayment is due to fraud or intent to evade the tax, a penalty of 25 percent of the tax shall be added in addition to the penalties provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(4) In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section, an operator who fails to remit the required tax shall pay interest on the tax due at the rate of one percent per month, without proration for portions of a month, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid.

(5) Each penalty imposed and all interest accrued shall be merged with and become a part of the tax required to be paid.

(6) At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the finance director may bring any action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest. [Ord. 374 § 5, 2005; Ord. 315 § 9, 2001; Ord. 83 § 2, 1986; Ord. 2663 § 9, 1976].


3.55.100 Deficiency determinations – Fraud, evasion, operator delay.

(1) Deficiency Determination. If the finance director determines that an operator’s returns are incorrect, the finance director may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within, or that may come within, the finance director’s possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice of the finance director’s determination, as hereinafter provided. Penalties and interest on deficiencies shall be assessed as provided in CBMC 3.55.090.

(a) In making a deficiency determination, the finance director may offset overpayment, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayment.

(b) The finance director shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of the finance director’s determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail.

(2) Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax, or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of the tax, or any portion thereof, the finance director shall proceed, in such manner as the finance director may deem best, to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director has determined the tax due based on such information, the director shall proceed to assess against such operator the tax and interest provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the finance director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed, such determination and notice to be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the finance director of any fraud, intent to evade, or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the finance director has given notice thereof, and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by such date.

(3) Costs of Determining Tax. All costs to the city in determining the actual tax due from any operator shall be added to, and become a part of, the amount owed by the operator upon written notice to the operator, served personally or by mail. [Ord. 315 § 10, 2001; Ord. 83 § 3, 1986; Ord. 2663 § 10, 1976].


3.55.110 Redetermination and refund.

(1) Any operator against whom a determination is made under CBMC 3.55.100 or any person against whom the tax has been imposed may file a petition for redetermination or refund within 10 days of the date notice is given to the operator under CBMC 3.55.100(1) or within one year to the date the tax is collected from the person, as the case may be. The petition shall be verified and shall state the specific reason the redetermination is merited or refund is due. If a petition is not filed within such time period, the determination or imposition of the tax becomes final and binding.

(2) If a petition is filed within the allowable period, the city manager shall reconsider the determination or imposition and, if the operator or person has so requested in the petition, shall give the operator or person a hearing after not less than two weeks’ notice of the time and place for the hearing. The city manager may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

(3) The city manager may decrease or increase the amount of the determination or imposition as a result of the hearing and, if an increase is determined, such increase shall be payable immediately after hearing.

(4) The order or decision of the city manager upon a petition becomes final 10 days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof unless an appeal is filed with the city council, in writing, within the 10 days after service of such notice.

(5) No petition, or appeal therefrom, shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. [Ord. 315 § 11, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 11, 1976].


3.55.120 Security for collection of tax.

The finance director, whenever deemed necessary to ensure the compliance with this chapter, may require an operator to deposit with the city cash, bond, or other security deemed acceptable by the city attorney. The amount of such cash, bond, or other security shall be fixed by the finance director, but it shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which the operator files returns or $5,000, whichever is less. Pursuant to CBMC 3.55.140, the operator has a right to appeal any decision of the finance director made pursuant to this section to the transient occupancy tax appeal board by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within 10 days after service of notice of requirement to provide such security. [Ord. 315 § 12, 2001; Ord. 83 § 4, 1986; Ord. 2663 § 12, 1976].


3.55.130 Administration.

(1) Records Required from Operators – Form. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of at least three years after they come into being.

(2) Examination of Records – Investigations. The finance director may examine, during normal business hours, the books, papers, and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator after notification to the operator, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of the tax required to be paid.

(3) Confidential Character of Information Obtained. No person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter shall make known in any manner whatsoever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any operator, except as follows:

(a) The disclosure to, or the examination of, records and equipment by another city of Coos Bay official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provision of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

(b) The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the finance director may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby. [Ord. 315 § 13, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 13, 1976].


3.55.140 Transient occupancy tax appeal board.

A transient occupancy tax appeal board is hereby created to be composed of members of the Coos Bay city council. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep a record of its transactions and shall not receive any compensation for their services on the board. The board shall have the power to:

(1) Hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions made pursuant to this chapter. The board may affirm, modify, or reverse such orders or decisions, and may prescribe such forms, rules, and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of a decision or order, the board may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary and give notice of its determinations. Such determination shall become final 60 days thereafter;

(2) Approve, modify, or disapprove all forms, rules, and regulations prescribed by the finance director in the administration and enforcement of this chapter;

(3) Make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the tax;

(4) Revoke the business license issued to any operator for repeated failure to comply with this chapter, and order such revocation to continue until the operator has come into compliance and paid in full all taxes owing, including delinquency penalties, interest, and costs. Such revocation shall be made only following a hearing with 10 days’ written notice to the operator. Such revocation may be in addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 315 § 14, 2001; Ord. 83 § 5, 1986; Ord. 2663 § 14, 1976].


3.55.150 Violations.

It is unlawful for any operator to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter. [Ord. 315 § 15, 2001; Ord. 2663 § 15, 1976].


3.55.160 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $750.00 for each such offense. [Ord. 315 § 16, 2001; Ord. 83 § 7, 1986; Ord. 2663 § 16, 1976].


Chapter 3.60 MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT TAX

Sections:

3.60.010    Title.

3.60.020    Purpose.

3.60.030    Definitions.

3.60.040    Levy of tax.

3.60.050    Deductions.

3.60.060    Seller responsible for payment of tax.

3.60.070    Penalties and interest.

3.60.080    Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by city manager.

3.60.090    Appeal.

3.60.100    Actions to collect.

3.60.110    Confidentiality.

3.60.120    Audit of books, records or persons.

3.60.130    Penalties.

3.60.140    Forms and regulations.

3.60.150    Intergovernmental agreement.


3.60.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the marijuana and marijuana-infused product tax, and shall apply to all areas within the incorporated city limits of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 483 § 1, 2016].


3.60.020 Purpose.

For the purpose of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana or marijuana-infused products in the city of Coos Bay is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products. [Ord. 483 § 2, 2016].


3.60.030 Definitions.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings.

(1) “Manager” means the city manager of the city of Coos Bay or his/her designee.

(2) “Gross taxable sales” means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales of marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

(3) “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by the Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

(4) “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(5) “Purchaser” means any person who acquires marijuana from a seller for any valuable consideration.

(6) “Purchase or sale” means the acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana or marijuana-infused products within the city.

(7) “Retail sale” means the transfer of goods or services for any valuable consideration.

(8) “Seller” means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the state of Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

(9) “Tax” means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter.

(10) “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the city manager for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 483 § 3, 2016].


3.60.040 Levy of tax.

(1) There is hereby levied and shall be paid a tax by every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this chapter.

(2) The amount of tax levied shall be established by the city council through resolution as follows:

(a) Three percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by individuals who are not purchasing marijuana under the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program.

(3) The purchaser shall pay to the seller, and the seller shall collect from the purchaser, the tax at the time of the purchase or sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused product. [Ord. 483 § 4, 2016].


3.60.050 Deductions.

The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana.

(1) Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser.

(2) Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller. [Ord. 483 § 5, 2016].


3.60.060 Seller responsible for payment of tax.

(1) Every marijuana retailer shall obtain a business license from the city of Coos Bay pursuant to CBMC Title 5. The marijuana retailer will indicate on the license application whether the marijuana retailer is licensed by or registered with the state of Oregon to provide marijuana items to consumers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

(2) Every seller shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the city manager on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax collected under this chapter. The seller may request or the city manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or the city manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and the city manager may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is fully and accurately completed, and actually received by the city manager. The quarters are:

First quarter: January, February, March

Second quarter: April, May, June

Third quarter: July, August, September

Fourth quarter: October, November, December

(3) At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city manager. Payments received by the city manager for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.

(4) Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the city manager, in her or his sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the city manager may order such a change. The city manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the city manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The city manager also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the city manager. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

(5) A seller shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due that is not received timely, without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed and if the tax and interest due are not paid the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties prescribed in CBMC 3.60.070.

(6) Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the city manager records of all sales made by the dispensary and such other books or accounts as may be required by the city manager. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of five years all such books, invoices and other records. The city manager shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. [Ord. 483 § 6, 2016].


3.60.070 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax.

(2) Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 60 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

(3) If the city manager determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(4) In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(5) Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid. [Ord. 483 § 7, 2016].


3.60.080 Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by city manager.

If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report of the tax required by this chapter, the city manager shall proceed in such manner as is deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the city manager shall procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any seller, the city manager shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In the case that such a determination is made, the city manager shall give notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally on the seller, or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller so assessed at the last known place of address. Such seller may appeal such determination as provided in CBMC 3.60.090. If no appeal is filed, the city manager’s determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable. [Ord. 483 § 8, 2016].


3.60.090 Appeal.

(1) Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the city manager with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within 15 days of mailing of the notice of a decision. The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, as prescribed by the city council, and shall give the appellant 15 days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing before the city council.

(2) The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeal fee to facilitate the appeal. Appeal fees shall be set by city resolution of the city council.

(3) The parties shall be entitled to appear personally and by counsel and to present such facts, evidence and arguments as may tend to support the respective positions on appeal.

(4) The city council shall afford the parties an opportunity to be heard at an appeal hearing after reasonable notice. The city council shall take such action upon the appeal it sees fit. The city council shall at a minimum:

(a) At the commencement of the hearing, explain the relevant issues involved in the hearing, applicable procedures and the burden of proof.

(b) At the commencement of the hearing place on the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning any relevant and material fact in issue at the hearing which was made outside the official proceedings during the pendency of the proceeding. The parties shall be notified of the substance of the communication and the right to rebut the communication. Notwithstanding the above, the parties are prohibited from engaging in ex parte communications with the members of the city council.

(c) Testimony shall be taken upon oath or affirmation of the witnesses.

(d) The city council shall ensure that the record developed at the hearing shows a full and fair inquiry into the relevant and material facts for consideration for the issues properly before the city council.

(e) Written testimony may be submitted under penalty of false swearing for entry into the record. All written evidence shall be filed with the city recorder no less than five working days before the date of the hearing.

(f) The city council shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the city manager’s determination of amount due, and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination.

(g) Informal disposition may be made of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default.

(5) The action of the city manager shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section.

(6) Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including, but not limited to, the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing of the notice of appeal, and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal.

(7) The finding of the city council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. [Ord. 483 § 9, 2016].


3.60.100 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Within three years after the tax becomes payable or within three years after a determination becomes final, whichever time period is longer, the city may bring an action in the name of the city in the courts of this state, another state or the United States to collect the amount delinquent and penalties and interest. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105 (as hereafter amended), in the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, which shall not exceed the amount allowed by Oregon law. [Ord. 483 § 10, 2016].


3.60.110 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

(1) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or

(2) The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

(3) Presentation of evidence to the court or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the city manager or an appeal from the city manager for amount due the city under this chapter; or

(4) The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

(5) The disclosures of records related to a business’ failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The city council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). [Ord. 483 § 11, 2016].


3.60.120 Audit of books, records or persons.

(1) It shall be the duty of every seller liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of five years, all records, books, reports, income tax reports and other matters required by this chapter as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the seller may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city manager shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times as set forth below. Every operator shall maintain records of marijuana and marijuana-infused product purchase and sales, accounting books and records of income. Sellers must, at a minimum, include a cash receipt and deposit journal and a cash disbursements journal/check register for all authorized deductions. These records and books shall reconcile to the tax reports and be auditable. They shall also reconcile to the seller’s income tax reports. If the city manager finds the books and records of the seller are deficient in that they do not provide adequate support for tax reports filed, or the seller’s accounting system is not auditable, it shall be the responsibility of the seller to improve its accounting system to the satisfaction of the city manager.

(2) The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the city manager or authorized agent of the city manager. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the city manager may immediately seek a subpoena from a court of competent jurisdiction to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. [Ord. 483 § 12, 2016].


3.60.130 Penalties.

(1) It is unlawful for any seller or any other person so required to fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish the supplementary return or other data required by the city manager or to enter a false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter.

(2) Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of up to $500.00 per occurrence. Every day in which the violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate occurrence, and the punishment therefore shall be in addition to any other penalty, interest, sum or charge imposed by this chapter. Delinquent taxes and fees, penalty and interest imposed by this chapter may be collected in a civil action.

(3) The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor shall the provisions of this chapter prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city ordinance. [Ord. 483 § 13, 2016].


3.60.140 Forms and regulations.

The city manager is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said marijuana tax and in particular, and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for:

(1) A form or report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors;

(2) The records which sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 483 § 14, 2016].


3.60.150 Intergovernmental agreement.

The city council many enter into an IGA with the state of Oregon whereby a state department or agency is responsible for the administration, collection, distribution, or enforcement of the tax authorized by this chapter, either in full or in part. The terms of that agreement shall apply in lieu of and shall supersede conflicting provisions of this chapter but shall not be construed as repealing any provision of this chapter. [Ord. 483 § 18, 2016].


Chapter 3.65 TRANSPORTATION UTILITY FEE

Sections:

3.65.010    Short title.

3.65.020    Purpose.

3.65.030    Definitions.

3.65.040    Transportation utility fee.

3.65.050    Use of funds.

3.65.060    Billing and collection.

3.65.070    Appeal.

3.65.080    Liability.

3.65.090    Authority of city manager.


3.65.010 Short title.

Ordinance No. 510 may be referred to as the “transportation utility fee ordinance” and will be cited and referred to herein as “this chapter.” [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.020 Purpose.

This chapter establishes a transportation utility fee, which fee when collected will subsidize the costs and expenses city incurs to provide street system services. The transportation utility fee provides a utility-based funding mechanism to pay for benefits conferred on city residents and businesses through road maintenance and repairs. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the transportation utility fee is (1) a fee for service and not a charge against property, (2) premised on the direct and indirect use or benefit derived from use of city’s street system, and (3) not a property tax or subject to the limitations of Article XI, Section 11, of the Oregon Constitution. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.030 Definitions.

Unless the context requires otherwise, when used in this chapter the following terms and phrases have the meanings assigned to them below:

City – City of Coos Bay, Oregon.

City council or council – The then-appointed Coos Bay city council.

City manager – City’s then-appointed city manager or his or her designee.

City street system or street system – All transportation-related components located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, and/or city easements within city’s incorporated limits that city is contractually or legally obligated to operate and maintain, including, without limitation, streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, bridges, sidewalks, paths, and improvements and installations related to such components, which are designated for use by motor vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles, and/or other similar vehicles.

City utility service(s) – City’s sanitary sewer utility and/or Coos Bay-North Bend water board water utility.

Customer(s) – A person receiving city utility service(s).

Developed property – Real property that has been altered by development coverage.

Dwelling or dwelling unit – One or more habitable rooms that are occupied, or are intended or designed to be occupied, by one family with facilities for living, sleeping, sanitary facilities, cooking, and eating.

Nonresidential property – All developed property not used as residential property.

Occupied unit(s) – Any structure(s) (or discrete portion thereof) located in city’s incorporated limits which is lawfully capable of being occupied as either residential property or nonresidential property. With respect to multifamily residential property, each separate dwelling unit is considered a separate occupied unit. Each separate and distinct business in a shopping center or commercial or industrial building is considered a separate occupied unit. An occupied unit may include one or more structure(s) if all are part of the same dwelling unit or commercial or industrial operation. For example, a nonresidential property being used as an industrial or commercial site having several structures forming or being used as an integrated commercial or manufacturing business may constitute one occupied unit.

Person(s) – Any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, firm, association, trust, unincorporated organization, government or governmental agency or political subdivision, or any other entity.

Person(s) responsible – The utility customer or person(s) who by usage, occupancy, and/or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay a city utility bill for an occupied unit.

Premises or property – Includes the subject real property and all improvements located thereon.

Residential property – Developed property used or intended for use primarily as a personal domestic domicile, including, without limitation, single-family, multifamily, and group homes, but not including properties used primarily for transient (i.e., less than 30 days) occupancies such as hotels, resorts, and motels.

Transportation utility fee(s) or fee(s) – The transportation utility fee established under this chapter.

Vacant – That an occupied unit has become continuously unoccupied for 30 days or more; provided, however, “vacant” does not mean that only a portion of a property without a separate water meter has become vacant or unoccupied. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.040 Transportation utility fee.

City hereby establishes and authorizes the imposition of a transportation utility fee in an amount to be set by resolution. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the transportation utility fee will be collected from each occupied unit located in city’s incorporated limits. Property that is undeveloped or, if developed, vacant and with all city utilities turned off is not considered an occupied unit. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the city manager, or designee, will determine the property classification and number of occupied units concerning each property. The transportation utility fee may be adjusted from time to time by council resolution. Policies and/or procedures for calculating, billing, and/or collecting the transportation utility fee may be established from time to time by the Coos Bay-North Bend water board (water board). [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.050 Use of funds.

All fees collected under this chapter will be deposited into the city’s street improvement fund. Street improvement fund revenues will be used to pay the costs and expenses of operating the street system, including, without limitation, costs and expenses associated with the operation, maintenance, repair, engineering, improvement, renewal, safety, replacement, and/or reconstruction of the street system. It will not be necessary that the maintenance and repair expenditures from the street improvement fund relate to any particular property from which the fee(s) for said purposes were collected. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.060 Billing and collection.

(1) Fees. Subject to and in accordance with this chapter, the council may establish and/or modify from time to time such fees, charges, fines, and/or penalties related to the transportation utility fee as the council deems necessary or appropriate by council resolution, including, without limitation, late fees and penalties.

(2) Billing. The transportation utility fee will be billed and collected monthly, or at such other interval determined by the water board, following billing procedures established by the water board and similar to those in place for the city’s sewer user fees also billed by the water board on behalf of the city. The water board shall follow established practices for billing of sewer user fees on behalf of the city, including development of payment due dates, delinquency notices, shutoff procedures, and collection proceedings, as well as appropriate methods for determining responsibility of payment in non-owner-occupied properties and those vacant, with regard to the billing and collection of the transportation utility fee.

(3) Place of Payment. All payments will be made at the place designated on the most recent utility bill. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.070 Appeal.

(1) Any person aggrieved by a ruling or interpretation of this chapter may appeal the ruling or interpretation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager. The notice of appeal must be filed no later than five days prior to the proposed termination date or within 10 days after the date notice of the ruling or interpretation is delivered to the person, whichever is earlier. The notice of appeal must contain (a) the name, address, and telephone number of the appellant, (b) a copy of the ruling or interpretation being appealed, and (c) the basis for the appeal, describing with reasonable specificity why the ruling or interpretation is in error. No termination of service will occur during the pendency of a timely and properly filed appeal before the city manager and/or council under this section.

(2) The city manager will conduct an informal hearing on the matter and, after consideration of the material presented by the appellant and city, the city manager will decide whether to approve or deny the appeal. If necessary, the city manager will prepare a written decision based upon the city manager’s findings. The city manager will send his or her written decision, if applicable, to the appellant and the council.

(3) If the appellant determines that his or her appeal has not been handled by the city manager to his or her satisfaction, he or she may, within 10 days after receipt of the city manager’s decision, request that the council complete an independent review of the appeal. The city manager will forward his or her entire file on the case for review of the council. The council will, within 30 days after receipt of the request for an independent review, issue a written decision on the matter and send the decision to the appellant and city manager. The council’s decision is final, conclusive, and binding. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.080 Liability.

City is not liable or responsible for any actual, consequential, and/or other damage(s) to person(s) or property resulting from city’s pursuit of any rights or remedies under this chapter or applicable law, including, without limitation, termination of water service to any person(s) or premises. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


3.65.090 Authority of city manager.

The city manager is responsible for the administration of this chapter. Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, the city manager will make all interpretations and discretionary determinations under this chapter, including, without limitation, determinations as to approvals, authorizations, judgments, adjustments, requirements, options, and/or impacts upon the transportation system. [Ord. 510 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019].


Title 4 (Reserved)

 


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Licenses Generally

5.10    Entertainment Clubs

5.15    Job Credits

5.20    Secondhand Stores and Gem and Precious Metal Dealers

5.25    Social Games

5.30    Taxi Regulations


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY

Sections:

5.05.010    Definitions.

5.05.020    Purpose.

5.05.030    Nonprofit organizations.

5.05.040    Agents of proprietors.

5.05.050    License required.

5.05.060    Duration of license.

5.05.070    License fees.

5.05.080    License application.

5.05.090    Unlawful acts.

5.05.100    Delinquent license fees.

5.05.110    Fee amounts.

5.05.120    Violations.

5.05.130    Revocation of license.

5.05.140    Suspension of license.

5.05.150    Appeal.

5.05.160    Penalties.


5.05.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of licensing businesses in the city of Coos Bay, Oregon, the following definitions apply:

“Amusement device” means any game, device, or machine kept, operated, or played in any place of business or other place where the public is invited or permitted to attend and which may be played by the insertion of coins.

“Application” means a new application, a renewal of an application, or a transfer of license application.

“Auctioneer” means any person who sells or offers to sell merchandise by public outcry or to the highest bidder, either for himself or for another person.

“Business” means professions, trades, occupations, shops, and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood.

“Child care provider” means a person who regularly provides child care to five or more children at a time as a business.

“Exhibition” means the display of goods or materials for which an admission fee is charged.

“Flea market” means all general sales, open to the public, conducted in any commercial zone within the city, for the purpose of disposing of personal property. These general sales include, but are not limited to, sales entitled “flea markets,” “bazaars,” and “rummage sales.” “Flea market” also includes situations where booths, tables, or spaces are sold or rented for the purpose of conducting sales of personal property. For the purpose of the definition of “flea market,” personal property means property which is owned by the individual conducting the sale, is purchased for resale, or is obtained on consignment.

“Garage sale” means any public sale of new or used goods within the city limits by an individual or group of individuals from private property when the individual or group of individuals is not in the business of selling goods or is not licensed as a secondhand dealer, and when the property from which the sale is to be conducted is not within a zone permitting commercial business or otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter.

“General contractor” means businesses registered by the State Construction Contractors Board as general contractor – all structures or residential only.

“Limited contractor” means businesses registered by the State Construction Contractors Board as limited contractor – all structures or residential only.

“Nonprofit” means any business or organization which holds a certificate of exemption from taxes from the Internal Revenue Service.

“Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city.

“Real estate business” means any enterprise or undertaking of any nature that deals directly or indirectly with any interest in land, including, but not limited to, leaseholds of any nature involving property located within the jurisdiction of the city of Coos Bay.

“Seasonal business” means Christmas tree lots, firework stands, or any other special seasonal business operating not less than 30 consecutive days in the same location.

“Special contractor” means business registered by the State Construction Contractors Board as specialty contractor – all structures or residential only.

“Transient business” means a business that operates from various city-owned properties and city rights-of-way and has no fixed permanent location from which the business is conducted, and which shall not remain on public property at any one location in the city, for more than the time specific on any single day. The business is permanently affixed to wheels and must be removed each day.

“Transient merchant” means any person, firm, or corporation selling or offering to sell, other than at auction, any merchandise in any building, store, room, or place of business occupied by the person, firm, or corporation within the city with the intention of doing so for a short period of time and without the intention of permanently doing so in the regular course of business, except for seasonal businesses.

“Vending machine” means any machine from which food, drink, or cigarettes are received in return for the insertion of coins. [Ord. 451 § 1, 2013; Ord. 425 § 1, 2010; Ord. 197 § 1, 1993; Ord. 103 § 1, 1987].


5.05.020 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to provide revenue to pay for the expenses required to issue licenses, to provide revenue to pay for municipal services to businesses, and to regulate businesses. [Ord. 103 § 2, 1987].


5.05.030 Nonprofit organizations.

All nonprofit organizations doing business in the city shall register with the city by filling out a business license application. Upon receipt of a completed application, which may include a requirement of proof of the organization’s nonprofit, tax-exempt status, the finance department shall issue a business license, which shall be issued without charge. [Ord. 287 § 1, 1999; Ord. 103 § 3, 1987].


5.05.040 Agents of proprietors.

(1) The owner of property who contracts with a third party to manage such property for purposes of leasing and/or renting the property shall be assessed a business license fee pursuant to resolution of the city council under the heading within such resolution of “Residential, Commercial and Industrial Leaseholds and Tenancies.” The license fee for the third party agent/manager shall be assessed pursuant to such resolution, under the heading “General Retail and Service Businesses.”

(2) The agent or agents of a nonresident proprietor engaged in any business for which a license is required by this chapter shall be jointly liable with the proprietor for the payment of fees established by the council, and for the penalties for failure to pay the fees or to comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 425 § 2, 2010; Ord. 103 § 4, 1987].


5.05.050 License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to transact or carry on or cause to be transacted or carried on any business without having first obtained a license therefor from the city recorder for the current calendar year. [Ord. 103 § 5, 1987].


5.05.060 Duration of license.

All business licenses under this chapter are annual and shall expire on December 31st. The required application and license fee are due on January 1st of each year for the calendar year commencing with that date and are delinquent on February 1st. [Ord. 103 § 6, 1987].


5.05.070 License fees.

(1) All trades, shops, businesses, occupations, professions, and callings carried on in the city and not licensed and taxed by other provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city shall be licensed and the amount to be paid as license fees shall be established by resolution of the council.

(2) Garage sales may be conducted without obtaining a business license. However, no household may conduct more than two garage sales in a one-year period, and no sale may last longer than five days.

(3) A license fee is not delinquent until after the applicant has commenced operation of his trade, shop, business, occupation, profession or calling within the city during the calendar year without paying the required license fee.

(4) When an applicant for a business license has not engaged in business during the calendar year until after June 30th, the required fee for the license shall be reduced by one-half. If the applicant had engaged in the same or similar business during the previous calendar year, there will be no reduction in the required fee.

(5) Where the applicant for a business license is operating more than one trade, shop, business, occupation, profession or calling, they must be separately licensed, but the applicant need pay only the one license fee which would be the highest fee. [Ord. 103 § 7, 1987].


5.05.080 License application.

(1) All business licenses required under this chapter or any other ordinance shall be issued by the recorder. The application for any license shall contain the following information:

(a) The description of the business carried on within the city.

(b) The name of the applicant with a statement of all persons having an interest in the business either as proprietors or owners of the business.

(c) The location in which the business is conducted.

(d) Upon request of the city recorder, any applicant shall provide proof of possession of any licenses, certificates, or registrations that are required by state or federal laws to conduct the type of business listed on the application. Failure to provide such proof shall be cause of denial or revocation of the license.

(e) The date of application.

(f) The average number of persons regularly employed by the business at the time the application for license is made. When practicable, this average shall be computed by adding all regular employees listed on the business’s Social Security reports during the year and dividing this total by the number of reports.

(g) The amount of money tendered with the application.

(h) Any other information necessary to enable the city to review the application under subsection (2) of this section and to determine the appropriate fee as established by resolution of the council.

(2) The recorder shall refer each application to the appropriate departments of the city for review. Approval or denial of the application shall be based on consideration of all available evidence as to whether the proposed business will meet the requirements of the City Charter and ordinances. The license shall not be granted if:

(a) The activity or device to be licensed would not comply with city ordinances or state or federal laws (unless the business is a state registered and/or licensed medical or recreational business that is in compliance with local land use ordinances, despite federal law prohibiting the use and sale of marijuana).

(b) The licensed activity or device would endanger property or the public’s health or safety.

(c) The applicant’s violation of law or ordinance represents a reasonable doubt about the applicant’s ability to perform the licensed activity without endangering property or the public’s health or safety.

(d) The applicant fails to supply the information required, or submits misleading or false information, or submitted misleading or false information on a previous application.

(e) The premises to be used by the business do not fully comply with all city ordinances and requirements.

(3) In the event of the transfer of any business, the license shall be transferred using a form provided by the recorder, signed by the person making the transfer, and accompanied by a transfer fee established by resolution of the council.

(4) Upon a favorable recommendation from each department, the recorder shall issue the license. If any department determines that the application should be denied, the recorder shall notify the applicant of the denial and the reasons for the denial. [Ord. 482, 2016; Ord. 461 § 1, 2014; Ord. 214, 1995; Ord. 103 § 8, 1987].


5.05.090 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person to willfully make false or misleading statements to the city recorder for the purpose of determining the amount of a license fee, or to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or to fail to pay any required license fee or penalty. [Ord. 103 § 9, 1987].


5.05.100 Delinquent license fees.

In the event that any person required to obtain a license fails to obtain the license or pay the required fee before it becomes delinquent, the recorder shall collect the fee payment with a penalty of 10 percent of the fee payment for each calendar month, or fraction of a month, that the fee payment is delinquent. [Ord. 103 § 10, 1987].


5.05.110 Fee amounts.

Nothing contained in this chapter may be construed as vesting any right in a license or a contract obligation on the part of the city as to the amount of the fee. Other taxes or fees and the fees provided by council resolution may be increased, decreased, or created by the city. Any business may be reclassified at any time and other fees or taxes may be levied. No person who has received a license and has paid the fee required under this chapter shall be entitled to any refund. [Ord. 103 § 11, 1987].


5.05.120 Violations.

The conviction of a person for violation of any provision of this chapter may not serve to relieve the person from paying the fee or penalty for which the person is liable. The payment of any fee may not bar or prevent legal prosecution of a complaint for the violation of any provision of this chapter. [Ord. 103 § 12, 1987].


5.05.130 Revocation of license.

Upon determination that a licensed business, activity, or device within the city violated city ordinances or state or federal laws, or that the application contains false or misleading information, the city recorder may revoke the license upon 30 days’ notice in writing to the licensee, with the notice delivered to the licensee’s establishment, or the licensee’s business address. The notice shall state the reasons for the revocation. [Ord. 103 § 13, 1987].


5.05.140 Suspension of license.

Upon determining that a licensed business, activity, or device presents an immediate danger to persons or property, the recorder may suspend the license. The suspension takes effect upon the licensee’s receipt of the suspension notice, or upon delivery of the notice to the establishment or the licensee’s business address. The notice shall state the reason for the suspension. The recorder may continue a suspension as long as the reason for the suspensions exists, or until a determination on an appeal regarding the suspension is made. [Ord. 103 § 14, 1987].


5.05.150 Appeal.

(1) Any person whose application for a license has been denied, or a licensee whose license has been denied renewal, has been suspended or has been revoked, may, within 30 days after the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation is mailed, appeal to the council. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the recorder. The appeal shall state:

(a) The name and address of the appellant.

(b) The nature of the determination being appealed.

(c) The reason the determination is incorrect.

(d) What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

(2) An appellant who fails to file a statement within the time permitted waives all objections, and relinquishes all rights to appeal. If a notice of revocation is appealed, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument. The decision of the council is final. [Ord. 214, 1995; Ord. 103 § 15, 1987].


5.05.160 Penalties.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. [Ord. 103 § 16, 1987].


Chapter 5.10 ENTERTAINMENT CLUBS

Sections:

5.10.010    Definitions.

5.10.020    License required.

5.10.030    License fee.

5.10.040    License application procedures.

5.10.050    Investigation.

5.10.060    Revocation.

5.10.070    Procedure for issuance or denial of license.

5.10.080    Transferability.

5.10.090    Employee work permits.

5.10.100    Suspension and revocation of license.

5.10.110    Operating rules and regulations.

5.10.120    Restrictions on multi-use facilities.

5.10.130    Access by police officers.

5.10.140    Checking the age of patrons.

5.10.150    Exemptions.

5.10.160    Penalty.


5.10.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the following mean:

“Adult club” means any entertainment club which restricts its admission to persons age 21 years and over.

“Club premises” means any place where an entertainment club is operated or maintained and includes all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and other adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to the public during operating hours.

“Entertainment club” means commercial premises open to the public, the primary function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As an incidental function, an entertainment club may sell and/or serve food and beverages to its patrons.

“Person” means one or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships or associations.

“Person financially interested” means all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis of gross or net revenue, which may include landlords, lessors, lessees, and the owner or owners of the building, fixtures, or equipment.

“Teen club” means any entertainment club which permits the entry of persons under the age of 21 years. [Ord. 143 § 1, 1989].


5.10.020 License required.

From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person shall conduct, own, lease, manage, operate, or assist in the conducting, owning, leasing, managing, or operating, either as owner, lessee, principal, agent, master, employee, or otherwise, an entertainment club within the city unless a license as provided for in this chapter is first obtained. [Ord. 143 § 2, 1989].


5.10.030 License fee.

The license fee for entertainment clubs shall be determined by council resolution. License fees shall be payable annually and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of each calendar year in which the license is issued. License fees shall not be prorated for the balance of any calendar year. No license shall be issued for any sum less than that set by the council during any portion of the calendar year. [Ord. 143 § 3, 1989].


5.10.040 License application procedures.

(1) An applicant for a license shall submit his application to the city recorder, which application shall be under oath and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business, the personal history and business experiences of such persons, and any other matters deemed by the city to be of necessary inquiry.

(2) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation fee of $65.00.

(3) The applicant shall provide a written statement setting forth all means proposed to ensure that adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside the premises, will be maintained, and that the ages of patrons admitted to the club will be monitored.

(4) The applicant shall elect whether the entertainment club will be operated either exclusively as a teen club or exclusively as an adult club, and contain a statement of the proposed schedule of operating hours and days.

(5) The applicant shall provide a statement of whether the applicant, or the applicant’s officers, directors, partners or any other person involved in the operation or management of the entertainment club or financially interested therein, has been convicted within the preceding five years of any crimes involving firearms, controlled substances, sexual offenses, prostitution, assault, or contributing to the delinquency of a minor.

(6) The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and photographs of persons involved in the operation or management or financially interested. [Ord. 143 § 4, 1989].


5.10.050 Investigation.

The department of public safety shall examine and investigate the background and qualifications of applicants for a license within the meaning of this chapter and shall make a recommendation as to whether or not a license shall be issued. [Ord. 143 § 5, 1989].


5.10.060 Revocation.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deprive the council of power to revoke any license issued by it. [Ord. 143 § 6, 1989].


5.10.070 Procedure for issuance or denial of license.

(1) Approval or denial of the license shall be based on council consideration of all available evidence indicating whether the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The license shall not be granted if:

(a) The business premises do not comply with all applicable regulatory codes of the city relating to public health, safety and welfare.

(b) The application is incomplete or if it contains any material misrepresentation.

(c) The application does not propose adequate measures for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in terms of traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside the premises, and the monitoring of the ages of patrons admitted to the club.

(d) Convictions for any of the crimes, disclosure of which was required by CBMC 5.10.040(5), by any person involved in operation or management of the club, or financially interested therein, or other criminal activity, present a reasonable doubt about the applicant’s ability to operate the club without presenting a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. [Ord. 143 § 7, 1989].


5.10.080 Transferability.

No license issued as provided in this chapter shall be transferred or assigned. Change in persons having financial interest in a licensed business shall be reported immediately to the city manager, who shall order an investigation by the public safety department. The change shall be approved or denied by the council. Applications for a change of financial ownership shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation fee of $65.00. [Ord. 143 § 8, 1989].


5.10.090 Employee work permits.

Employees in entertainment clubs shall obtain a work permit from the city. Applications for such work permits may be obtained from the recorder and shall contain such information as may be deemed necessary to allow a police background investigation. No work permit shall be issued to any person who has not been a resident of Coos County, Oregon, for at least six months preceding the issuance of such permit and/or who has been involved in any of the conduct described in CBMC 5.10.070(2)(d) which would lead to the refusal to grant a license. Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00, renewable annually from date of application. A temporary work permit may be approved by the city manager pending the background check. [Ord. 143 § 9, 1989].


5.10.100 Suspension and revocation of license.

(1) The city manager shall temporarily suspend any license or work permit issued hereunder if:

(a) Any person who has any interest in the business is convicted of a felony;

(b) Any person who has any interest in the business is convicted of five misdemeanors;

(c) Any person who has any interest in the business is convicted of or forfeited bail for any crime involving firearms, controlled substances, sexual offenses, prostitution, assault or contributing to the delinquency of a minor;

(d) Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or any information requested is omitted from the application;

(e) Any person who has any interest in the business or any employee violates any section of this chapter;

(f) The licensee fails to keep the building or equipment of the licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health, building, fire or life safety codes;

(g) The licensee fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Any action taken by the city manager under this section shall be subject to the right of appeal to the council when meeting in regular council session. Notice of appeal shall be filed with the recorder within 20 days or such action shall be deemed final and conclusive. A temporary suspension shall be for 30 days.

(3) Permanent revocation may be made only by the council and such revocation shall only take place at a council meeting in regular council session upon application of the city manager and only after the licensee has been served with notice at least 20 days prior to the council meeting. Such notice shall include the time and date of the council meeting and the grounds upon which the permanent revocation is sought. Notice shall be deemed to have been received by the licensee or permittee if the city manager mails notice to the address listed by the licensee or permittee on his application for a license or permit. [Ord. 143 § 10, 1989].


5.10.110 Operating rules and regulations.

The following operating rules and regulations shall apply to all entertainment clubs in the city:

(1) Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted to enter or remain on the premises of a teen club:

(a) Under the age of 14 years unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.

(b) Twenty-one years of age or older except for bona fide employees or entertainers hired by the licensee to work in the club.

(2) No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to enter or remain on the premises of an adult club unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.

(3) Teen clubs shall be operated only on Friday and Saturday nights during weeks when Coos Bay public schools are in session. Teen clubs shall close no later than 12:00 midnight.

(4) Adult clubs may operate any night of the week and shall close no later than 2:00 a.m.

(5) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ an adequate number of qualified security personnel who will be present on club premises during all operating hours to maintain peace and order and to ensure compliance with the law. If the city manager determines that the club operation is directly resulting in an increased demand for police services in the vicinity of the club, the licensee shall be required to augment its private security force by hiring commissioned police officers with arrest authority to patrol said vicinity during club operating hours.

(6) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to ensure that no alcoholic beverages or controlled substances are offered for sale or consumed on the club premises.

(7) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to remove from the club premises any person who is or appears to be under the influence of or affected by the use of alcohol and/or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical danger to the safety of others present.

(8) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and adequate illumination of all portions of the club premises which are available for use by the public. Such illumination shall be not less than 10 foot-candles at floor level at all times when the premises are open to the public or when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain therein.

(9) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to discourage loitering or the creating of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any patrons of the club on club premises, or the immediate vicinity of the same. “Loitering” shall not include walking between the club building and a patron’s vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain admission to the club.

(10) It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter resulting from club operations. The cleanup shall occur within eight hours after the end of each day’s operation and shall extend for a one-block radius around the club.

(11) No person, other than an employee or entertainer, who leaves the club building shall be permitted to return to the club unless that person pays a readmission fee equal to the original price of admission. [Ord. 143 § 11, 1989].


5.10.120 Restrictions on multi-use facilities.

(1) The premises where a teen club is located shall not be used, at any time, as an adult club, or an adult entertainment facility, or a premises which is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.

(2) A teen club may only be located on the same premises with another licensed business if:

(a) All businesses on the premises comply with the operating rules and regulations of this chapter relating to teen clubs; or

(b) The teen club is physically segregated from the space used by the other businesses and has a separate entrance into the building which is exclusively for the use of its patrons; or

(c) Only one business operates at a time on the premises, and the premises are closed altogether for not less than one hour between the close of one business operation and the opening of another. [Ord. 143 § 12, 1989].


5.10.130 Access by police officers.

All police officers of the city shall have free and immediate access to all entertainment clubs for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 143 § 13, 1989].


5.10.140 Checking the age of patrons.

(1) It is the responsibility of the licensee to require picture identification (or reasonable equivalent) showing the age of each person admitted to an entertainment club. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly allow a person to enter or remain on the premises of an entertainment club in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(2) It is unlawful for any person to affirmatively misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining admission to, or remaining at, an entertainment club in violation of the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 143 § 14, 1989].


5.10.150 Exemptions.

Entertainment clubs do not include, and this chapter does not apply to, premises which serve alcoholic beverages and which are under the jurisdiction of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of prerecorded background music which is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited guests which is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored or operated by or held on the premises of a governmental entity, an accredited educational institution, or a nonprofit religious, charitable, benevolent, fraternal, or social organization which is recognized by the United States of America as being exempt from federal taxation. [Ord. 143 § 15, 1989].


5.10.160 Penalty.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $1,000. [Ord. 143 § 16, 1989].


Chapter 5.15 JOB CREDITS

Sections:

5.15.010    Short title.

5.15.020    Purpose.

5.15.030    Definition.

5.15.040    Eligibility.

5.15.050    Job credit.

5.15.060    Fee offset.

5.15.070    Continuation of eligibility.

5.15.080    Cessation of eligibility.


5.15.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be referred to as the job credit ordinance. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1986].


5.15.020 Purpose.

To encourage new businesses to locate within the city and to help existing businesses to expand so as to increase employment opportunities and improve the economic climate. [Ord. 76 § 2, 1986].


5.15.030 Definition.

“Qualified business” means a business firm which has been precertified by the enterprise zone board of directors or their designees. [Ord. 146 § 1, 1989; Ord. 76 § 3, 1986].


5.15.040 Eligibility.

Whenever a qualified business has been precertified by the enterprise zone board of directors or their designees, the business becomes eligible for city job credits. The community development department will issue a certificate of eligibility to the qualified business based on the precertification. [Ord. 146 § 2, 1989; Ord. 76 § 4, 1986].


5.15.050 Job credit.

For each new job stated on the certificate of eligibility, the business will receive a credit of $3,000 usable over a five-year period against fees otherwise due to the city. [Ord. 76 § 5, 1986].


5.15.060 Fee offset.

All business license and land development fees may be offset by the accrued job credits. In particular, sewer fees in lieu of assessment may be offset. Fees that may not be offset are the state of Oregon surcharges on various building permits, sewer user fees, and improvement assessments. Requirements for bonds, and the costs thereof, are not affected or waived by this chapter. [Ord. 146 § 3, 1989; Ord. 76 § 6, 1986].


5.15.070 Continuation of eligibility.

Qualified businesses which have added to their employment rolls may prove such increase by providing copies of their employment division returns, or an equivalent, for the last four calendar quarters. Qualified eligible businesses must provide proof of employment level to the city on or about the anniversary of its first eligibility determination, and on each anniversary thereafter for the five-year eligibility period. [Ord. 76 § 7, 1986].


5.15.080 Cessation of eligibility.

If a qualified business ceases to do business in Coos Bay or otherwise loses its qualification during the five-year period, such business is no longer eligible for job credits. To the extent eligible businesses show a decline in employment over the five-year period, the job credits cease for each such position lost. To the extent fees offset exceeded the proportionate job credits earned over the year or years of eligibility, the business must reimburse the city for the difference. [Ord. 76 § 8, 1986].


Chapter 5.20 SECONDHAND STORES AND GEM AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS

Sections:

5.20.010    Purpose.

5.20.020    Definitions.

5.20.030    License required.

5.20.040    License application.

5.20.050    License fee.

5.20.060    License display.

5.20.070    Transferability.

5.20.080    Record of purchases – Restrictions on resale.

5.20.090    Limitations on purchases.

5.20.100    Limitations on the sale of regulated property.

5.20.110    Tagging regulated property for identification.

5.20.120    Inspection of property and records.

5.20.130    Revocation.

5.20.140    Appeal.

5.20.150    Penalties.

5.20.160    Savings clause.


5.20.010 Purpose. 

The council’s purpose in adopting this chapter is to regulate certain business activities that present an extraordinary risk of being used by criminals to dispose of stolen property. The council finds that this risk is present despite the best efforts of legitimate secondhand property dealer businesses because these businesses process large volumes of goods and materials that are frequently the subject of theft. This chapter is intended to reduce this type of criminal activity by providing timely police awareness of such property transactions and by regulating the conduct of persons engaged in this business activity. The council finds that these regulations are necessary and the need for the regulations outweighs any anti-competitive effect that may result from their adoption. [Ord. 453 § 1, 2013].


5.20.020 Definitions.

“Acceptable identification” means either a current driver’s license, a state issued identification card issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles, or two current United States, state, or local government issued identification cards, one of which has a photograph of the seller. The second identification card is not required if the photo identification is accompanied by a scanned fingerprint.

“Engage in business” shall include any principal owning, managing, or operating a business which receives, buys, sells, or in any way exchanges tangible personal property subject to this chapter, but it does not include purchases of new or secondhand items from licensed manufacturers or wholesalers, with established places of business, and sales of secondhand items by those engaging primarily in the business of selling new merchandise, or dealers in secondhand motor vehicles, or sales on the premises where the goods have been used by the owner (such as garage sales), or rummage sales of donated goods, nor shall it apply to judicial sales or other sales by public officials in the exercise of their official duties.

“Gem and precious metal dealer” means any person who owns, manages or operates a business, including transient merchants, for the purpose of buying, receiving, selling, or in any way exchanging precious metals or gems including, but not limited to, gold, silver, zirconium, platinum, diamonds, rubies, sapphires, emeralds, and turquoise, but such items do not include the raw materials or items which have not been previously sold at wholesale or retail.

“Licensee” means a gem or precious metal dealer or secondhand property dealer which has a license pursuant to this chapter.

“New” means any property not previously put into service.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity or entity-in-fact. 

“Police department” means the city of Coos Bay police department.

“Public safety officer” means a police officer or any designee of the city of Coos Bay police chief.

“Purchase” means the buying, exchanging, transferring, collecting, consigning, or otherwise acquiring of regulated property from another person not a used merchandise dealer, for resale, exchange or transfer by the purchaser. This includes taking possession of regulated property with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to return regulated property at a subsequent time at a stipulated price or for the payment of a storage or handling fee.

“Regulated property” means:

(a) Except for property excluded in subsections (b) of this definition, any property specified in a list maintained and published by the chief of police, including, but not limited to, precious metals and gems; watches, jewelry, and household items containing precious metals or precious gems; audio and video equipment; photographic and optical equipment; electrical office equipment; power equipment and tools; hand tools; telephones or telephone equipment; musical instruments; firearms; sporting equipment; and computer and related equipment.

(b) The term “regulated property” does not include any of the following property: vehicles required to be registered with the state Motor Vehicles Division; boats required to be certified by the state Marine Board; books, glassware, furniture, clothes, refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, window air conditioner units, and other similar major household appliances; clothing; or property that is purchased for investment purposes, limited to the following:

(i) Gold bullion bars or rounds (0.995 fine or better).

(ii) Silver bullion bars or rounds (0.995 fine or better).

“Secondhand property dealer” means any place in which items of used personal property, other than motor vehicles, are purchased, bartered, pawned or consigned and placed on sale or resale as part of a regular course of business, but excluding yard sales held less than three times in a one- year period and for no more than a 72-hour period, moving sales, and other similar one-time sales occurring at a residence.

“Trade show” means an event open to the public, held in a venue other than a dealer’s business location, at which vendors of a specific type of merchandise may exhibit, buy, sell, or trade items that may include regulated property. Events commonly known as flea markets or swap meets, in which goods of many types are exhibited, sold or traded, are not considered trade shows for the purpose of this chapter.

“Used” means items which have been previously placed into service or sold at retail. [Ord. 453 § 2, 2013].


5.20.030 License required. 

No person shall conduct, keep, manage, operate, or assist in the conducting, keeping, managing, or operating any gem and precious metals dealership or secondhand store, as owner, officer, principal, agent, employee or otherwise, unless a basic business license is first obtained from the city. Reference CBMC 5.05.080. [Ord. 453 § 3, 2013].


5.20.040 License application.

(1) Written application for a business license shall be filed with the city of Coos Bay community development department. Applications for licenses by or on behalf of a corporation, partnership or other business entity shall be made by an agent properly authorized by that entity. 

(2) Each business license application for secondhand property dealers shall be accompanied by an irrevocable consent to inspect and examine the licensed premises and business records of the licensee applicant at any time during the term of the license by any officer of the police department.

(3) The police department shall examine and investigate the background and qualifications of all secondhand property dealer business applicants for licenses and shall make a recommendation whether or not to issue the license. 

(4) The license shall not be granted if:

(a) The applicant’s activity will not comply with any city ordinance or state or federal law;

(b) The applicant does not have the knowledge or skill required to engage in the licensed activity;

(c) The applicant’s activity would endanger property, public health or public safety; or

(d) The applicant’s past or present violations of laws or ordinances present a reasonable question about his or her ability to perform the licensed activity without danger to property, public health or public safety.

(5) Approval or denial of the license shall be based on consideration of all available evidence indicating whether the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 453 § 4, 2013].


5.20.050 License fee. 

The license fee shall be set by council resolution. License fees shall be payable at the time of application. Licenses shall commence on the day issued and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the calendar year in which the license is issued. License fees shall not be prorated for any portion of any calendar year. [Ord. 453 § 5, 2013].


5.20.060 License display. 

Every licensee must display the license in a conspicuous manner in the licensee’s business premises. [Ord. 453 § 6, 2013].


5.20.070 Transferability. 

Licenses may not be assigned or otherwise transferred. [Ord. 453 § 7, 2013].


5.20.080 Record of purchases – Restrictions on resale. 

(1) At the time of a transaction every licensee under the terms of this chapter shall be subject to the following record making and record keeping requirements in the manner specified by the chief of police for the city of Coos Bay:

(a) The date and time of the transaction.

(b) A description of the regulated property purchased in sufficient detail to distinguish the item from similar items in the dealer’s possession and the notation ‘new’ if an item appears to be new.

(c) Obtain an image of the approved identification of the person from whom the regulated property was purchased as defined in the definition of “acceptable identification” in CBMC 5.20.020, or an image of the person.

(d) An image of the thumbprint of the person from whom the regulated property was purchased.

(2) A digital image shall be taken and retained with the records of any regulated property not bearing a serial number or other identifying marks, i.e., jewelry, coins, stamps, or other collectibles. 

(3) Before taking possession of any article of property subject to this chapter, the licensee shall obtain from the person having custody of such property a signed statement which indicates the person selling the property has the legal authority to transfer ownership by completing a form to be provided or approved by the chief of police.

(4) No licensee shall resell property subject to this chapter for a period of 14 days after the report form has been delivered to the police department; provided, that for good cause shown, the chief or a designee may waive all or any part of such 14-day period. 

(5) There shall be maintained at or electronically available from the licensee’s place of business daily records containing a true account of all acquisitions and sales of property. All records of purchases shall be kept in an orderly manner on the used merchandise dealer’s business premises and open for reasonable inspection by peace officers upon their request. Any paper records shall be kept for at least one year following the date of the receipt of the article of property. 

(6) Dealers shall, by the end of the business day when a transaction occurs, transmit the recorded information required under subsections (1)(a) and (b) of this section, using the automated electronic reporting system approved by the city.

(a) Only reports containing complete information shall be deemed to comply with this section.

(b) In the event that the automated electronic reporting system becomes inoperable or a secondhand dealer’s computer system becomes inoperable or other event that makes reporting within the time allowed by this subsection impossible, the secondhand dealer shall maintain paper copies of all the reporting requirements and immediately report the occurrence of such event to the chief of police. Once reporting can resume, the secondhand dealers must, within 12 hours, input and transmit the information required under subsections (1)(a) and (b) of this section for all transactions occurring during any period reporting was suspended, using the approved automated electronic reporting system.

(7) Dealers having three or less transactions in a week may choose to use the electronic reporting system specified by the chief of police or record their transactions in paper form as approved by the chief and deliver or mail the paper forms to the chief of police at the end of the business day when the transaction occurred. [Ord. 453 § 8, 2013].


5.20.090 Limitations on purchases.

(1) A secondhand dealer shall not:

(a) Purchase regulated property with serial numbers, personalized inscriptions or initials, or other identifying marks, which are or have been altered, obliterated, removed, or otherwise rendered illegible unless such removal is the result of obvious normal wear;

(b) Purchase regulated property from a person under the age of 18 years;

(c) Purchase regulated property from a person who is obviously under the influence of drugs or intoxicating liquor; or

(d) Knowingly purchase regulated property from a person who is not the owner of the regulated property or parent or guardian of the owner of the regulated property.

(e) Purchase any of the following items:

(i) Gift cards, in-store credit cards or activated phone cards;

(ii) Medications.

(2) A secondhand dealer shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. [Ord. 453 § 9, 2013].


5.20.100 Limitations on the sale of regulated property.

(1) Regulated property purchased by any secondhand dealer shall not be sold for a period of 14 full days after the date the report required is received by the city. The secondhand dealer shall maintain the purchased property in substantially the same form as purchased and shall not commingle the property in a manner that precludes identification during this 14-day holding period. The purchased property shall be located on the business premises and available for inspection during normal business hours during this holding period as provided herein.

(2) Upon reasonable belief that the purchased property is the subject of theft, the chief of police may provide notice to any used merchandise dealer not to dispose of any specifically described property purchased. The used merchandise dealer shall retain the property in substantially the same form as purchased. Upon receipt of notice pursuant to this subsection, the used merchandise dealer shall not sell, exchange, dismantle or otherwise dispose of the property for a period of time, as determined and stated in the notice by the chief of police, not to exceed 180 days from the date of purchase. [Ord. 453 § 10, 2013].


5.20.110 Tagging regulated property for identification. 

Dealers shall affix a tag to every item of regulated property, which must contain a unique, legible number. That unique number must either be the same as the transaction item number for that item or be referenced to the transaction report required by the Coos Bay police department. After the holding period has expired, the transaction item number must remain identifiable on the property until the sale or disposition of the property.

(1) After the applicable holding period has expired, hand tools or items that are sold with other like items and have no identifiable numbers or markings need not remain tagged. [Ord. 453 § 11, 2013].


5.20.120 Inspection of property and records. 

Upon presentation of official identification, any peace officer may enter onto the business premises of any secondhand dealer to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The inspection shall be for the limited purpose of inspecting any regulated property purchased by the dealer, held by the dealer pursuant to CBMC 5.20.100, or the records incident thereto. Any inspection pursuant to this section shall only be authorized to occur during normal business hours. [Ord. 453 § 12, 2013].


5.20.130 Revocation. 

(1) The city manager may revoke any license if the licensee, licensee’s employees or agents have permitted the licensee’s business premises to be used in violation of this chapter or any ordinance of the city, or any state or federal law. 

(2) The licensee shall be notified, in writing, of the effective date of revocation, the reasons for revocation, and the licensee’s right to appeal. Notice may be given either by mailing the notice of revocation by first class mail to the business address of the licensee or by leaving the notice at the licensed premises. [Ord. 453 § 13, 2013].


5.20.140 Appeal.

(1) Any person whose application for a license has been denied, or a licensee whose license has been denied renewal or revoked, may, within seven business days after the notice of denial or revocation is mailed, appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city recorder. 

(2) The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:

(a) The name and address of the appellant;

(b) The nature of the action being appealed;

(c) The reason the action is incorrect;

(d) A statement of facts establishing the contentions of the appellant.

(3) A licensee who fails to file a notice of appeal within the time permitted waives all rights to an appeal. If the action appealed is revocation, revocation does not take effect until final decision on the appeal. At the hearing, the appellant may present evidence, testimony and oral argument. [Ord. 453 § 14, 2013].


5.20.150 Penalties. 

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a penalty not to exceed $750.00 per violation, and each day that the violation persists shall be a separate and distinct violation. [Ord. 453 § 15, 2013].


5.20.160 Savings clause. 

All licenses in effect at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the term of the license. [Ord. 453 § 18, 2013].


Chapter 5.25 SOCIAL GAMES

Sections:

5.25.010    Gambling prohibited.

5.25.020    Definitions.

5.25.030    Application for license.

5.25.040    License investigation.

5.25.050    Special event license.

5.25.060    Granting and denial of application.

5.25.070    Responsibility of licensee.

5.25.080    Employee work permits.

5.25.090    License not transferable.

5.25.100    Suspension and revocation of license.

5.25.110    Regulations.

5.25.120    License fees.

5.25.130    Bona fide nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization license.

5.25.140    Penalty.


5.25.010 Gambling prohibited.

No person shall participate in, operate or assist in operating any gambling game or activity, including a lottery. No person shall have in his possession any property, instrument or device designated or adapted for use in any type of gambling activity. Any such property, instrument or device is a nuisance and may be summarily seized by any police officer. Property so seized shall be placed in the custody of the department of public safety of the city. Upon conviction of the person owning or controlling such property for a violation of this section, the municipal judge shall order such property confiscated and destroyed. [Ord. 104 § 1, 1987].


5.25.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“Card room” means any space, room or enclosure furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards only, and the use of which is available to the public; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to any bona fide nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization as defined in CBMC 5.25.130.

“Gambling” means any contest, game, gaming scheme, gaming device or machine in which the outcome depends in a material degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding the skill of the contestants may also be a factor therein. Gambling does not include “social games” or bingo, lotto, or raffles operated in compliance with Oregon law by a charitable, religious or fraternal organization, or off-track wagering operated in compliance with Oregon law.

“Player” means a person who engages in any form of gambling solely as a contestant or bettor, without receiving or becoming entitled to receive any profit therefrom other than personal gambling winnings, and without otherwise rendering any material assistance to the establishment, conduct or operation of the particular gambling activity.

“Social games” means:

(1) A game involving the playing of cards between players only, which does not include lotteries or any game involving the use of any property, instrument, or device designed or adapted for the use in any type of gambling activity, in a private home where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the game; and

(2) A game involving the playing of cards between players only, which does not include lotteries or any game involving the use of any property, instrument, or device designed or adapted for use in any type of gambling activity, in a private business, private club, or place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the social game. [Ord. 142 § 1, 1989; Ord. 138 § 1, 1989; Ord. 104 § 2, 1987].


5.25.030 Application for license.

From and after the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in or carry on, or to maintain or conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted, any card room in the city without having a valid license from the city. License shall be granted only upon the approval of the council. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 104 § 3, 1987].


5.25.040 License investigation.

An applicant for a card room license shall submit his application to the city recorder, which application shall be under oath and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business, the personal history and business experiences of such persons, the past criminal record, if any, of all persons who have any interest in the business and any other matters deemed by the council to be of necessary inquiry. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation fee of $65.00. The term “person financially interested” shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis of gross or net revenue, including landlords, lessors, lessees, and the owner or owners of the building, fixtures or equipment. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and photographs of persons financially interested. [Ord. 104 § 4, 1987].


5.25.050 Special event license.

A bona fide nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization as defined in CBMC 5.25.130 shall submit its application for a card room license to the recorder on the application form provided which shall include, among others, the name of the organization, the date and place for the proposed event, and whether or not the general public will be allowed to attend. No investigation fee shall be required. [Ord. 104 § 5, 1987].


5.25.060 Granting and denial of application.

The council shall either approve the application and grant the license applied for or deny the application and refuse to grant the license. The license shall not be granted if:

(1) Any person who has any interest in the business has been previously convicted of a felony within the last 10 years;

(2) Any person who has any interest in the business has been convicted of five misdemeanors or major traffic offenses, or any combination of misdemeanors and major traffic offenses totaling five, the last of which was within five years of the date of the application;

(3) Any person who has any interest in the business has been convicted of any crime involving gambling within the last five years or any person who has any interest in the business has forfeited bail after November 1, 1971, for any crime involving gambling;

(4) Any person who has any interest in the business has been directly or indirectly involved in a forfeiture proceeding regarding a gambling device as defined in the Oregon Revised Statutes where such gambling device has been ordered destroyed within the last five years;

(5) Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or any information requested is omitted from the application;

(6) Any person who has any interest in the business has had a license which was in his name revoked or suspended three times by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, the last of which was in the last five years;

(7) Any person who has any interest in the business has any employee who violates any section of this chapter; and

(8) Any other conduct involving moral turpitude on the part of any person who has any interest in the business. [Ord. 104 § 6, 1987].


5.25.070 Responsibility of licensee.

Each card room shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be to supervise the games and see to it that they are played strictly in accordance with this chapter and within the provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes. No licensee shall permit any person to engage in unlawful gambling in or upon any licensed premises. The licensee shall be vicariously liable for any conduct of any employee in regard to any gambling activity or social game conducted in or upon licensed premises. [Ord. 104 § 7, 1987].


5.25.080 Employee work permits.

Employees in card rooms and employees supervising card room activities shall obtain a work permit from the city. Applications for such work permits may be obtained from the recorder and shall contain such information as may be deemed necessary to allow a police background investigation. The city manager may deny a permit based upon recommendations from the public safety department when it is documented that such employment should not be permitted. No work permit shall be issued to any person who has not been a resident of Coos County, Oregon, for at least six months preceding the issuance of such permit, and/or who has been involved in any of the conduct described in CBMC 5.25.060 which would lead to the refusal to grant a license. Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00, renewable annually from date of application. A temporary work permit may be approved by the city manager pending applicant’s background check. [Ord. 104 § 8, 1987].


5.25.090 License not transferable.

No card room license shall be assignable or transferable. Change of persons having financial interest in a licensed business shall be reported immediately to the city manager, who shall order an investigation by the public safety department. The change shall be approved or denied by the council. Applications for a change of financial ownership shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation fee of $65.00. [Ord. 104 § 9, 1987].


5.25.100 Suspension and revocation of license.

(1) The city manager shall temporarily suspend any card room license or work permit issued hereunder if:

(a) Any person who has any interest in the business is convicted of a felony;

(b) Any person who has any interest in the business is convicted of five misdemeanors;

(c) Any person who has any interest in the business is convicted of or forfeited bail for any crime involving gambling;

(d) Any person who has any interest in the business has been directly or indirectly involved in a forfeiture proceeding regarding a gambling device as defined in the Oregon Revised Statutes where such gambling device has been ordered destroyed or a bond has been forfeited in lieu of the gambling device being destroyed;

(e) Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or any information requested is omitted from the application;

(f) Any person who has any interest in the business has had a license which was in his name revoked or suspended three times by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission;

(g) Any person who has any interest in the business or any employee violates any section of this chapter;

(h) Any person who has any interest in the business engages in any other conduct involving moral turpitude; and

(i) Any licensee shall permit any person to engage in unlawful gambling in or upon any licensed premises.

(2) Any action taken by the city manager under subsection (1) of this section shall be subject to the right of appeal to the council when meeting in regular council session. Notice of appeal shall be filed with the recorder within 20 days or such action shall be deemed final and conclusive. A temporary suspension shall be for 30 days.

(3) Permanent revocation may be made only by the council and such revocation shall only take place at a council meeting in regular council session upon application of the city manager and only after the licensee has been served with notice at least 20 days prior to the council meeting. Such notice shall include the time and date of the council meeting and the grounds upon which the permanent revocation is sought. Notice shall be deemed to have been received by the licensee or permittee if the city manager mails notice to the address listed by the licensee or permittee on his application for a license or permit. [Ord. 104 § 10, 1987].


5.25.110 Regulations.

It shall be unlawful to operate a card room in violation of any of the following regulations and rules:

(1) With respect to the social games set forth in CBMC 5.25.020, and except for organizations defined under CBMC 5.25.130, there shall be a limit on any bet of $20.00 and a three raise limit.

(2) Licensees and permittees holding or obtaining licenses and permits under the provisions of this chapter shall thereby automatically agree to be bound by and observe each and all of the regulations and rules established thereby.

(3) Each and all other games conducted or operated in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted and operated in full conformity with and subject to all provisions of the laws of the state of Oregon and the city of Coos Bay.

(4) All card rooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. Card room licenses and work permits shall be available for inspection during all hours of operation.

(5) No licensee or permittee shall participate in any card game nor procure players, back, farm out, assign or sublet any card games lawfully permitted under this chapter on the premises in which said licensee or permittee has any interest or works.

(6) The playing of all card games shall be so arranged as to provide free access and visibility to any interested party. Doors leading into the card room must remain unlocked during all hours of operation.

(7) No person under the age of 21 shall be permitted to participate in any card game or to enter or remain upon such premises.

(8) No charge shall be collected from any player for the privilege of participating in any game. [Ord. 104 § 11, 1987].


5.25.120 License fees.

There shall be collected for each card room licensed hereunder, the sum of $50.00 per table per month, payable quarterly in advance. [Ord. 104 § 12, 1987].


5.25.130 Bona fide nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization license.

(1) A nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors and members may be granted a license at an annual fee of $120.00 per table, when it appears that the tables are for the exclusive use of members of the society, club or fraternal organization and no charge is made for participation. The society, club or fraternal organization shall have been in continuous existence conducting its affairs in the city for a period of two years immediately preceding application for a license, and only if the conduct of a card room is not the primary reason for existence of the society, club or fraternal organization.

(2) A nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors and having been in existence for at least two years preceding application may apply for a license to allow social games at a special event sponsored by such organization. The license fee shall be $25.00 per event. There shall be no charge per table. [Ord. 104 § 13, 1987].


5.25.140 Penalty.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $1,000. [Ord. 104 § 14, 1987].


Chapter 5.30 TAXI REGULATIONS

Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Purpose.

5.30.030    Fees and charges.

5.30.040    Taxi company business license.

5.30.050    Taxicab driver’s business license.

5.30.060    Termination of employee or independent contractor.

5.30.070    Vehicles.

5.30.080    Operation.

5.30.090    Violations.


5.30.010 Definitions.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Driver” means an individual employed by or contracting with a taxi company to haul for-hire passengers or goods.

“Person” means a natural person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other entity in law or fact.

“Police department” means the police department of the city of Coos Bay.

“Taxi company” means any person engaged in the business of transporting persons, commonly known as taxi service, but excluding any public transit program owned, operated, or owned and operated by the state of Oregon or any political subdivision thereof.

“Taxicab” means a vehicle used by a taxi company, whether owned by the company or not. [Ord. 311 § 1, 2001].


5.30.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to require taxi companies and taxicabs operating in the city to do so in a safe, fair, and efficient manner. Taxi companies doing business in the city should be allowed to operate without unnecessary restraints; however, because the city’s transportation system is a matter of important public concern which fundamentally affects the well-being of the city’s citizens, and because taxicabs constitute an essential part of the city’s transportation, some regulation is needed to ensure protection of the safety of the city’s citizens, to provide for the public need, and to promote public convenience. [Ord. 311 § 2, 2001].


5.30.030 Fees and charges.

Business license fees for taxi companies and taxicab drivers shall be the fees in effect for business licenses under Chapter 5.05 CBMC, Business Licenses Generally. [Ord. 311 § 3, 2001].


5.30.040 Taxi company business license.

(1) A business license shall be required for any person to operate a taxi company in the city.

(2) A business license shall not be issued to an applicant who does not meet the following requirements:

(a) The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony within 10 years prior to the date of application;

(b) The applicant shall maintain a drug- and alcohol-free workplace program, which at a minimum shall meet the following requirements:

(i) Be a written policy statement;

(ii) Provide training to supervisors in how to implement the policy;

(iii) Educate the employees about the policy and how to get help if they need it;

(iv) Provide an employee assistance service or access to rehabilitation;

(v) Provide drug testing program appropriate to workplace risks and conditions; and

(vi) Be applicable to drivers working as independent contractors with the taxi company.

(3) Application.

(a) An application for a business license shall be filed with the city on a form provided by the city, which shall contain the following information, in addition to any information required under Chapter 5.05 CBMC:

(i) The name and address of the applicant;

(ii) Any additional facts the applicant believes to be relevant to the issuance of a business license;

(iii) The color scheme and/or insignia to be used to designate any vehicle of the applicant, which shall not resemble or in any way infringe upon an existing taxi company’s color scheme and/or insignia. Taxi companies in operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from this provision providing the color scheme and/or insignia is not changed;

(iv) A record of all vehicular and pedestrian accidents involving property damage and/or personal injury involving the applicant within 10 years of the date of application;

(v) A computerized criminal history check, to be conducted by the police department, reflecting all crimes of which the applicant has been convicted;

(vi) Proof of the applicant’s ability to obtain commercial liability insurance in a minimum amount mandated by Oregon law. [Ord. 311 § 4, 2001].


5.30.050 Taxicab driver’s business license.

No person shall drive a taxicab for hire unless the person has obtained a taxicab driver’s business license and has met the following requirements:

(1) Application. The original and all renewal applications for a taxicab driver’s business license shall be filed with the city on forms provided by the city. The application shall contain the following information, in addition to any information required under Chapter 5.05 CBMC:

(a) The applicant’s name, residence address, business address, age, sex, height, weight, and color of eyes and hair;

(b) Proof the applicant possesses a valid Oregon driver’s license;

(c) Proof the applicant’s United States’ citizenship or registered alien status;

(d) Proof of the applicant has attained a minimum age of 21 years;

(e) A letter or other documentation demonstrating the applicant is or will be employed or otherwise engaged by a taxi company licensed to do business in the city;

(f) A computerized record conducted by the police department reflecting all crimes of which the applicant has been convicted;

(g) A record of all traffic offenses committed by the applicant for the three years preceding the application. Three moving citations in the previous two years, one traffic crime conviction in the previous three years, or one driving under the influence of intoxicants may be cause for refusal by the city to grant a taxicab driver’s business license.

(2) Each business license application shall be accompanied with payment of the business license fee.

(3) Following a computerized background check and approval of the application, the city shall issue the business license. The application receipt shall serve as a temporary license for a period not to exceed 15 days from the date of the receipt.

(4) The business license shall be displayed in the taxicab in full view of passengers at all times the driver is engaged in driving for hire. Business licenses shall expire annually and, if acquired during the course of a year, the cost may be prorated according to city policy. [Ord. 311 § 5, 2001].


5.30.060 Termination of employee or independent contractor.

If an individual is terminated from his or her employment with a taxi company, or if the taxi company has terminated any contract with a driver who is an independent contractor with the taxi company, the taxi company shall notify the city of the termination no later than at the close of business three days following termination. Notification shall be by U.S. mail or personal delivery to the chief of police. [Ord. 311 § 6, 2001].


5.30.070 Vehicles.

(1) Each vehicle utilized by a taxi company shall be maintained in clean and safe operating condition fit for public use. The vehicle interior shall be clean, sanitary, and in good repair. Vehicle safety inspections shall be conducted annually at a repair facility approved by the city.

(2) Each vehicle shall be equipped with the following:

(a) Adequate brakes;

(b) Adequate tires showing no excess wear;

(c) Seat belts that are functioning and readily accessible to drivers and passengers;

(d) A top light identifying the vehicle as a taxicab;

(e) Any other equipment required by the state of Oregon.

(3) A list of the vehicles transporting persons or goods for the taxi company, including license numbers and vehicle identification numbers, shall be submitted to the city at the time of application for the business license. Any additions to, deletions from, or substitutions of vehicles, or any changes to the license numbers of vehicles on this list, shall be submitted to the city, no later than two weeks after the date such change occurs. [Ord. 311 § 7, 2001].


5.30.080 Operation.

(1) Rates. Rates shall be set by each taxi company, and shall be uniform within each classification of the rate structure. A statement of rate structure shall be submitted to the city at the time of application for the business license. A change of rate structure shall be reported in writing by the taxi company to the city within seven days following implementation of the revised rate structure.

(2) Receipts. Written receipts shall be supplied to customers upon request. Receipts shall show, at a minimum, the date of and amount for services, taxi company’s name, and driver’s name.

(3) Signage. Each taxicab shall be clearly marked on both sides with the company name, the word “taxi” and the phone number to call for service. Signage must be legible for a distance of 25 feet. Each company shall post, on either the inside or outside of each taxicab, a summary of the rate structure and applicable complaint procedures.

(4) Hours of Operation. Taxi companies shall maintain and have available taxicab service during each hour of the day and each day of the year.

(5) Complaints. Taxi companies shall maintain a central complaint file. Complaints shall remain on file for one year.

(6) Dispatch Records. Dispatch records shall be an accurate record of each call taken or ride dispatched by the taxi company dispatcher. Dispatch records shall include the time of call; time the call was dispatched; location of the pick-up; time of pick-up; destination, including stops; and time the call was completed. Dispatch records shall be kept in a central location for ease of access, and shall be maintained for a minimum of one year.

(7) Insurance. Each taxi company shall provide the city proof of commercial insurance for each vehicle and driver transporting persons or goods for the taxi company, and shall direct the insurance carrier for that policy to notify the city in the event of cancellation of the insurance policy.

(8) Drug Testing. Each taxi company shall maintain and provide proof to the city of an ongoing random drug testing program; provided, however, taxi companies may enter into agreements with other taxi companies for the creation of a “pool” or “consortium” for random testing. Random drug testing shall be conducted monthly following Department of Transportation levels for type of drug levels and type of drug to be tested for.

(9) Alcohol. Alcohol use by on-duty taxi drivers or taxi company personnel is prohibited; no taxi driver or taxi company personnel shall consume alcohol within eight hours prior to going on duty.

(10) Disorderly Persons. Drivers are not required to pick up disorderly persons. For the purposes of this subsection, a disorderly person includes, but is not limited to, an unsanitary person, a person engaging in disorderly conduct, or any person who has created problems for the taxi company or taxi driver within the past three years.

(11) Right to Be Paid. Each driver has the right to be paid for services rendered, which may be requested in advance. Should a customer refuse to pay, the driver may refuse the ride.

(12) Call Charge. A driver is entitled to payment for responding to a call whether the ride is accepted or not. Payments will be limited to the taxi company’s minimum rate.

(13) Maintenance. Each taxi company shall establish a vehicle maintenance program for the purpose of meeting safety standards and documentation of all applicable compliance standards.

(14) Shared Ride. No passenger shall be required to share a taxicab with another passenger. A driver may pick up a second passenger only if the original passenger has given permission. Under no circumstance shall a driver pick up a second passenger when transporting a minor.

(15) Scanners. When used, scanners shall be used in compliance with all applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations, including the prohibition of use of a scanner for personal gain.

(16) Compliance. Each taxi company shall be operated in compliance with all applicable city, county, state, and federal laws, administrative rules, and regulations not covered in this chapter. [Ord. 311 § 8, 2001].


5.30.090 Violations.

(1) Civil Penalty. Any person or taxi company willfully violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $750.00 for each such offense.

(2) Revocation and Suspension.

(a) Violation of any provision of this chapter may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the taxi company or taxicab operator’s business license, or, in proper case, revocation or suspension of both.

(b) Procedure.

(i) When the chief of police has grounds for revocation or suspension of a business license, the chief shall provide a notice and order of revocation or suspension, as the case may be, to the taxicab company or driver. The notice and order shall state the grounds for revocation or suspension and the effective date. The notice and order shall also contain a provision informing the taxicab company or driver that the notice and order may be appealed by filing written notice of intent to appeal with the city manager not more than seven days after the date of service of the notice and order.

(ii) The notice and order shall be served on the taxicab company or driver by personal delivery, or first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, delivered to the last known address of the taxicab company or driver, as reflected in the records of the police department. If service is made by mail, service shall be deemed complete when deposited in the mail, and shall not be deemed ineffective by a taxi company’s or driver’s refusal to receive the certified letter.

(iii) Hearing shall be held before the city manager as soon as is practicable. The city manager may affirm, reverse, or modify the notice and order. Appeal of the city manager’s decision shall be by writ of review, as provided under ORS Chapter 34. [Ord. 311 § 9, 2001].


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.05    Animal Control


Chapter 6.05 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

6.05.010    Short title.

6.05.020    Definitions.

6.05.030    Animal control.

6.05.040    Licensing.

6.05.050    Animals for which a special permit must be obtained.

6.05.060    Exemptions.

6.05.070    Impoundment.

6.05.080    Penalties.


6.05.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be referred to as the animal control ordinance of Coos Bay. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1985].


6.05.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“Animal” means any mammal, reptile, amphibian, insect or bird.

“Animal at large” means any animal, excluding cats, off the premises of its owner and not under complete physical control of its owner or other person.

“Owner” means any person having a property right in the animal or who harbors the animal or who has it in his care, custody, or control or knowingly permits the animal to remain on or about his premises.

“Vicious animal” means any animal which has the capacity to inflict serious harm on a person and has previously attacked or bitten any person without provocation or which behaves in such a manner that the owner knows or should reasonably know that the animal has a predisposition to attack or bite persons without provocation. [Ord. 42 § 2, 1985].


6.05.030 Animal control.

It is unlawful for any owner to:

(1) Permit or allow an animal to run or be at large.

(2) Permit an animal to trespass upon property of another.

(3) Keep a vicious animal.

(4) Permit any animal to cause annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying, or other like sounds which may be heard beyond the boundary of the owner’s property.

(5) Leave an animal unattended for more than 24 consecutive hours without adequate care.

(6) Deprive an animal of proper facilities or care, including but not limited to food, potable water, shade or shelter.

(7) Physically mistreat any animal either by deliberate abuse or failure to furnish adequate care, including medical attention.

(8) Allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or odiferous.

(9) Confine an animal within or on a motor vehicle at any location under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal.

(10) Allow an animal to deposit its solid wastes in any public area not designed to receive those wastes, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking strips, and parks, unless such wastes are removed immediately. This section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his guide dog.

(11) Allow the carcass of an animal to remain on public property or exposed on private property for a period of time longer than is reasonable and necessary to remove and properly dispose of such carcass.

(12) Lead, ride, tie, or fasten any animal described in CBMC 6.05.050 in such a manner as to permit it to remain on or go along any sidewalk, driveway or pedestrian pathway. [Ord. 107, 1987; Ord. 42 § 3, 1985].


6.05.040 Licensing.

All dogs kept within the city of Coos Bay shall be licensed according to the laws of the state of Oregon and/or Coos County. [Ord. 42 § 4, 1985].


6.05.050 Animals for which a special permit must be obtained.

(1) No horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, pig, goat, sheep, llama, poultry, rabbit, or animal raised for fur-bearing purposes shall be kept within the city limits unless a special written permit therefor is issued by the city after inspection of the premises and a finding of fact that no nuisance will be created thereby.

(2) The following animals may not be kept within the city limits unless a special written permit therefor is issued by the city after an inspection of the premises and a finding of fact that no nuisance will be created thereby:

(a) Any cat other than the Felis catus.

(b) Any nonhuman primate.

(c) Any wolf, coyote or other canine not of the species Canis familiaris.

(d) Any poisonous reptile or any reptile whose average adult length is greater than two feet.

(e) Any bat.

(f) Any bear.

(g) Any bees kept in a collection of hives or colonies.

(h) Any mammal, reptile or amphibian not native to North America.

(3) Fees for such special permits shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(4) A permit shall be for the term of one year, and no renewal shall be issued without a reinspection. The number of such animals allowed under such special permit may be specified. A violation of any of the provisions of CBMC 6.05.030 or this section shall be grounds for revocation of such permit.

(5) Every stable or other building wherein any animal listed in subsection (1) of this section is kept shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times.

(6) Every such stable or other building occupied by authority of a special permit for animals listed in subsection (1) of this section, located within 200 feet of any apartment, house, motel, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, retail food store, building used for school, religious or medical purposes, or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which said creatures are kept, shall be provided with a water-tight and fly-tight receptacle for manure, of such dimension as to contain all accumulations of manure, which receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent its becoming a nuisance. Said receptacle shall be kept securely covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate except in such receptacle. If such measures are necessary in order to avoid a nuisance, any such building shall be screened tightly against flies; serviced with running water; serviced with adequate sewers; be floored in such a manner as to be impervious to water; and such other measures be taken as may be necessary to ensure proper protection to public health and safety, as conditions precedent to the issuance of any such special permit.

(7) Every animal permitted under subsection (2) of this section shall be at all times kept or maintained in a safe manner or confined securely so that keeping the animal will not constitute a danger to human life or property. [Ord. 47 § 1, 1985; Ord. 42 § 7, 1985].


6.05.060 Exemptions.

(1) Notwithstanding any restrictions or prohibitions of this chapter, animals of any kind and any number may be kept for exhibition of amusement purposes, temporarily, by a circus, carnival, or other exhibition licensed in accordance with the applicable city ordinance. All rules as to sanitation and humane treatment contained in this chapter shall govern the keeping of the animals and maintenance of the premises or buildings where such animals are kept.

(2) Notwithstanding any restrictions or prohibitions of this chapter, animals of any kind and in any number may be kept by a school, museum or zoo for educational purposes. All rules as to sanitation and humane treatment contained in this chapter shall govern the keeping of the animals and maintenance of the premises or buildings where such animals are kept.

(3) Police service dogs, while in the exercise of their law enforcement duties, are exempt from any restrictions or prohibitions of this chapter. [Ord. 42 § 8, 1985].


6.05.070 Impoundment.

Any animal which is the subject of a violation of this chapter may be impounded by any city employee, law enforcement officer or county dog control officer. The procedures established by the county dog control board shall control the release or disposal of animals so impounded. [Ord. 42 § 11, 1985].


6.05.080 Penalties.

(1) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00.

(2) Each day on which the violation continues shall be a separate offense.

(3) The abatement of the nuisance by impoundment or otherwise shall be in addition to the penalty imposed hereunder. [Ord. 42 § 12, 1985].

 


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.02    Solid Waste Management Franchise

8.05    Unlawful Disposal of Solid Waste and Littering

8.10    Public Nuisances

8.15    Alarm Systems

8.20    Discarded Vehicles

8.25    Emergency Management Agency and Emergency Operations Plan

8.30    Trees and Tree Board

8.35    City Facility Smoking Restrictions

8.45    Temporary Lodging Facilities

8.55    Vacant Property Registration Regulations


Chapter 8.02 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FRANCHISE

Sections:

8.02.010    Policy.

8.02.020    Definitions.

8.02.030    Requirement of franchise – Exemptions.

8.02.040    Grant of exclusive franchise.

8.02.050    Exemptions.

8.02.060    Franchise term.

8.02.070    Franchise fee.

8.02.080    Franchisees’ duties.

8.02.090    Hazardous waste disposal service not required.

8.02.100    Rate regulation.

8.02.110    Rate preferences prohibited.

8.02.120    Transfers – Subcontracting.

8.02.130    Performance review.

8.02.140    Termination, suspension, modification or revocation of franchise.

8.02.150    Right to lease franchisees’ equipment.

8.02.160    New or expanded resource recovery services.

8.02.170    Termination of solid waste disposal service.

8.02.180    Prohibited acts.

8.02.190    Payment of service.

8.02.200    Oversight.

8.02.210    Enforcement and penalties.


8.02.010 Policy.

It is the public policy of the city of Coos Bay to regulate the management of solid waste to:

(1) Provide a means whereby the city carries out its responsibility for solid waste management in compliance with statutes, regulations and the policy of the state of Oregon relating to the planning for and management of solid waste;

(2) Ensure safe, efficient, economical and comprehensive solid waste disposal service;

(3) Ensure fair and equitable consumer rates and prohibit rate preferences or other discriminatory practices;

(4) Increase efficiency and decrease truck noise, street wear, energy use, air pollution and public inconvenience by the elimination of overlapping solid waste disposal service;

(5) Protect public health and the environment;

(6) Protect against improper or dangerous handling of hazardous wastes;

(7) Provide public service standards;

(8) Provide a basis and incentive for investment in solid waste management equipment, facilities, sites and technology;

(9) Conserve energy and material resources, reduce solid waste, and promote material and energy recovery in all forms;

(10) Provide the opportunity to recycle as part of an overall solid waste management system, taking advantage of coordinated area-wide service, promotion, marketing and education. [Ord. 272 § 1, 1999].


8.02.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“Franchisees” means Coos Bay Sanitary Service and Waste Connections of Oregon dba Les’ Sanitary Services, Inc. 

“Hazardous waste” means any substance defined as hazardous waste pursuant to state or federal law.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust, firm, estate, joint venture or other legal entity or public agency.

“Resource recovery” means the process of obtaining useful materials or energy resources from solid waste, including reuse, recycling and other recovery of materials or energy resources from solid waste.

“Solid waste” means all residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional wastes in a solid or semisolid state including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, ashes or swill, newsprint or wastepaper, cardboard, grass clippings, compost, discarded home or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture, vehicle parts or tires, medical wastes and vegetable or animal wastes.

“Solid waste disposal service” means the collection, transportation and disposal of or resource recovery from solid waste.

“Solid waste management” means the prevention, reduction and disposal of solid waste; the management and provision of services, facilities and equipment necessary and convenient to such activities.

“Source-separated materials” means solid waste separated into separate materials by the source, generator or producer in preparation for recycling or reuse.

“Waste” means material that is no longer directly usable by the source, generator or producer of the material and which is to be disposed of or resource-recovered by another person. The fact that all or any part of such material may have value or that the source, generator or producer of materials has separated or segregated such material from other waste does not remove the material from this definition. [Ord. 347 § 1, 2004; Ord. 272 § 2, 1999].


8.02.030 Requirement of franchise – Exemptions.

(1) No person shall provide solid waste disposal service or advertise or offer to provide such service within the corporate limits of the city of Coos Bay unless granted a franchise.

(2) The city council may, after public hearing and by resolution, make exemptions from the requirement of a franchise. The city manager shall give 30 days’ written notice to each franchisee of the public hearing and the proposed basis of the exception. 

(3) Any grant of an exemption shall be supported by written findings that the exemption carries out the policies set forth in CBMC 8.02.010; that there is a need for the proposed service; that the franchisees cannot provide the proposed service; that the person seeking the exemption has the necessary equipment, experience, finances and personnel to adequately provide the proposed service; and that granting of the exemption will not have a material detrimental impact on customer service, consumer rates or business activities of the franchisees. [Ord. 272 § 3, 1999].


8.02.040 Grant of exclusive franchise.

(1) The city of Coos Bay hereby grants to Waste Connections of Oregon dba Les’ Sanitary Services, Inc., the exclusive franchise, right, and privilege to provide solid waste disposal service within that portion of the corporate limits of the city of Coos Bay described as “Area I” in “Exhibit A,” which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated herein by reference, and also grants the exclusive right and privilege to extend this franchise to any unincorporated areas adjacent to this area which are hereafter annexed into the city, on and after the date of such annexation.

(2) The city of Coos Bay hereby grants to Coos Bay Sanitary Service the exclusive franchise, right, and privilege to provide solid waste disposal service within that portion of the corporate limits of the city of Coos Bay described as “Area II” in “Exhibit A,” which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated herein by reference, and also grants the exclusive right and privilege to extend this franchise to any unincorporated areas adjacent to this area which are hereafter annexed into the city, on and after the date of such annexation.

(3) Within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any amendment hereto, each franchisee shall file with the city recorder written acceptance by endorsement of a copy thereof.

(4) The city may enter into franchises for the disposal of medical waste, subject to approval by the franchisees.

(5) If the city of Coos Bay consolidates with the city of North Bend, the franchises granted by this chapter shall not extend to the area embraced within the corporate limits of the city of North Bend prior to the time of consolidation. [Ord. 272 § 4, 1999].


8.02.050 Exemptions.

The following persons and activities are exempt from the requirement of a franchise: 

(1) Collection, transportation, reuse, recycling of or operation of a collection center for totally source-separated materials or repairable or cleanable discards by a religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization which was not organized and is not operated for any solid waste management purpose and which is using the activity for fundraising. Organizations within the scope of this subsection include, but are not limited to, the Boy Scouts of America, the Salvation Army, St. Vincent de Paul, Goodwill and churches;

(2) Collection, transportation or redemption by any person of returnable beverage containers under ORS Chapter 459 commonly known as the “Bottle Bill”;

(3) Transportation and disposal of wastes generated or produced as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business or service of auto wrecking licensed by the state of Oregon, or generated or produced by demolition, land clearing or construction, janitorial services, gardening, park maintenance or landscaping service, street sweeping, auto body recovery, septic tank pumping or sludge collection. As used in this subsection, “janitorial service” does not include clean-up of accumulated or stored wastes;

(4) Transportation by a person of solid waste or source-separated recyclable materials generated or produced on his or her own premises to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market; 

(5) Purchase of totally source-separated solid waste at fair market value;

(6) Provision of disposal service for hazardous wastes;

(7) Collection of recyclable material from nonresidential sources. [Ord. 272 § 5, 1999].


8.02.060 Franchise term.

Each franchisee’s exclusive franchise, right, and privilege shall become effective on July 1, 1999, and shall continue for a period of seven years. At the end of the initial year, and each initial year thereafter, the franchise shall automatically be extended so that the term of the franchise remains seven years, unless the city notifies the franchisee, in writing, at least 30 days prior to July 1st, that the franchise will not thereafter automatically be extended to provide for a seven-year term, in which case the franchise shall terminate in seven years. Nothing in this section restricts the city council from terminating, suspending, modifying or revoking a franchise for cause. [Ord. 272 § 6, 1999].


8.02.070 Franchise fee. 

(1) In consideration for the franchises granted by this chapter, each franchisee shall pay to the city five percent of the franchisee’s gross revenue. As used in this section, “gross revenue” includes all gross receipts from solid waste disposal service within franchisee’s respective service area, less receipts from container or drop box rental. In addition to the five percent franchise fee, each franchisee shall provide, at no cost to the city, solid waste disposal service for all administrative buildings of the city of Coos Bay, the city of Coos Bay public library, and all other solid waste generated by the city placed in the city’s containers located within that franchisee’s service area. All consideration paid by the franchisees pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any business license or other fee charged or assessed by the city.

(2) On or before June 30th of each fiscal year, each franchisee shall furnish the city with a certified statement of the franchisee’s gross revenue generated from solid waste disposal service within the franchisee’s service area for the prior calendar year. The statement shall include the number of residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customers and identify any other services performed by the franchisee and the revenue derived from those services. Each franchisee shall pay its franchise fee to the city on or before July 15th of each calendar year for gross revenue received during the first six months of that calendar year and on or before January 15th for gross revenue received during the last six months of that calendar year. 

(3) Each franchisee shall keep complete and accurate records of the franchisee’s operations in a form acceptable to the auditors of the city and in accordance with generally acceptable accounting practices. By accepting the grant of franchisee, each franchisee hereby consents to an audit at least once yearly to determine compliance with this section. [Ord. 272 § 7, 1999].


8.02.080 Franchisees’ duties.

Each franchisee shall:

(1) Dispose of solid waste at a site approved by the local government unit having jurisdiction over solid waste disposal sites or resource recovering such wastes, both in compliance with ORS Chapter 459 and this chapter.

(2) Obtain and maintain public liability insurance in an amount not less than the limits set forth in the Oregon Tort Claims or any successor statute, for public bodies, which shall be evidenced by a certificate of insurance filed with the city recorder.

(3) Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities, personnel and finances to provide all necessary solid waste disposal service or demonstrate the ability to subcontract with others to provide such service. Equipment shall be maintained, operated and loaded so that solid waste shall not be spilled, dropped, leaked or otherwise deposited on public ways or private property.

(4) Respond to any customer complaint regarding service.

(5) Provide weekly solid waste disposal service in residential areas and daily solid waste disposal service in commercial areas, Sundays and holidays excepted. Wet or offensive solid waste shall be collected in commercial areas before the hour of 12:00 noon each day, Sundays and holidays excepted.

(6) Furnish solid waste disposal service to all residents requesting and paying for such service in the franchisee’s service area.

(7) Provide, at no cost, pick-up for the city’s brush pick-up program. This program shall be offered at least twice annually, once in the spring and once in the fall. The city council shall adopt regulations it deems reasonable for users, including but not limited to the following:

(a) Each residence shall be limited to a five-yard maximum;

(b) As defined in this subsection, brush shall not include grass clippings or other similar material;

(c) Brush shall be cut into lengths of not more than five feet;

(d) A fee schedule for any amounts of brush in excess of the five-yard maximum.

(8) Provide the level of recycling service required by Oregon law, including, but not limited to:

(a) Operation of a recycling depot within the corporate limits of the city of Coos Bay or the city of North Bend for the purpose of providing a public facility where residents may take recyclable materials;

(b) Collection each week of source-separated materials from residential customers on the same day solid waste disposal service is provided. Types of materials to be collected shall be periodically designated by the city council;

(c) Expand franchisees’ recycling education and promotion program, including mailing information at least once quarterly to all customers and providing comprehensive information on recycling to all new customers;

(d) Any additional recycling and reuse service when the city council finds that such service is required.

(9) Provide to each residential customer at no cost at least one durable recycling container.

(10) Permit inspection at reasonable times by the city of the franchisee’s facilities, equipment, and personnel providing service.

(11) When a customer requires disposal of an unusual volume of solid waste or needs a special type of solid waste disposal service requiring a substantial new investment in equipment, the franchisee may enter into a contract with the customer to finance such service and thereby ensure amortization of such equipment. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure franchisee’s purchase of equipment shall not become a charge against ratepayers who do not need or are not benefited by the franchisee’s investment. [Ord. 272 § 8, 1999].


8.02.090 Hazardous waste disposal service not required.

Franchisees are not required to store, collect, transport, transfer, dispose of or resource recover any hazardous waste; provided, however, that franchisees may provide such service if it does so in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. [Ord. 272 § 9, 1999].


8.02.100 Rate regulation.

(1) Rates for solid waste disposal service provided by each franchisee shall be set by resolution of the city council and may be modified from time to time upon request of a franchisee or the city council’s own motion. 

(2) Prior to any change in rates, a hearing shall be held before the city council. The franchisees shall be given reasonable notice of time and place of the hearing and an opportunity to appear and be heard. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, not less than 10 days and not more than 30 days prior to any such hearing, which shall state that a proposed change in the rates for solid waste disposal service is before the city council, and that any resident of the city may appear and be heard. Any revision of rates shall be made by resolution of the city council adopted following such hearing.

(3) In determining rates, the city council shall give due consideration to franchisees’ current and projected revenues and expenses; overhead; acquisition and replacement cost of equipment; cost of providing added or different service; reasonable return to the franchisee for doing business; research and development by the franchisee; and such other factors deemed relevant by the city council to determine rates. The city council may consider rates charged by other persons performing the same or similar solid waste disposal service in similar areas under same or similar service conditions.

(4) If approved in the rate schedule, a franchisee may charge an initial fee for new service, a reinitiation fee for recommencing service to any customer who has been terminated for failure to pay, and interest on past due accounts. [Ord. 272 § 10, 1999].


8.02.110 Rate preferences prohibited.

A franchisee shall not give a rate preference to any person or to any locality or for any type of solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of or resource recovered. This section shall not prohibit the establishment of uniform classes of rates based upon length of haul, type or quality of solid waste handled or customer location, so long as such rates are reasonably based upon cost and are approved by the city council. [Ord. 272 § 11, 1999].


8.02.120 Transfers – Subcontracting. 

(1) A franchisee may not transfer this franchise or any portion hereof to any other person without prior written approval of the city council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The city council may attach conditions to any such transfer it deems necessary to guarantee maintenance of solid waste disposal service and compliance with this chapter. A pledge of this franchise as financial security shall be considered a transfer for purposes of this subsection. 

(2) If a franchisee does not have necessary equipment or personnel, the franchisee may subcontract to provide a portion of its solid waste disposal service; provided, that such subcontracting does not relieve the franchisee from total responsibility for providing and maintaining service under and from compliance with this chapter. [Ord. 272 § 12, 1999].


8.02.130 Performance review.

(1) Within 90 days after the third anniversary of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and every three years thereafter, the city may hold a public hearing at which the franchisees shall be present and participate to review the performance of the franchisees and to review the current state of technology available for solid waste management.

(2) Any customer may submit comments or complaints before or during the hearing, orally or in writing, and which shall be considered by the city council in making its performance review. 

(3) If, as a result of such performance review, the city council and franchisees agree changes to the franchise are necessary, amendments shall be drafted, reviewed, agreed to by the parties and incorporated into the franchise. 

(4) Within 30 days after the date of the performance review, the city council shall issue a report with respect to the franchisees’ performance and quality of service. If substantial violations of this franchise are found which the city council determines may be reasonably corrected by the franchisee, the city council may direct that franchisee to correct such violations within a reasonable period of time.

(5) Failure by the franchisee after due notice to correct or to commence correcting any such substantial material violation shall be considered a material breach of this franchise, and the franchise as to that franchisee shall be terminated. [Ord. 272 § 13, 1999].


8.02.140 Termination, suspension, modification or revocation of franchise.

(1) Failure by franchisee to provide necessary solid waste disposal service or otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for termination, modification, suspension or revocation of the franchise.

(2) If the city manager determines grounds for termination, modification, suspension or revocation exist, he or she shall send written notice to the franchisee identifying the specific deficiencies, and stating that the franchise has not less than 20 days from date of mailing within which to correct the deficiencies or to request a hearing before the city council. 

(3) If a hearing is requested, the city manager shall set the hearing at the earliest practicable opportunity. The franchisee and other interested persons shall have an opportunity to present oral or written evidence at the hearing. Persons presenting evidence may be questioned by the city council. After hearing evidence, the city council shall make findings based on evidence in the record whether the franchisee has violated subsection (1) of this section, and specifying remedial action.

(4) If the franchisee fails to correct deficiencies within the time specified in the notice sent pursuant to subsection (2) of this section or within the time specified in the order entered pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the franchise may be terminated, suspended, modified or revoked, and any such action may be made contingent upon continued noncompliance. 

(5) If the city manager finds a franchisee’s violation of subsection (1) of this section poses an immediate and serious danger to public health, he or she may order summary action within a time specified in the notice to the franchisee; provided, however, that the franchisee shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the council at the earliest practicable opportunity. [Ord. 272 § 14, 1999].


8.02.150 Right to lease franchisees’ equipment. 

(1) If a franchise is revoked or otherwise terminated, the city shall have the right to lease, for a period not to exceed six months, such of the franchisee’s equipment necessary to conduct solid waste disposal service within the area previously serviced by franchisee. Such lease shall be at the then-reasonable rental value for equipment so leased, and shall provide for the release of the equipment back to the franchisee by noon on each day so the franchisee may use such equipment in performing services for franchisee’s customers, if any, outside the franchisee’s former service area.

(2) If the city elects to lease franchisee’s equipment and the city and the franchisee are unable to agree on reasonable rental value, then each shall, within 10 days of the first written notice provided to the other, appoint an arbitrator, who together shall, within five days of appointment, name a third arbitrator. The arbitrators shall sit as a panel, and the panel’s decision as to the reasonable rental value shall be deemed conclusive upon the parties. If either party or the arbitrators fail to comply with the terms of this subsection, then arbitration shall be pursued under ORS 33.230 et seq. [Ord. 272 § 15, 1999].


8.02.160 New or expanded resource recovery services.

Where a new resource recovery service or substantial expansion of existing resource recovery service is proposed by the city or person other than a franchisee:

(1) The city manager shall provide written notice of the proposed new or expanded service to the franchisee whose service area is affected by such proposed service at least 30 days prior to consideration by the city council.

(2) The city council may, on its own motion, and shall, upon request of an affected franchisee or applicant for an exception, hold a public hearing on the proposed new or expanded service. 

(3) In determining whether the service is needed, consideration shall be given to the purposes of this chapter, public need for the service, technological and economical feasibility, effect on consumer rates, effect on other service by the franchisee, costs and justification, applicable laws, ordinances or regulations and any applicable solid waste management plan.

(4) If the city council determines that such new or expanded service is needed, the city council may require the franchisee provide the service within the franchisee’s service area within a specified period of time, may allow an exemption from the requirement of a franchise to provide the new or expanded service, and, if applicable, set rates. [Ord. 272 § 16, 1999].


8.02.170 Termination of solid waste disposal service.

A franchisee shall not terminate solid waste disposal service to any of the franchisee’s customers unless:

(1) Street or road access is blocked and there is no alternate route; provided, however, that the city shall not be liable for blocking of such access;

(2) Extreme weather conditions render providing solid waste disposal service unduly hazardous or the franchisee is prevented from providing such service by accidents or casualties caused by an act of God or the public enemy;

(3) A customer has not complied with CBMC 8.02.190 or is delinquent in making payment for solid waste disposal service after regular billing, written notice of delinquency and demand for payment;

(4) The franchisee has given not less than 90 days’ written notice of intent to terminate all or a substantial part of solid waste disposal service to the city council and the city council has given written approval to terminate such service; 

(5) The franchisee is ordered to suspend, reduce or terminate all or a portion of its solid waste disposal service by a legislative, administrative or judicial body having competent jurisdiction to make such order. [Ord. 272 § 17, 1999].


8.02.180 Prohibited acts.

In addition to, and not in lieu of, compliance with ORS Chapter 459 and other applicable laws and regulations:

(1) No person shall place hazardous waste for collection or disposal by franchisee without prior notice to the city manager or the franchisee. This requirement shall not apply to minor quantities of hazardous wastes generated at or by a single-family residential unit. 

(2) No person shall place material in or remove material from a solid waste collection container without prior authorization from the owner of the container. For the purpose of this subsection, the franchisee is the owner of any container supplied by franchisee.

(3) No person, other than the source, generator or producer, shall take or remove solid waste which has been placed for solid waste disposal service by a franchisee or person provided an exemption pursuant to this chapter.

(4) No person shall install an underground solid waste container for storage or collection of solid waste. A franchisee is not required to service an underground container unless the person responsible for it places the container above ground prior to time of solid waste disposal service.

(5) No container used for residential solid waste disposal shall be located behind any locked or latched door or gate or inside of any building or structure, or shall exceed 32 gallons in volume or 60 pounds in weight, unless approved by the franchisee.

(6) Each customer shall provide safe access to the customer’s solid waste container or wastes without risk or hazard to franchisee, its employees or agents, or any other person.

(7) No container designed for mechanical pickup shall exceed a safe loading weight or volume as established by the franchisee to protect service workers, the franchisee’s collection equipment, the customer and the public.

(8) Stationary solid waste compacting devices shall comply with federal and state safety standards and provide adequate protection for the user.

(9) Every person who generates or produces waste shall remove or have removed from the person’s premises at least once every seven days all waste which may putrefy during that period. More frequent removal may be required where a facility or service involves public health. All waste shall be removed at sufficient frequency to prevent health hazards, nuisances or pollution.

(10) Producers and generators of waste shall clean both waste containers and shall keep the area around such containers free of accumulated wastes. The franchisee shall provide periodic maintenance to containers supplied by franchisee. [Ord. 272 § 18, 1999].


8.02.190 Payment of service.

Persons who receive solid waste disposal service from the franchisee shall be responsible for payment of service. [Ord. 272 § 19, 1999].


8.02.200 Oversight.

Solid waste disposal service provided by franchisees shall be under the oversight of the city manager. [Ord. 272 § 20, 1999].


8.02.210 Enforcement and penalties.

(1) The city or the franchisee may take such legal action as is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, including actions to recover payment for services by any customer. 

(2) Violation by any person of this chapter shall be punished by a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day a violation persists shall be deemed a separate offense; provided, however, that two or more such continuing offenses may be joined in the same action. Penalties imposed pursuant to this section are not in lieu of other remedies provided by other applicable law, rule or regulation. 

(3) Any action or determination by franchisee under or pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city manager. Any action or determination of the city manager under this chapter may be appealed to the city council. [Ord. 272 § 21, 1999].


Chapter 8.05 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE AND LITTERING

Sections:

8.05.010    Definitions.

8.05.020    Unlawful disposal of solid waste.

8.05.030    Littering.

8.05.040    Penalty.


8.05.010 Definitions.

“Person” means any natural person; an association, partnership or corporation; any other legal entity or entity in fact.

“Right-of-way” means any highway, road, street, alley, lane, trail, sidewalk, other public way, or any beach, park, recreational facility or other similar facility owned and operated by the state of Oregon, Coos County, or the city of Coos Bay, and located within the corporate limits of the city of Coos Bay.

“Solid waste” means all solid or semisolid waste material, including, but not limited to: garbage; rubbish; refuse; trash; ashes or swill; newsprint or waste paper; corrugated board or cardboard; grass clippings; compost; residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional wastes; discarded home or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture; vehicle parts or tires; animal parts or wastes. [Ord. 270 § 1, 1999].


8.05.020 Unlawful disposal of solid waste.

(1) Except as provided by subsection (2) of this section, no person shall deposit solid waste produced by the person or any business owned by the person or with which the person is associated as an employee or agent in or about any solid waste receptacle owned or rented by another person, without first obtaining the permission of that person.

(2) No person shall deposit solid waste produced by the person or any business owned by the person or with which the person is associated as an employee or agent on any publicly owned property, except in solid waste receptacles designed and designated for such purpose.

(3) No person shall use, or attempt to use, any publicly owned solid waste receptacle as a means to dispose of residential, commercial, or industrial solid waste regularly generated by the person or any business owned by the person or with which the person is associated as an employee or agent. [Ord. 270 § 2, 1999].


8.05.030 Littering.

(1) No person shall discard or deposit any solid waste on the land of another without first obtaining permission of the owner.

(2) No person shall discard or deposit, or permit the discarding or depositing, of any solid waste on any public right-of-way, except in receptacles provided for the purpose of holding such solid waste. [Ord. 270 § 3, 1999].


8.05.040 Penalty.

(1) Upon first conviction for a violation of this chapter, a fine not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 shall be imposed.

(2) Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter on successive occasions shall be subject to the following enhanced penalty: for each additional offense for which the person is convicted, a mandatory minimum fine shall be imposed equal to twice the amount of the fine imposed for the immediately prior conviction.

(3) Each violation of this chapter is a separate offense, and if the violation is of a continuing nature, each and every day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. [Ord. 270 § 4, 1999].


Chapter 8.10 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:

8.10.010    Definitions.

8.10.020    Nuisances affecting public health.

8.10.030    Attractive nuisances.

8.10.040    Noxious vegetation.

8.10.050    Unauthorized dumping.

8.10.060    Trees.

8.10.070    Fences.

8.10.080    Surface waters – Drainage.

8.10.090    Sifting or leaking loads.

8.10.100    Destabilizing or exposing soils.

8.10.110    Notices and advertisements.

8.10.120    Notice of nuisance determination.

8.10.130    Enforcement.

8.10.140    Joint responsibility.

8.10.150    Abatement by the city.

8.10.160    Assessment of costs.

8.10.170    Summary abatement.

8.10.180    Unenumerated nuisances.

8.10.190    Penalties.

8.10.200    Separate violations.

8.10.210    Appeal.


8.10.010 Definitions.

“Abate” means to remove, destroy or to otherwise remedy an unlawful condition, by such means and such manner as is necessary in the interests of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

“Civil violation” means a violation of a provision of this chapter, for which a monetary penalty may be imposed under this chapter. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues to exist is a separate violation.

“Code enforcement officer” means an employee of the city who is charged with enforcing this chapter.

“Debris” means the remains of something broken down or destroyed including, but not limited to: scrap metal, scrap paper, scrap plastic or scrap wood; pieces of asphalt, concrete, lumber or other building supplies; or yard clippings or cuttings of plant material.

“Director” means the director of public works and community development.

“Garbage” means food waste, animal and vegetable waste, dead animal carcasses, refuse, rubbish trash, or other useless or discarded material.

“Hearing officer” means a person appointed to conduct hearings.

“Junk” means all inoperable motor vehicles in which multiple major components are defective or removed for more than 30 consecutive days; any motor vehicle which has been unlicensed for more than 30 consecutive days; defective motor vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, used tires, inoperable and defective machinery, or parts thereof, inoperable and defective appliances and parts thereof, metal portions of inoperable machinery, broken glass, empty glass, plastic or metal containers, scrap lumber, broken furniture, other wastes and/or discarded materials, mattresses, or such trash or abandoned materials or anything whatsoever in which flies, mice or rats may breed. As used in this chapter, such refers only to materials left outside of any building and does not apply to materials stored inside a lawfully constructed building so long as such building is wholly enclosed except for doors for ingress and egress.

“Nuisance” is defined as the doing of any act, failing to perform any duty, or permitting or causing any condition or thing to exist which results in a substantial and unreasonable interference with an abutting property owner or occupier’s use and enjoyment of their property, or adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare of the city, as specified more particularly herein.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

“Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or supervision of a construction project.

Person Responsible. The person responsible for abating a nuisance includes:

(1) The owner.

(2) The person in charge of property, as defined in this section.

(3) The person who caused a nuisance, as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of the city, to come into or continue in existence.

“Property” is defined as any real or personal property. [Ord. 409 § 4, 2008; amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 400 § 1, 2007].


8.10.020 Nuisances affecting public health.

No person shall cause or permit a nuisance affecting public health on property owned or controlled by the person. The following are, including, but not limited to, nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter:

(1) Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with State Health Division regulations.

(2) Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the city.

(3) Stagnant water that affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

(4) Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(5) Decayed or unwholesome food offered for human consumption.

(6) Premises that are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or that are in an unsanitary condition.

(7) Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.

(8) Cesspools or septic tanks that are in an unsanitary condition or that cause an offensive odor.

(9) Mastics, oil, grease or petroleum products allowed to be introduced into the sewer system by a user connected to the sewer system.

(10) Animal carcasses on streets or private or public property.

(11) Animals or birds afflicted with communicable diseases.

(12) Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, packing straw, hay or other packing material, lumber, scrap iron, tin, and other metal or anything whatsoever in which flies, rats or other rodents may breed or multiply or in which may be a fire danger, or which constitutes a hazardous attraction to children.

(13) Maintaining or keeping a junk vehicle or parts thereof in the city, except in an authorized wrecking yard zoned for such use.

(14) Any refrigerator, freezer, or other insulated container within which a child could suffocate.

(15) Toxic, radioactive, caustic, flammable, explosive or other dangerous or hazardous substances, except for as housed where applicable and stored in accordance with health, environmental, refuse and zoning laws. [Ord. 400 § 2, 2007].


8.10.030 Attractive nuisances.

No owner or person in charge of property shall permit on the property:

(1) Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

(2) Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

(3) Excavations remaining open for an unreasonable amount of time without erecting proper safeguards or barriers against children.

(4) Natural or human-caused sand pits left open for an unreasonable amount of time without erecting proper safeguards or barriers against children. [Ord. 400 § 3, 2007].


8.10.040 Noxious vegetation.

(1) No owner or person in charge of real property shall allow noxious vegetation on the property. Noxious vegetation is declared a nuisance.

(2) The owner or person in charge of real property shall abate noxious vegetation from the property. The owner and the person in charge shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of abatement as provided in this chapter.

(3) For purposes of this section, “noxious vegetation” means:

(a) Vegetation that is, or is likely to become:

(i) A health hazard;

(ii) A fire hazard;

(iii) A traffic hazard, because it impairs the view of the public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.

(b) Poison oak.

(c) Poison ivy.

(d) Blackberry bushes that extend into a public way, a pathway frequented by children, cross a property line, or that are used for a habitation by trespassers.

(e) Gorse.

(f) Scotch broom.

(4) No owner or person in charge of property shall allow noxious vegetation to be on the property or in the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare abutting on the property. An owner or person in charge of property shall cut down or destroy noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent it from becoming a health or fire hazard, or, in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from going to seed. [Ord. 400 § 4, 2007].


8.10.050 Unauthorized dumping.

No person shall deposit, on public or private property, rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, junk or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling on a public way. [Ord. 409 § 3, 2008; Ord. 400 § 5, 2007].


8.10.060 Trees.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property that abuts on a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees, bushes or vegetation on the property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. An owner or person in charge of property that abuts on a street or public sidewalk shall keep all trees, bushes or vegetation on the premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed so that any overhanging portions are at least eight feet above the sidewalk and at least 14 feet above the roadway.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a dead or decaying tree to stand if it is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. [Ord. 409 § 1, 2008; Ord. 400 § 6, 2007].


8.10.070 Fences.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence, or permit barbed wire to remain as part of a fence, along a sidewalk or public way; or in any residentially zoned district; or within any setback in any residentially zoned district, historic district or the Downtown/Empire core areas.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person, without written permission of the city manager.

(3) Fences exceeding four feet in height shall be prohibited on the bay side of Bayshore Drive north of Elrod Avenue, excepting that portion between Highland Avenue and Fir Avenue, on the bay side of South Empire Boulevard south of Newmark, and on the bay side of 6th Avenue south of the 6th Avenue bridge. [Ord. 498§ 1, 2018; Ord. 409 § 2, 2008; Ord. 400 § 7, 2007].


8.10.080 Surface waters – Drainage.

(1) No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.

(2) The owner or person in charge of property shall install, and maintain in a proper state of repair, adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or on the sidewalk. [Ord. 400 § 8, 2007].


8.10.090 Sifting or leaking loads.

(1) No person shall drive or move a vehicle on any street unless it is constructed or loaded so as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping.

(2) Any person driving a vehicle from which any contents have escaped must remove the escaped substance or material from the street within three hours.

(3) Any escaped substance or material as set forth in this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated. [Ord. 400 § 9, 2007].


8.10.100 Destabilizing or exposing soils.

(1) No person shall remove the vegetation from, expose, or otherwise destabilize soil which is predominantly dune or blow sand and is subject to being blown onto public or other private property.

(2) The owner or person in charge of property where the exposure or destabilization occurs shall replant, cover or otherwise stabilize the area before damage occurs to public or other private property.

(3) This section shall not apply to a building site for the period of 90 days from the issuance of a building permit or the period of construction plus 30 days, whichever period is shorter. The time period may be extended by the city building official. [Ord. 400 § 10, 2007].


8.10.110 Notices and advertisements.1

(1) No person shall affix or cause to be distributed any placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon any real or personal property, public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in charge of the property.

(2) Any placard, bill, advertisement, or poster found posted, or otherwise affixed, upon any public property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by any employee of the city. The person responsible for such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in its removal.

(3) This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the use of and location of signs and advertising.

(4) This section shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of advertising material during any parade or approved public gathering. [Ord. 400 § 11, 2007].


8.10.120 Notice of nuisance determination.

At least five days prior to the determination that a nuisance exists, the city recorder shall notify the owner or person in charge of the property and provide notice that a nuisance determination is pending. For the purposes of this section, notice is sufficient if it is:

(1) Mailed to the last known address of the owner or person in charge; or

(2) Posted at the site of the property involved. [Ord. 400 § 12, 2007].


8.10.130 Enforcement.

The severity of enforcement of this chapter shall generally correspond to the degree of risk of harm to the public health, safety and welfare. In the absence of an immediate hazard that is threatening to health or public safety, the following abatement procedures will apply:

(1) On determination that a nuisance exists, the city shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

(2) At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail to the person responsible at the person’s last known address.

(3) The notice to abate shall contain:

(a) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists and direction to abate the nuisance within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(b) A description of the nuisance.

(c) A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible.

(d) A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine.

(e) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(f) If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

(g) Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

(h) An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

(i) If notice is returned as undeliverable or the delivery was refused, then notice can be provided via publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days before abatement action is taken. [Ord. 400 § 13, 2007].


8.10.140 Joint responsibility.

If more than one person is a person responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance. [Ord. 400 § 14, 2007].


8.10.150 Abatement by the city.

(1) If the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible within the time allowed, the city code enforcement officer and city attorney may cause the nuisance to be abated.

(2) The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right to enter into or upon property at reasonable times to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance.

(3) The city recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in physically abating the nuisance and shall include a charge equal to 10 percent of those expenses for administrative costs. [Ord. 400 § 15, 2007].


8.10.160 Assessment of costs.

(1) The city recorder shall forward to the owner and the person responsible, by registered or certified mail, a notice stating:

(a) The total cost of abatement, including the administrative costs.

(b) That the costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice.

(c) That if the owner or the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the city recorder not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

(2) If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided by the city manager and city attorney, shall be entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(3) The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the current statutory interest rate. The interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(4) An error in the name of the owner or the person responsible or a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment will not void the assessment, and it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Ord. 400 § 16, 2007].


8.10.170 Summary abatement.

The chief of police, any law enforcement officer, or any other city official may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which imminently endangers human life or property. The person responsible for such a nuisance shall reimburse the city for costs incurred in abating the nuisance. [Ord. 400 § 17, 2007].


8.10.180 Unenumerated nuisances.

In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated in this chapter, every other thing, substance or act that is determined by the council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 400 § 18, 2007].


8.10.190 Penalties.

(1) If the responsible persons fail to comply with CBMC 8.10.130, the city shall enforce this penalty section.

(2) A violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine upon conviction of not less than $250.00 for the first offense. The penalty shall be $500.00 for the second separate violation and $1,000 for the third and subsequent separate violations of the same provision within any five-year period. Total civil penalty shall not exceed $5,000.

(3) Civil penalties assessed may be enforced and collected in accordance with lien, personal obligation, and other procedures authorized by law. The civil citation shall contain the following information:

(a) File number;

(b) Name of the person cited;

(c) Name of property owner;

(d) Section of this chapter violated;

(e) A brief description of the violation of which the person is charged in such a manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;

(f) The date and place at which the violation occurred and the date of which the citation was issued;

(g) A statement of action, if any, required to be taken to correct the violation as determined by the director and the time frame in which to do so;

(h) A statement that a minimum cumulative civil penalty in the amount of $250.00 per day for each violation shall be assessed against the person to whom the notice is directed;

(i) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed as prescribed by this chapter and that the per diem civil penalty shall not accrue when the administrative appeal is pending;

(j) A certification by the city’s duly authorized code enforcement officer to the effect that he/she certifies that he/she has reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person cited committed the violation.

(4) Service of Citation. The citation shall be served upon the person or persons to whom it is directed per CBMC 8.10.130. [Ord. 400 § 19, 2007].


8.10.200 Separate violations.

(1) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(2) The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance. However, abatement of a nuisance within 10 days of the code enforcement officer’s determination that a nuisance exists will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of a penalty under the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 400 § 20, 2007].


8.10.210 Appeal.

(1) Hearing Officer – Appointment. The city manager shall appoint one or more hearing officers to hear appeals relating to the interpretation and/or enforcement of this chapter. The hearing officer may not be a city employee and shall not be an employee of the city attorney’s office. Contracts may be entered into by the person qualified to act as a hearing officer and shall be a municipal or land use attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Oregon.

(2) Hearing Officer – Powers and Duties. The hearing officer shall likewise hear evidence presented by the city attorney and/or the director. A hearing officer shall hear all appeals taken from the administration of this chapter. The hearing officer shall hear evidence presented by the person appealing the decision or interpretation of this chapter. The hearing officer shall give substantial weight to the director’s decision or interpretation and shall substitute his/her judgment only upon a showing by the appellant that the director’s decision/interpretation is arbitrary and capricious or clearly erroneous. Formal rules of evidence need not be followed but witnesses shall be sworn by the hearing officer and a written order issued.

(3) Cost of Appeal. In cases where the city’s decision is upheld by the hearing officer, said hearing officer shall award the city its reasonable costs of enforcement including those associated with the appeal.

(4) Appeal Procedure.

(a) All appeals shall be filed in writing with the city recorder at least 14 calendar days of the date of the issuance of a nuisance determination or interpretation.

(b) All appeals to the hearing officer shall contain the following:

(i) The names of appellants participating in the appeal;

(ii) A brief statement setting forth the action appealed and a separate and concise statement of the error alleged to have been committed by the director.

(iii) The signature of the appellant(s), and the appellant’s telephone number(s) and mailing address;

(iv) Verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of at least one appellant of the truth of the matter stated in the appeal.

(c) Upon receiving the appeal, the recorder or designee shall transmit the same to the designated hearing officer as provided herein.

(d) Failure of any person to file a timely appeal or failure of any person who has filed an appeal to attend the scheduled hearing shall constitute a waiver of his or her right to an appeal hearing.

(e) A copy of the final order of the hearing officer shall be mailed to the appellant(s) within seven working days following the entry of a written order under this section. Unless otherwise stated in the order, such order shall be final and conclusive 14 calendar days from the date of mailing thereof unless any party of record makes application to Coos County circuit court.

(f) Judicial Abatement. The city may seek a judicial abatement order from the Coos County circuit court, as deemed necessary, to abate a condition which continues to be a violation of this chapter where other methods of remedial action have failed to produce compliance. [Ord. 400 § 21, 2007].1

    Prior legislation: Ord. 41. 


Chapter 8.15 ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:

8.15.010    Definitions.

8.15.020    Permits.

8.15.030    Duties of alarm users.

8.15.040    False alarm fees.

8.15.050    Deactivating system.

8.15.060    Duties of alarm monitors.

8.15.070    Denial and termination of permits.

8.15.080    Revocation of permits.

8.15.090    Automatic dialing service.


8.15.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases mean:

“Alarm monitor” means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of receiving from alarm users and transmitting to the Coos Bay police department communications or signals originating from alarm users.

“Alarm system” means a mechanical or electrical device designed or used for the detection of unauthorized entry into or upon premises or for alerting others of an unlawful act within or upon premises, and which, when activated, transmits by any means a signal in any form that is audible, visible, or perceptible outside of the protected land, building, structure or facility. Alarm system includes, but is not limited to, those devices designed to transmit a signal or message to a central alarm receiving station.

“Alarm user” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporate or other organization, public or private, in control of premises wherein an alarm system is being maintained.

“Automatic dialing device” means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

“Premises” means any building, structure or facility, or land within the city. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1987].


8.15.020 Permits.

As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all alarm users within the city must apply for alarm system permits. No fee shall be charged to such users who make application within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Thereafter, permits for any alarm system within the city, including any activated after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall pay a fee of $20.00 for issuance. Permits shall remain in effect unless revoked under this chapter or until the alarm system is dismantled or abandoned by the user. Permits are not transferable; subsequent users on the same premises must obtain a new permit. The city shall not, by the issuance of a permit, be obligated to respond or accord any priority to an alarm from such system. [Ord. 96 § 2, 1987].


8.15.030 Duties of alarm users.

It shall be the duty of each alarm user to cause the alarm system to be properly installed, serviced, maintained and operated so that such system will not produce false alarms. It shall also be the obligation of each alarm user to obtain and provide to appropriate occupants and employees of the premises proper instruction on the use and operation of such alarm system. Each alarm user shall secure an alarm system permit and shall surrender same to the city upon sale of the premises or upon disconnection of the alarm system. [Ord. 96 § 3, 1987].


8.15.040 False alarm fees.

During any one calendar year, an alarm system for which a permit has been issued shall be allowed four false alarms without any fee or charge being imposed. Commencing with the fifth false alarm and the next two false alarms thereafter during the calendar year, there shall be paid to the city of Coos Bay by the alarm user the sum of $25.00 for each false alarm; beginning the eighth false alarm per calendar year, the fee shall be $50.00 per false alarm. Failure to pay a false alarm fee within 30 days from the mailing or delivery of a notice requesting such payment shall be a violation of this chapter and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit under CBMC 8.15.080. Where the alarm system is operated through an alarm monitor, such monitor shall be mailed a duplicate copy of the notice to the user requesting. [Ord. 96 § 4, 1987].


8.15.050 Deactivating system.

(1) The alarm user shall provide the city with the name and telephone numbers of the person to be notified to disable an alarm and secure the premises whenever the alarm system is activated.

(2) Audible Alarms. Upon request of the city, a responsible party or other designated person shall respond immediately upon being notified to the premises where the alarm system is located and shall disable the alarm, if the city has not already done so, and secure the premises.

(3) Inaudible Alarms. Upon request of the city, a responsible party or other designated person shall respond, within 30 minutes after being notified, to the premises where the alarm system is located, and shall disable the alarm and secure the premises.

(4) A police officer may disable or cause an alarm system to be disabled if:

(a) It is an audible alarm; or

(b) It is an inaudible alarm and a responsible party or designated person does not arrive within 30 minutes after being requested to do so by the city; or

(c) The city is unable to contact a responsible party or the designated person, or no person has been designated by the user. [Ord. 96 § 5, 1987].


8.15.060 Duties of alarm monitors.

(1) The alarm monitor shall ensure the alarm system is properly installed and maintained.

(2) The alarm monitor shall furnish the user with proper instructions to operate the system properly.

(3) The monitor shall promptly notify the city of the names and addresses of its users as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and notify the city thereafter as it adds new users or as users are terminated.

(4) A failure on the part of an alarm monitor to comply with this section shall be a violation of this chapter, and the continuation of such violation after the mailing or delivery of a 30-day written notice to the alarm monitor shall be sufficient cause for the city to cease taking messages or communications from such monitor. [Ord. 96 § 6, 1987].


8.15.070 Denial and termination of permits.

(1) The city shall not be obligated to issue permits for alarm systems to be wired directly into the police department.

(2) The chief of the department of public safety may require the removal of any alarm system wired directly into the police department when such alarm system is defective or is interconnected with a fire alarm or is a combination fire and police alarm. [Ord. 96 § 7, 1987].


8.15.080 Revocation of permits.

Whenever an alarm user shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, including the duties of alarm users, the chief of the department of public safety shall mail or deliver written notice thereof to the alarm user and if such user shall fail or refuse to comply with such notice and this chapter within a period of 30 days, then the chief of police shall revoke the alarm system permit issued under the terms of this chapter and terminate response services to such user. Any such user may appeal from the notice of the chief of the department of public safety by giving written notice of such appeal and the reasons therefor to the city recorder within 30 days after receipt of the written notice from the chief of the department of public safety; and the council will hear such appeal at its next regular meeting held not earlier than six days after the receipt of such notice of appeal. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. [Ord. 96 § 8, 1987].


8.15.090 Automatic dialing service.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device as defined in this chapter; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice that it is so programmed.

(2) It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any telephone line assigned to the city without written permission of the city; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice that an automatic dialing device is so programmed.

(3) Violations of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00. [Ord. 96 § 9, 1987].


Chapter 8.20 DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

8.20.010    Definitions.

8.20.020    Prohibited action.

8.20.030    Investigation.

8.20.040    Contents of notice.

8.20.050    Entry on private property.

8.20.060    Hearing by municipal judge.

8.20.070    Abatement by the city and appraisal.

8.20.080    Low-value vehicle.

8.20.090    Public sale notice.

8.20.100    Public sale.

8.20.110    Redemption before sale.

8.20.120    Assessment of costs.

8.20.130    Penalty.


8.20.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

“Costs” means the expense of removing, storing, or selling a discarded vehicle.

“Discarded vehicle” means a vehicle that is in one or more of the following conditions:

(1) Inoperative.

(2) Wrecked.

(3) Dismantled.

(4) Partially dismantled.

(5) Abandoned.

(6) Junked.

“Law enforcement officer” includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city.

“Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, owner, or person having possession, control, or title to property where a vehicle is located.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

“Vehicle owner” means an individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or an interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle. [Ord. 113 § 1, 1987].


8.20.020 Prohibited action.

No person shall keep or permit the storage of a discarded vehicle upon private property within the city for more than seven days unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a lawfully conducted business dealing in junked vehicles. [Ord. 113 § 2, 1987].


8.20.030 Investigation.

(1) When a city official investigates a discarded vehicle on private property and determines that a nuisance exists which should be abated, the official shall:

(a) Attempt to discover the owner of the vehicle and the person in charge of the property on which the vehicle is located; and

(b) Give written notice to them by personal service or by registered or certified mail that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter.

(2) If the owner of the vehicle is not found, the city official shall place a notice on the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen. [Ord. 113 § 3, 1987].


8.20.040 Contents of notice.

A notice issued under this section shall state:

(1) That a certain discarded vehicle is in violation of this chapter and that within 10 days after sending or posting the notice:

(a) The vehicle must be removed from the city or to the storage yard of a lawfully conducted business dealing in junked vehicles; or

(b) The vehicle must be completely enclosed within a building.

(2) That the alternative to compliance with subsection (1) of this section is to petition the municipal judge within the 10-day period described in subsection (1) of this section and make a written request to appear before the municipal judge to show why the vehicle should not be immediately abated.

(3) That failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove the vehicle, charge the cost against the property from which it was removed, and to sell the vehicle to satisfy the costs of removal and storage. [Ord. 113 § 4, 1987].


8.20.050 Entry on private property.

(1) A city official is authorized to enter onto private property at all reasonable times and examine a vehicle to determine whether it is in a discarded condition. Except when an emergency exists, before entering onto private property, the city official shall obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for inspection.

(2) No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this chapter until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court showing probable cause for the inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing this chapter as the basis for the inspection, stating whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint, or giving other specific or general information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is located.

(3) No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent a city official from entering onto private premises and inspecting a vehicle when an emergency exists or when the official exhibits a warrant authorizing entry. [Ord. 113 § 5, 1987].


8.20.060 Hearing by municipal judge.

(1) Following a request to appear, the municipal judge shall provide a hearing for the petitioner to show cause why a vehicle should not be abated immediately and to receive evidence and the testimony of the city official and other interested persons concerning the existence, location, and condition of the vehicle. After the hearing, the judge may order the vehicle removed by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The order may require the removal of more than one vehicle and may consolidate the hearings and orders relating to more than one vehicle. Persons receiving the notice specified in CBMC 8.20.040 shall be sent copies of the order.

(3) The judge may impose conditions and take other action she or he considers appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The judge may delay the time for removal of the vehicle when, in her or his opinion, circumstances justify such action. The judge shall refuse to order removal of the vehicle when the vehicle, in the opinion of the judge, is not subject to the provisions of this chapter. The judge shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence in conducting the hearing. [Ord. 113 § 6, 1987].


8.20.070 Abatement by the city and appraisal.

(1) Ten days after giving the notice required in CBMC 8.20.040 or, if a hearing is held, 10 days after adoption of a resolution declaring a vehicle to be a public nuisance as required in CBMC 8.20.060, the city will have jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or authorized independent contractors. No person shall interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow authorized persons to enter onto private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) After removing the vehicle, the city shall have it appraised. [Ord. 113 § 7, 1987].


8.20.080 Low-value vehicle.

(1) If the vehicle is appraised at $750.00 or less, the city official shall file an affidavit with the motor vehicles division describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled. The city official may dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale without notice and public auction.

(2) The certificate of sale shall be on a form provided by the recorder. [Ord. 113 § 8, 1987].


8.20.090 Public sale notice.

(1) If the vehicle is appraised over $750.00, the city official shall publish a notice of sale in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice of sale shall state:

(a) The sale is of discarded property in possession of the city.

(b) A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license number, identification number, and any other information that will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle.

(c) The terms of the sale.

(d) The date, time, and place of the sale.

(2) The notice of sale shall be published two times. The first publication shall be made not less than 15 days before the date of the proposed sale, and the second shall be made not less than seven days before the date of the proposed sale. [Ord. 113 § 9, 1987].


8.20.100 Public sale.

(1) If a vehicle is appraised over $750.00, the city official shall hold a sale at the time and place appointed, within view of the vehicle to be sold.

(2) The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. However, if no bids are entered or the bids entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the city official may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to the costs.

(3) At the time the purchase price is paid, the city official shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate; the original shall be delivered to the purchaser and a copy filed with the recorder.

(4) The certificate of sale shall be on a form provided by the recorder. [Ord. 113 § 10, 1987].


8.20.110 Redemption before sale.

(1) A vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or by the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed by applying to the city official before sale or disposition has taken place. The person shall:

(a) Submit satisfactory evidence of ownership or interest in the vehicle to the city official.

(b) Pay the costs owing at the time the application to redeem is made.

(c) Give evidence that the nuisance character of the vehicle will not be resumed.

(2) Upon compliance with subsection (1) of this section, the city official shall execute a receipt and cause the vehicle to be returned. [Ord. 113 § 11, 1987].


8.20.120 Assessment of costs.

(1) The city recorder shall forward to the owner and the person responsible, by registered or certified mail, a notice stating:

(a) The total cost of abatement, including the administrative costs.

(b) That the costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice.

(c) That if the owner or the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the city recorder not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

(2) No sooner than 30 days after the date of the notice, the council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make a decision on the objections to the costs assessed.

(3) If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided by the council, shall be made by resolution and shall be entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the discarded vehicle was removed or abated.

(4) The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the statutory rate. Interest shall accrue from the date of entry of the lien into the lien docket.

(5) An error in the name of the owner or the person responsible or a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment will not void the assessment, and it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Ord. 113 § 12, 1987].


8.20.130 Penalty.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense. [Ord. 113 § 13, 1987].


Chapter 8.25 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY AND EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN

Sections:

8.25.010    Title.

8.25.020    Purpose.

8.25.030    Definitions.

8.25.040    Emergency management agency.

8.25.050    Duties of city manager and emergency management program manager – Responsibility for execution.

8.25.060    Declaration and ratification of emergency.

8.25.070    Seeking declaration of state of emergency by Office of the Governor.

8.25.080    Regulation of persons and property.

8.25.090    Termination of emergency.


8.25.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the city of Coos Bay emergency code. [Ord. 265 § 1, 1998].


8.25.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures to prepare for and carry out any activity to prevent, minimize, respond to or recover from an emergency which is threatened or which exists within the corporate limits of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 265 § 2, 1998].


8.25.030 Definitions.

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Coos Bay, or such other person designated by the city council to serve in that capacity.

“Emergency” means any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening to cause loss of life, injury to persons or property, human suffering, including, but not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material as defined by ORS 466.605, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight, infestations, crisis influx of persons unmanageable by the city, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage or war.

“Emergency program manager” means the person appointed by the city manager to administer the emergency operations plan for the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 265 § 3, 1998].


8.25.040 Emergency management agency.

There is hereby established an emergency management agency for the city of Coos Bay. The emergency management agency shall be comprised of the following officials: the mayor, fire chief, the police chief, the community services director, the city attorney and the city manager, who shall be the director of the agency. The emergency management agency shall cause to be created and updated on a regular basis an emergency operations plan. [Ord. 265 § 4, 1998].


8.25.050 Duties of city manager and emergency management program manager – Responsibility for execution.

(1) The city manager shall be responsible for emergency management in the event an emergency is declared, and shall be responsible for preparation and implementation of the emergency management operations and the emergency management plan.

(2) The city manager shall designate an emergency management program manager for the emergency management agency, who shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To create a basic emergency operations plan;

(b) To direct officials of city departments, bureaus and other offices with emergency service capabilities to prepare coordinated standard emergency operating procedures;

(c) To ensure that personnel, equipment, material and supplies are available or can be procured from public and private sources for use in the event of an emergency and to provide for accounting of such items;

(d) To provide coordination for the emergency management plan, other emergency programs, and operations of federal, state and county agencies in the event of an emergency, and other public or private agencies and corporations with emergency service capabilities;

(e) To provide for training operations under simulated emergency conditions. [Ord. 265 § 5, 1998].


8.25.060 Declaration and ratification of emergency.

(1) The city manager shall have the authority to make a declaration of emergency whenever he or she determines an emergency exists which threatens to cause or is causing danger of injury or death to persons or damage to or the destruction of property, such that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(2) Upon determination that an emergency exists, the city manager shall immediately make a declaration to that effect, and shall immediately contact the mayor or, in the mayor’s absence, the president of the council or his or her designee, who shall immediately convene a special session of the city council for the purpose of ratifying such declaration.

(3) The declaration of emergency shall state:

(a) The nature of the emergency;

(b) The geographic boundaries of the area which is subject to emergency controls, which shall be no larger than necessary to respond to the emergency; and

(c) Any special regulations imposed as a result of the emergency.

(4) Ratification of a declaration of emergency shall state the duration of time during which the geographic area subject to emergency controls shall remain an emergency area, and shall authorize the exercise of specific emergency powers by the city manager for the duration of the period of time set forth in the ratification. [Ord. 265 § 6, 1998].


8.25.070 Seeking declaration of state of emergency by Office of the Governor.

(1) Upon determination that all local resources have been expended, that the emergency is continuing, and that the city is no longer able to adequately respond to the emergency, the city manager shall seek authorization from the city council to seek a declaration of emergency from the Office of the Governor of the State of Oregon.

(2) If the city council authorizes the request for a declaration of emergency by the Office of the Governor, the city manager shall prepare a certification, to be signed by the members of the city council, stating that all local resources have been expended and providing a preliminary assessment of injuries, deaths and property damage or loss.

(3) The city manager shall immediately forward the certification and preliminary assessment to the Coos County board of commissioners, with a request that the board of commissioners file the request with the State of Oregon Office of Emergency Management. [Ord. 265 § 7, 1998].


8.25.080 Regulation of persons and property.

(1) Whenever an emergency is declared to exist within the city of Coos Bay, the city council may exercise its police power to the fullest extent authorized by the U.S. Constitution, the Oregon Constitution, and the Charter of the city of Coos Bay to respond to the emergency. In the exercise of its police powers, the city council may, by resolution, authorize the city manager to do any or all of the following:

(a) Redirect city funds for emergency use and, to the extent permitted by law, suspend standard city procurement procedures;

(b) Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places;

(c) Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place;

(d) Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate the same on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances;

(e) Evacuate persons;

(f) Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages;

(g) Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquids;

(h) Prohibit the sale, carrying, or possession of any weapons or explosives of any kind on public streets, public places, or any outdoor place;

(i) Curtail or suspend commercial activity;

(j) Turn off water, gas, or electricity;

(k) Order the destruction of property;

(l) Order such other measures as are necessary to provide for the public order, peace, health, safety, welfare and morals during the emergency.

(2) Any resolution authorizing summary action pursuant to this section shall contain provisions allowing affected persons to obtain prompt opportunity for review of the action. [Ord. 265 § 8, 1998].


8.25.090 Termination of emergency.

The city manager shall terminate the declaration of emergency when the emergency no longer exists or the threat of emergency has passed. [Ord. 265 § 9, 1998].


Chapter 8.30 TREES AND TREE BOARD

Sections:

8.30.010    Short title.

8.30.020    Purpose.

8.30.030    Definitions.

8.30.040    Tree board – Composition and procedures.

8.30.050    Tree board – Duties.

8.30.060    Permits.

8.30.070    Planting, maintenance and removal.

8.30.080    Protection of trees.

8.30.090    Appeals.


8.30.010 Short title.

This chapter may be cited as the Coos Bay tree ordinance. [Ord. 181 § 1, 1992].


8.30.020 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Coos Bay by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs within the city. [Ord. 181 § 2, 1992].


8.30.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Park trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all other areas owned by the city and open to the public.

“Public right-of-way” means streets and alleys including that portion of the dedicated right-of-way which is not currently used as a street or alley.

“Street trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land located within or adjacent to public rights-of-way within the city. [Ord. 181 § 3, 1992].


8.30.040 Tree board – Composition and procedures.

(1) The tree board shall be appointed by the city council and shall consist of up to eight members.

(a) One member of the tree board may be a member of the city council.

(b) One member of the tree board shall also be a parks commissioner.

(c) At least one member of the tree board shall be a representative from the field of arboriculture, landscape architecture, or otherwise have a background and professional knowledge of trees and their care.

(d) One member of the tree board shall be designated by the board of the Coos Bay Downtown Association.

(e) The balance of the tree board shall be citizens with an interest in trees.

(f) All members shall be city residents. Members residing outside the city, but who own property within the city, shall be considered to have such residential status. The council may allow membership for one nonresident who possesses subject matter expertise needed by the board.

(2) The members shall be appointed for a term of four years. Vacancies, except at the expiration of a term, shall be filled by a temporary appointment made by the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Committee members may be reappointed for additional terms of four years each.

(3) A member of the tree board may resign at any time by submitting a letter of resignation to the council. A member may be removed by the council for nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without excuse is considered to be in nonperformance of duty. The possible need for removal may be brought to the attention of the council by the tree board.

(4) The tree board members, by majority vote, shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a one-year term at the beginning of each year, and may reelect the incumbent. The chairperson shall preside over tree board meetings and retain the right to vote. The vice-chairperson shall preside in the chairperson’s absence.

(5) Regular meetings shall be held at a frequency necessary to carry out tree board duties. Meetings shall be called at the request of the chairman, or four commissioners, or at the request of the public works or community services departments.

(6) Four members of the tree board shall constitute a quorum for conducting any business.

(7) The tree board may make and alter rules and regulations for its operation consistent with the City Charter, ordinances, and resolutions, subject to review and approval of the council.

(8) Members of the tree board shall receive no compensation, but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. [Ord. 475 § 1, 2016; Ord. 470 § 1, 2015; Ord. 298, 2001; Ord. 181 § 4, 1992].


8.30.050 Tree board – Duties.

(1) The tree board shall have the primary responsibility to study, investigate, develop, and to update periodically a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of all street and park trees.

(2) As part of the plan, a list of acceptable species shall be developed and maintained for planting as street trees. The species will be divided into three size classes: small, medium, and large. A list of tree species not suitable for planting will also be developed.

(3) The plan developed by the tree board shall be presented to the city council, and upon council acceptance and approval the plan shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city.

(4) The plan, and the provisions of this chapter, will be reviewed completely at least once in every three-year period after the initial approval.

(5) The tree board may also develop criteria for determining and standards for protecting heritage trees within the city. The purpose of the heritage tree designation is to recognize, foster appreciation of, and protect trees having significance to the community. Criteria may include such things as species rarity, age, size, quality, association with historical events or persons, or scenic enhancement. The tree board shall have the authority to determine, select and identify such trees that qualify as heritage trees. [Ord. 181 § 5, 1992].


8.30.060 Permits.

(1) A permit shall be obtained from the public works director before planting, pruning or otherwise affecting a street tree. There shall be no fee required for this permit.

(2) With a permit, adjacent property owners may plant street trees so long as the selection, location, and planting of such trees is in accordance with this chapter.

(3) Any street tree planted subsequent to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and not in compliance therewith shall be removed at the expense of the person who planted it. [Ord. 181 § 6, 1992].


8.30.070 Planting, maintenance and removal.

(1) The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes as defined in this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.

(2) No street trees other than those species listed herein as small trees may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.

(3) The distance trees may be planted will be in accordance with the three species size classes, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet.

(4) No street trees shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street trees shall be planted closer than 10 feet of any fireplug.

(5) The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.

(6) The public works director may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.

(7) It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. “Topping” is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city tree board.

(8) All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface.

(9) Leaf Pick-Up.

(a) The city shall continue to manage and fund the sweeping of streets and public parking lots within the city.

(b) Private property owners and/or occupants shall continue to be responsible for removing leaves collected on awnings, canopies, or building roofs, and for sweeping sidewalks. Leaves may be swept into the streets. [Ord. 181 § 7, 1992].


8.30.080 Protection of trees.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, break, or injure any street tree or park tree.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or keep attached to any street or park tree or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree any rope, wire, chain, sign or other device whatsoever, except as a support for such tree.

(3) During the construction, repair, alteration or removal of any building or structure, it shall be unlawful for any owner or contractor to leave any street tree in the vicinity of such building or structure without a good and sufficient guard or protector as shall prevent injury to such tree arising out of or by reason of such construction or removal.

(4) Excavations shall not be placed within six feet of any street tree without approval of the public works director. During such excavation or construction, any such person shall guard any street tree within six feet thereof.

(5) All building material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any street tree. [Ord. 181 § 8, 1992].


8.30.090 Appeals.

Any decision under this chapter made by the public works director may be appealed to the tree board. Any decision of the tree board may be appealed to the city council. Appeals must be in writing and filed within 14 days of the decision being appealed. A decision of the city council shall be final. [Ord. 181 § 9, 1992].


Chapter 8.35 CITY FACILITY SMOKING RESTRICTIONS

Sections:

8.35.010    Definition.

8.35.020    Prohibition.

8.35.030    Removal from premises.

8.35.040    Penalties.


8.35.010 Definition.

The word “smoking” shall have the same meaning as defined in CBMC 12.35.010, except to the extent that such term is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 459, 2014].


8.35.020 Prohibition. 

The smoking of tobacco or any other organic material in or about the Coos Bay City Hall, Public Library, fire stations, city shops and Visitor’s Information Center shall be prohibited. The area encompassed by this prohibition shall be the above-mentioned facilities, adjacent city property around the building and the parking area adjoining the buildings. This prohibition includes any and all devices by which tobacco or other organic material is burned for purposes of inhaling of the material created by such burning, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, and e-cigarettes, as well as the discarding of any such smoking material. [Ord. 477, 2016; Ord. 459, 2014].


8.35.030 Removal from premises.

Any police officer, city code compliance officer, or the city manager or his designee, shall have the authority to direct anyone smoking in violation of this prohibition to leave the area encompassed by this prohibition, if that person fails to comply with such city official’s request to discontinue smoking. [Ord. 459, 2014].


8.35.040 Penalties. 

Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $1,000. Each violation is a separate offense; and if the violation is of a continuing nature, each and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 459, 2014].


Chapter 8.45 TEMPORARY LODGING FACILITIES

Sections:

8.45.010    Applicability.

8.45.020    Intent.

8.45.030    Definitions.

8.45.035    Facility location and permit requirement.

8.45.040    Authorization process and permitting.

8.45.045    Standards and requirements for operation.

8.45.050    Modifications to permit.

8.45.055    Permit revocation.

8.45.060    Protection and liability.

8.45.065    Periodic and annual review.

8.45.070    Penalty.


8.45.010 Applicability.

This chapter applies to all temporary lodging facilities as defined in CBMC 8.45.030 established after August 15, 2019. Existing temporary lodging facilities established prior to adoption of this chapter shall continue to operate under the conditions of approvals and permits granted by the city, all other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, and any limitations and requirements imposed as a condition of funding. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.020 Intent.

The city recognizes the value and benefit of temporary housing and services until permanent housing can be realized. It is the intent of this chapter to create a process and standards for the establishment of temporary lodging facilities to address individual and family temporary shelter needs. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

Building – A walled and roofed structure above ground.

Building official – The Coos Bay building official or his/her designee.

City engineer – The Coos Bay city engineer or his/her designee.

City manager – The Coos Bay city manager or his/her designee.

Director – Public works and community development director or his/her designee.

Fire chief – The Coos Bay fire chief or his/her designee.

Guests – Homeless individuals and families in need of temporary shelter.

Lodging facility operator – Any noncommercial entity or entities working together to meet the standards and criteria specified by this chapter to provide temporary lodging at no cost.

Noncommercial – Not engaging in commerce or making a profit.

Property owner – Temporary lodging facility site property owner.

Structure – A building or any piece of work joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something located on the ground.

Temporary – Thirty consecutive days and 90 days in a single calendar year.

Temporary lodging facility – A building, buildings or area of land for parking vehicles on private property for family and/or individual for temporary and noncommercial (less than 30 consecutive or 90 days per family or individual in a single calendar year) overnight accommodations for families and/or individuals transitioning to a long-term housing solution. An indoor lodging facility meeting city fire and life safety requirements may offer beds, meals, shower, laundry or other amenities within a structure of a lodging facility operator subject to an annual inspection by the city for life/safety code compliance and compliance with Coos County health department requirements. Outdoor lodging facilities are parking lots to provide parking for vehicles to be used as shelter on a temporary basis.

Temporary lodging facility permit – A permit issued by the city to provide temporary shelter for families and/or individuals.

Vehicle – A car, truck or recreational vehicle (a) of one hundred square feet or less; (b) occupied by no more than two persons per car or truck and no more than four persons per recreational vehicle; (c) hold current DMV registration; (d) be operational and capable of moving within a four-hour notice on its own power; and (e) have four working tires. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.035 Facility location and permit requirement.

Temporary lodging facilities are permitted on private property with city authorization of either an indoor or outdoor temporary lodging facilities permit. No more than one temporary lodging facilities permit may be secured for any facility. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.040 Authorization process and permitting.

(1) Indoor Temporary Lodging Facility.

(a) Prior to submittal of an application for an indoor temporary lodging facility permit (permit), the property owner and lodging facility operator shall engage in a pre-application conference with the city building official, fire chief and director and provide a draft facility proposal with a site plan, floor plan and management plan consistent with the requirements of subsection (1)(b) of this section. Additionally, the property owner will provide the building official and fire chief access to the proposed facility for an on-site inspection to assess the structure’s layout and compliance with building code requirements. Within 10 working days of the pre-application meeting, the building official will provide a written assessment of the proposed facility to the property owner relative to compliance with building code requirements.

(b) An application to the director can be submitted following the pre-application conference noted in subsection (1)(a) of this section. The indoor temporary lodging facility permit application shall include information consistent with CBMC 8.45.045(1) and the following:

(i) A floor plan identifying:

(A) The location and square feet of sleeping and gathering area;

(B) Smoke/fire detection and carbon monoxide detectors;

(C) Restroom amenities, including location and number of sanitation fixtures;

(D) The route guests would use to exit or enter the proposed sleeping and gathering areas, and the area in square feet proposed for sleeping and gathering.

(ii) A site plan identifying parking location for guest parking on site.

(iii) A facility management plan addressing:

(A) The number of individuals to be served.

(B) Eligibility criteria, enforcement rules, and procedures for disruptive guests.

(C) Number and responsibilities of on-site lodging facility operator staff, training standards, copy of the facilities insurance policy naming the city as an additional insured party, management procedures, security procedures and a primary and secondary contact person.

(D) Refuse collection.

(E) Security procedures.

(F) Compliance with Coos County health department requirements.

(G) The requirements of CBMC 8.45.045(1).

(H) An emergency contact phone number and any additional information requested by the director.

(iv) Insurance. The temporary lodging operator will maintain in force and effect a policy of general liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000. A copy of the certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city prior to issuance of a temporary lodging facility permit.

(2) Outdoor Temporary Lodging Facility.

(a) Prior to submittal of an application for an outdoor temporary lodging facility permit, the property owner and lodging facility operator shall engage in pre-application conference with the city engineer and director and provide a draft facility proposal to allow on-site vehicle parking for the purpose of sleeping accommodations. Also provided will be a site plan and management plan consistent with the requirements of subsection (2)(b) of this section. Additionally, the property owner will provide the city engineer access to the proposed facility, so s/he may evaluate the parking lot design and site ingress/egress. Within 10 working days of the pre-application meeting, the director will provide the property owner with a written assessment of the proposed facility.

(b) An application for a temporary lodging facility permit can be submitted to the director following the pre-application conference noted in subsection (2)(a) of this section. The outdoor temporary lodging facility permit application shall include:

(i) A site plan identifying compliance with CBMC 8.45.045(2) and the following:

(A) Location and distances to residential properties, public transportation, and location of designated overnight parking spaces.

(B) The permitted locations for an amount pre-determined by the property owner during the permitting process with a maximum of five recreational vehicles, automobile or truck parking unless otherwise authorized by the city police chief and fire chief.

(C) ADA restroom amenities, including location and number of sanitation fixtures.

(D) Property ingress and egress.

(E) Property lighting.

(F) Trash and recycling facilities.

(ii) A facility management plan addressing:

(A) The number of individuals to be served.

(B) Eligibility criteria, enforcement rules, and procedures for disruptive guests.

(C) Number and responsibilities of on-site lodging facility operator staff, training standards, other management procedures, and a primary and secondary contact person.

(D) Refuse collection.

(E) Security procedures.

(F) Any additional information requested by the director.

(G) The requirements of CBMC 8.45.045(2).

(H) An emergency contact phone number and any additional information requested by the director.

(iii) Insurance and Bonding. The temporary lodging operator will maintain in force and effect general liability insurance with a limit of not less than $1,000,000 and a $10,000 restoration bond in the event city clean-up is required. A copy of the certificate of insurance and the bond instrument shall be provided to the city prior to issuance of a temporary lodging facility permit.

(3) Action on the Temporary Lodging Facility Permit Application.

(a) Within 10 working days of the receipt of a complete application for a temporary lodging facility permit, the director will notify all owners and occupants within a 500-foot radius of the proposed facility site that an application has been received and is available for 10 working days for public review and comment. At the end of the 10-working-day period, the director shall consider public comments and compliance with this chapter and formulate a recommendation for the city manager’s action.

(b) The city manager, upon considering the recommendation of the director and the requirements of this chapter, shall act upon the temporary lodging facility permit within 10 working days. To authorize a temporary lodging facility permit, the city manager must find that the facility proposal (i) meets the requirements of CBMC 8.45.045, (ii) will be compatible with the use of adjacent properties, and (iii) will not constitute a nuisance or a threat to the public welfare.

(c) The city manager will notify owners and occupants within 500 feet of the proposed facility site of his/her decision with advisement that the decision can be appealed to the city council within 10 working days of his/her decision date. If the temporary facility permit is authorized, a copy of the permit will be included in the notification to owners and occupants. If the temporary facility permit is denied, reasons for the denial will be included in the notification.

(d) Should the city manager’s decision be appealed, the city shall, within 10 working days of the receipt of the appeal, notify all owners and occupants within a 500-foot radius of the proposed facility site that an appeal has been filed and the date of the appeal public hearing. The city council, in a public hearing, shall affirm, modify or reverse the revocation within 30 days of the date of the appeal of the city manager’s decision. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.045 Standards and requirements for operation.

(1) Indoor Facilities.

(a) No indoor temporary lodging facility (indoor facility) shall be located within 500 feet of another lodging facility, kindergarten through 12th grade curriculum school or child care center, or park as measured from the closest property line.

(b) Appropriately sized and located exterior and interior on-site waiting and intake areas shall be provided. When abutting a residentially zoned property all areas for indoor facility activities and uses, including but not limited to waiting and intake, personal storage, facility storage, and recreation, shall be located indoors.

(c) The lodging facility operator will provide on-site management services and security for the guests and staff during all open hours of the indoor facility.

(d) The indoor facility shall comply with city and state health and safety codes.

(e) Maximum occupancy for overnight guests shall be determined by the building official and fire chief.

(f) For indoor facilities, one parking space for every three guests shall be provided on site. One space per employee on the largest shift shall also be provided. A covered and secured area for bicycle parking shall be provided for use by staff and guests commensurate with demonstrated need.

(g) On-site management by the lodging facility operator shall be provided at all times the indoor facility is in operation and at least one hour prior to and after indoor facility operation hours.

(h) Exterior lighting on pedestrian walkways and parking areas on the indoor facility premises are required. All lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public right-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood.

(2) Outdoor Facilities.

(a) No outdoor temporary lodging facility (outdoor facility) shall be located within 500 feet of another outdoor temporary lodging facility, kindergarten through 12th grade curriculum school, child care center, residential area or park as measured from the closest property line of the proposed outdoor facility.

(b) The number of overnight vehicles at the outdoor facility shall not exceed five, unless otherwise authorized by the chief of police and the fire chief with requirements for additional garbage disposal and toilet facilities.

(c) Sleeping outside a vehicle at the outdoor facility is not permitted.

(d) Vehicles shall be located on paved areas only.

(e) Restroom accommodations shall be made available for individual use.

(f) Garbage disposal services shall be provided. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.050 Modifications to permit.

After receipt of a temporary lodging facility permit, the lodging facilities operator may request modifications to the permit upon application to the city manager. Modifications must meet the intent of this chapter and may not conflict with the facility occupancy and parking requirements nor be in conflict with the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Coos Bay. CBMC 8.45.040(3) requirements for neighboring property notification and appeals shall be applied to modification requests. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.055 Permit revocation.

The temporary lodging facility permit may be revoked by the city manager if:

(1) The requirements of the permit are violated.

(2) The facility operator violates any applicable federal, state or city law, ordinance, rule, guideline or agreement.

(3) The facility activity is determined to be incompatible the quiet enjoyment, health, safety or welfare of adjacent properties or the well-being of the surrounding area and/or the Coos Bay community.

To revoke a permit, the city manager will notify all owners and occupants within a 500-foot radius of the facility site that revocation of the permit is under consideration for 10 working days for public comment. At the end of the 10-working-day period, the city manager shall reach a decision on the action to be taken related to the permit.

The city manager will notify owners and occupants within 500 feet of the proposed facility site of his/her decision and reasons regarding the revocation and that his/her decision can be appealed to the city council within 10 working days of his/her decision date.

The city council shall, if the city manager’s decision is appealed, affirm, modify or reverse the city manager’s action regarding the revocation within 30 days of an appeal. Permit revocation appeals are subject to CBMC 8.45.040 requirements for neighboring property notification. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.060 Protection and liability.

Nothing in this chapter creates any duty on the part of the city or its agents to ensure property or persons protection regarding the authorized temporary lodging facility. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.065 Periodic and annual review.

(1) Periodic Review. The city may periodically review a lodging facility operator permit and its related facility.

(2) Annual Review. The lodging facility operator shall annually submit to the director an assessment of the temporary lodging facility operation over the prior year, including the number of facility guests served. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


8.45.070 Penalty.

A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. However, if there is a violation of any provision identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in the state law. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. [Ord. 515 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


Chapter 8.55 VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.55.010    Title and purpose.

8.55.020    Definitions.

8.55.030    Inspection.

8.55.040    Registration.

8.55.050    Maintenance and security requirements.

8.55.060    Local presence required.

8.55.070    Additional authority.

8.55.080    Violation and penalty.

8.55.090    Appeals.


8.55.010 Title and purpose.

The title of this chapter shall be known as the “Coos Bay Vacant Property Registration Regulations.” The purpose of this chapter is to protect the city from blight by requiring that vacant properties be adequately secured and maintained. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.020 Definitions.

(1) “Borrower” means any person who becomes obligated on a real estate loan agreement, either directly or indirectly, and includes, but is not limited to, mortgagors, vendees under conditional land sales contracts and grantors under trust deeds.

(2) “Chief of police” means the city of Coos Bay police chief or his/her designee.

(3) “Evidence of vacancy” means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead the chief of police to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters; for dwellings, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation; evidence of trespass or criminal mischief; or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery persons, and/or government employees that the property is vacant.

(4) “Maintenance” means acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the condition of grounds, structures, and equipment; such that the condition does not fall below the standards established by CBMC 8.55.050.

(5) “Notice of default” means a written notice to a borrower stating that a default on a real estate loan agreement has occurred and that legal action may be taken.

(6) “Out of area” means outside of Coos County.

(7) “Owner” means any lender, person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property which includes but is not limited to a real estate loan agreement, mortgage; beneficiary status under a trust deed; vendors under conditional land sales contracts; trustees and a successor in interest to any mortgagee, beneficiary, vendor or trustee. This term also includes any party that accepts a deed in lieu of foreclosure who is recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of an estate, and the executor or administrator of an estate if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

(8) “Real estate loan agreement” means any agreement providing for a loan on real property, secured in whole or in part by real property located within the city of Coos Bay, or any interest therein, and includes, but is not limited to, mortgages, trust deeds and conditional land sales contracts.

(9) “Responsible person” means an individual or commercial entity who either operates a business or lives in Coos County who is authorized by the owner and confirmed by the chief of police to act on behalf of the owner with regard to CBMC 8.55.030, 8.55.050 and 8.55.060. The owner’s designation of a responsible person does not relieve the owner of any obligation to comply with this chapter.

(10) “Vacant” means a property where maintenance has been neglected and is unoccupied or not legally occupied regardless of whether there is a habitable structure or personal belongings on the property. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.030 Inspection.

(1) Immediately upon default of the borrower, but no later than prior to recording a notice of default with the Coos County clerk’s office, an owner shall perform or cause to be performed by a responsible person an inspection of the property that is the security for the real estate loan agreement.

(2) The owner or responsible person shall determine if the property is vacant. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the owner shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the chief of police.

(3) If the property is occupied but remains in default, the property shall be inspected by the owner or responsible person on a monthly basis until the borrower remedies the default. If an inspection reveals that the property is vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the owner shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the chief of police.

(4) The requirements of subsections (1) through (3) of this section also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title has transferred from one owner to another owner; and a property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.040 Registration.

(1) Registration requirements:

(a) The name of the owner;

(b) The direct mailing address of the owner;

(c) The direct contact name and phone number for the owner;

(d) The physical address for the owner or owner’s agent authorized to receive service of process, if applicable;

(e) The direct contact information for the party responsible for security, maintenance and marketing of the property, if applicable;

(f) The address of the vacant building;

(g) The date the property became vacant or the owner took legal possession;

(h) Legal description and tax parcel identification number of the property per the county assessor’s records; and

(i) The name and address of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual) identified on the deed of trust, if applicable.

(2) The registration is valid for one year. The property owner must secure a new registration annually if the property remains vacant.

(3) The owner must have a letter on file with Coos Bay police department authorizing access to the property.

(4) Notice of Changes. An owner who has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration to the Coos Bay police department within 10 business days of the change, including but not limited to any change in ownership or designation of a responsible person.

(5) No registration fee shall be imposed.

(6) Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the registration requirement as long as the property remains vacant.

(7) Registration forms are available at the Coos Bay police department and online at the city’s website. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.050 Maintenance and security requirements.

(1) An owner or his/her appointed responsible person shall maintain properties subject to this chapter. Maintenance includes all of the following:

(a) Ensuring that the condition of the subject property does not constitute a public nuisance or a chronic public nuisance as described by the code;

(b) Keeping the premises free of weeds, dead vegetation, graffiti, trash, accumulated newspapers, circulars, flyers, discarded personal items, and any other item or condition that would cause the chief of police to form a reasonable belief that the property is vacant;

(c) Regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of the subject property and the removal of all trimmings;

(d) If there is an outdoor pool or spa on the premises, such facility shall be drained and kept covered. Properties with pools or spas shall comply with the city’s minimum security-fencing requirements;

(e) Compliance with CBMC Title 8, Health and Safety;

(f) Securing the property when it is vacant. Windows and doors may be boarded up if damaged or if otherwise permitted by the code. Damaged windows and doors shall either be repaired or replaced within 10 business days of a notice by the chief of police to make the repairs or replace damages to the property;

(g) Maintenance of the building to assure it is structurally sound. All electrical, natural gas, sanitary and plumbing facilities shall be maintained, or when the property is vacant, shut off, in a condition which does not create a hazard to public health or safety;

(h) Weed removal to assure there is not an unreasonable risk of fire. Weeds shall be removed if they may constitute a fire hazard. No vacant building or site shall be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant buildings or on vacant property shall either be removed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances. If heating equipment is removed, any fuel supply shall be removed or terminated in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances;

(i) Debris removal from vacant buildings and property area and ongoing maintenance to keep the property fee of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage.

(2) Compliance with this section does not relieve a person subject to this chapter of any obligations set forth by state law, or any covenants, conditions and restrictions which may apply to the subject property. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.060 Local presence required.

An out-of-area owner or responsible person shall ensure compliance with this chapter. An 18-inch by 24-inch notice shall be posted by the owner or responsible person identifying a direct contact name and 24-hour contact phone number for persons to report problems or concerns, and the posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, then the posting shall be placed on the exterior of the property in a location visible from the street to the front of the property. An exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.070 Additional authority.

The chief of police shall have the authority to require the owner or responsible person to implement any additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to:

(1) Installation of additional security lighting;

(2) Increasing on-site inspection frequency;

(3) Employment of an on-site security guard; and

(4) Any other measures as may be reasonably required to prevent the decline of the property. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.080 Violation and penalty.

(1) An owner who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution as provided for in CBMC 8.10.190.

(2) Citations for violation of any section of this chapter may be mailed by first class mail to the owner.

(3) Violation of CBMC 8.55.050 is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided by CBMC 8.10.150. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


8.55.090 Appeals.

An owner who is required to implement additional maintenance or security measures as provided for in CBMC 8.55.050 shall have the right to appeal to the city council under the procedures set out in CBMC 8.10.210. [Ord. 509 § 5 (Exh. B), 2019].


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    Oregon Criminal Code

9.10    Offenses Against Public Officers

9.15    Offenses Against Public Decency

9.20    Offenses Against Public Peace

9.25    Other Offenses

9.30    Bankrupt, Liquidating and Closing-Out Sales

9.35    Graffiti

9.40    Specified Crime Property

9.45    Violation – Penalty


Chapter 9.05 OREGON CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.05.010    Oregon Criminal Code adopted.


9.05.010 Oregon Criminal Code adopted.

(1) ORS Chapters 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, and 167, except for any provision classified as a felony under the state law, are adopted by reference. Violation of an adopted provision of those chapters is an offense against this city.

(2) The provisions of ORS Chapter 161, relating to defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification apply to offenses defined and made punishable by this title.

(3) Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the definitions appearing in the general definitional and other particular sections of the chapters adopted by subsection (1) of this section are applicable throughout this title. [Ord. 100 § 1, 1987].


Chapter 9.10 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS

Sections:

9.10.010    Police and fire communications.

9.10.020    Interfering with a police officer.


9.10.010 Police and fire communications.

(1) No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave, or cause a disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of any police or fire department radio communication system.

(2) No person shall program an automatic dialing device to select a city police department telephone line. An “automatic dialing device” is a device which is connected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. [Ord. 100 § 4, 1987].


9.10.020 Interfering with a police officer.

No person, intentionally or with reckless disregard, shall interfere with a peace officer in the officer’s lawful performance of his or her duties. “To interfere with,” as used in this section, means any physical act, including a refusal to leave a particular area in response to a lawful order from a peace officer, that prevents or could reasonably be expected to prevent a peace officer from performing his or her duties. [Ord. 100 § 9, 1987].


Chapter 9.15 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY

Sections:

9.15.010    Public indecency.

9.15.020    Drinking in public places.


9.15.010 Public indecency.

No person shall, while in or in view of a public place, perform an act of urination or defecation, except in toilets provided for the purpose. [Ord. 100 § 8, 1987].


9.15.020 Drinking in public places.

No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor in or upon any street, alley, or other public place unless the place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. [Ord. 100 § 11, 1987].


Chapter 9.20 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE

Sections:

9.20.010    Unreasonable noise.

9.20.020    Discharge of weapons.

9.20.030    Lodging.

9.20.040    Obstructing passageways.

9.20.050    Fireworks prohibited.


9.20.010 Unreasonable noise.

No person shall create, or assist in creating, or permit the continuance of unreasonable noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of others. The following acts are declared to be unreasonable noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not be construed to be exclusive:

(1) The keeping of any bird or animal which by causing frequent or continued noise disturbs the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity.

(2) The attaching of any bell to any animal or allowing a bell to remain on any animal which is disturbing to any person in the vicinity.

(3) The use of any vehicle or engine, either stationary or moving, so operated as to create any loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.

(4) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any vehicle on any street, public or private place, except as a necessary warning of danger.

(5) The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger, or upon request of proper city authorities.

(6) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise created is effectively muffled.

(7) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in residential districts, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of the public welfare and safety, and then only with a permit issued by the city.

(8) The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire, or other emergency vehicle.

(9) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court of justice while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital or institution for the care of the sick or infirm, which unreasonably interferes with the operation of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients.

(10) The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises and the emission of annoying smoke.

(11) The use or operation of any device designed for sound production, amplification or reproduction, including but not limited to a radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder, loud speaker or similar device, so loudly as to disturb persons within the vicinity. However, upon application to the council, permits may be granted to responsible persons or organizations for the broadcast or amplification of programs of music, news, speeches, or general entertainment as part of national, state or city events, public festivals or outstanding events of a noncommercial nature, when the broadcast or amplification will not be audible for a distance of more than 1,000 feet from the instrument, speaker or amplifier. No permit shall be granted where any obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian traffic will result.

(12) The making of any noise by crying, calling or shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, horn, hammer, drum, musical instrument or other device for the purpose of advertising goods, wares or merchandise or by attracting attention or of inviting patronage of any person to any business. However, newspapers and magazines may be sold by public outcry.

(13) The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage within 100 feet of any private residence, apartment, rooming house or hotel in a manner as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(14) The operation of exhaust brakes commonly known as Jacob Brakes. [Ord. 100 § 2, 1987].


9.20.020 Discharge of weapons.

(1) Except at firing ranges approved by the chief of police and the council, no person other than an authorized peace officer or animal control officer shall fire or discharge a gun or other weapon, including a spring or air actuated pellet gun, air gun or BB gun, bow and arrow, or any weapon which propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion.

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

(a) The discharging of shotguns for the purpose of waterfowl hunting by licensed hunters during waterfowl hunting season is permitted in the area described as follows, which includes the dredged spoils islands east of the harbor line:  

Beginning at a point at the mean high water line of the Isthmus Slough Channel near the northwest corner of Eastside, thence, East along the mean high water line of the Marshfield Channel to a line extending North from Harbor View Drive.  Thence, South to a parallel line extending from the north edge of the city’s treatment lagoon; thence, East to the mean high water line of the Marshfield Channel.  Thence, South along the mean high water line of the Marshfield Channel to the south line of Section 30, Township 25 South, Range 13 West, Willamette Meridian; thence, Easterly along the south line of said Section 30 to the city limits line extending along the mid channel of the Cooston Channel; thence, following the city limits line along the east shore of Coos Bay; thence, Westerly to the east harbor line established by the International Port of Coos Bay; thence, Southerly along the harbor line to a point on the harbor line established by the International Port of Coos Bay, which point is on the east side of the Coos Bay Channel and the north side of the Coos River Channel; thence, Southwesterly to the east side of the main channel of Coos Bay; thence, Southeasterly to the point of beginning.

(b) The discharging of a weapon by any person in the lawful defense or protection of his or her person, family or property. [Ord. 427 § 1, 2010; Ord. 100 § 3, 1987].


9.20.030 Lodging.

No person shall:

(1) Lodge in a car, outbuilding, or other place not intended for that purpose without permission of the owner or person entitled to its possession.

(2) Write or cause to be written in the register of any hotel, lodging house, motel, rooming house or other place offering accommodations any other or different name than the true name of such person or the name by which such person is generally known.

(3) Refuse to permit any law enforcement officer to review the current guest records or the guest records for any period of time within the past three years of any place offering overnight public accommodations for the purpose of determining as part of a criminal investigation whether a particular person or persons had been registered in the place of accommodation. [Ord. 100 § 5, 1987].


9.20.040 Obstructing passageways.

No person shall:

(1) Keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any kind located in or upon any sidewalk except when the same is necessarily open during the immediate use thereof, and when being used the opening shall be properly guarded and protected.

(2) Lead, ride, tie, or fasten any animal other than those commonly known as household pets in such a manner as to permit it to remain on or go along any parking strip, sidewalk area or public pathway. [Ord. 100 § 6, 1987].


9.20.050 Fireworks prohibited.

(1) No person shall use or possess fireworks in, around, or upon any city park, city building, city parking lot or other city facility, specifically including the downtown boardwalk and the Empire boat ramp and fishing dock, except pursuant to an authorized permit for public display or otherwise approved for public purposes.

(2) “Fireworks” means any combustible or explosive composition or substance including, but not limited to, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, rockets, wheel colored fires, fountains, mines, serpents, flitter sparklers, ground spinners, illuminating torches, wheels, snakes or similar smoke-producing materials, and combination items. [Ord. 203 § 1, 1993].


Chapter 9.25 OTHER OFFENSES

Sections:

9.25.010    Inhaling toxic vapors.

9.25.020    Deliveries to prisoners.

9.25.030    Offenses outside city limits.


9.25.010 Inhaling toxic vapors.

(1) No person shall deliberately smell or inhale any drug, or any other noxious substance, vapor or chemical containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons, or other substance containing solvents releasing vapors, in such excessive quantities as to cause conditions of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefaction, hallucination or dulling of the brain or nervous system. This applies with particularity, but is not limited to, model airplane glue, finger nail polish or any other substance or chemical which has the above-described effect on the brain or nervous system.

(2) Any person found within the city visibly in a condition of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefaction or hallucination shall, if the condition was caused by the inhaling of the substances described above, be presumed to have inhaled the substance within the city.

(3) The deliberate inhaling of a substance as described in subsection (1) of this section, if it produces a visible manifestation of a condition of the nature described shall be prima facie evidence that the person so inhaling did so with the intent of producing such a state or condition.

(4) This section does not apply to the use of inhalants, or the condition produced thereby, where the use is made or conditions induced by or under the express direction or written prescription of a licensed physician for medical purposes. [Ord. 100 § 7, 1987].


9.25.020 Deliveries to prisoners.

No person shall knowingly deliver any intoxicating liquor, dangerous or narcotic drugs, controlled substance, or contraband, as defined by state law, to a person in custody or confined in a city detention facility. [Ord. 100 § 10, 1987].


9.25.030 Offenses outside city limits.

Where permitted by Oregon law, an act made unlawful by this title shall constitute an offense when committed on any property owned or leased by the city, even though outside the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 100 § 21, 1987].


Chapter 9.30 BANKRUPT, LIQUIDATING AND CLOSING-OUT SALES

Sections:

9.30.010    License required.

9.30.020    License application.

9.30.030    Duration of sales.

9.30.040    Issuance of license.

9.30.050    Revocation of license.

9.30.060    Suspension of license.

9.30.070    Penalties.


9.30.010 License required.

Except for sales under judicial process, it is unlawful for any person, partnership, partner or association to conduct bankrupt sales, liquidating, closing-out, removal, quitting business or fire sales, or similarly designated sales, whether the property for sale is their property or whether they shall sell or offer for sale as agents, factors or employees of others, unless the person, firm, corporation or association desiring to hold such sales first obtains a license for the sale from the city of Coos Bay. This section applies to both owners of the property for sale and to their agents and employees. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1987].


9.30.020 License application.

(1) Any person, partnership, corporation or association desiring to hold a bankrupt sale or closing-out sale, as defined in this chapter, shall file with the city recorder a written application showing:

(a) The name or names of the legal owners of the merchandise to be disposed of at the sale;

(b) The name or names of those who will actually dispose of the merchandise at the sale;

(c) A receipt or other reasonable evidence from officials of Coos County showing that any taxes due on the merchandise, if taxed or taxable, have been paid.

(2) A statement of the street and number where the sale is to be conducted and of the present, immediate past and future address, if any, of the applicant must be filed with the city recorder.

(3) In addition to the general application form to be filed, the applicant shall file a statement in writing showing all of the facts regarding the sale, the reasons for the sale, and all details necessary to fully identify the goods to be sold. The applicant shall specify the period of time during which the sale will continue, not to exceed a period of six months, except as provided in this chapter.

(4) The kind or type of merchandise mentioned in the application shall be defined as “all articles usually or customarily sold by the retail merchant to the public in the ordinary course of trade.” [Ord. 105 § 2, 1987].


9.30.030 Duration of sales.

All sales, as defined in this chapter, shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than six months in all from the commencement of the sale. Extension may be granted if need is shown. [Ord. 105 § 3, 1987].


9.30.040 Issuance of license.

No license shall be issued for a sale as defined in this chapter unless the applicant appears to be acting in good faith and disposing of stock for the purpose of any of the following: (1) retiring from business; (2) removing inventoried stock to a new location; (3) the applicant has suffered a fire loss of a substantial amount within 30 days prior to the date of the sale; (4) the applicant is in a voluntary bankrupt condition; or any similarly designated sales. [Ord. 105 § 4, 1987].


9.30.050 Revocation of license.

The city of Coos Bay may revoke the license of any person, partnership, corporation, or association found guilty of violating this chapter, and no new license shall be issued to that person within one year. [Ord. 105 § 5, 1987].


9.30.060 Suspension of license.

Any person who utters any false statement in making application for a license to conduct a sale or who fails to comply with agreements or pledges made in the application shall immediately be deprived of the sale license, and no further license shall be issued to the person for one year. [Ord. 105 § 6, 1987].


9.30.070 Penalties.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. [Ord. 105 § 9, 1987].


Chapter 9.35 GRAFFITI

Sections:

9.35.010    Definitions.

9.35.020    Unlawful application of graffiti.

9.35.030    Unlawful possession of graffiti implement.

9.35.040    Unlawful failure to supervise minor.

9.35.050    Penalties.

9.35.060    Property defaced by graffiti as nuisance.


9.35.010 Definitions.

“Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, design or mark which is painted, drawn, scratched, etched, or otherwise affixed or attached to the surface of property without the prior authorization of the owner of the property.

“Graffiti implement” means any paint, ink, chalk, dye, marker, aerosol spray paint container or any other substance or instrument or article designed or adapted for spraying, marking, etching, or carving a surface.

“Owner” means a person who has lawful care, custody, control or possession of any property by legal title, equitable interest, lease, or by any other method or manner giving the person lawful care, custody, control or possession of any property, including, but not limited to, bailments and other custodial arrangements.

“Person” means an individual; a partnership, corporation, association, or other form of legal entity; any entity in fact.

“Property” means all real property, including the land itself, as well as all buildings, structures, improvements, trees and any other permanent fixtures or features of the real property; all tangible personal property, including all chattels and movables such as vehicles, vessels, movable equipment, movable machinery, furniture, and movable tools or devices. [Ord. 226 § 1, 1996].


9.35.020 Unlawful application of graffiti.

No person shall apply graffiti to any property, or solicit, command or conspire with another person to apply graffiti to any property. No person shall aid or abet, or agree to aid or abet another person in applying, planning or conspiring to apply graffiti. [Ord. 226 § 2, 1996].


9.35.030 Unlawful possession of graffiti implement.

No person may possess any graffiti implement with intent to apply graffiti. [Ord. 226 § 3, 1996].


9.35.040 Unlawful failure to supervise minor.

No parent, guardian or other person having lawful custody of any minor child shall knowingly or negligently permit or allow such minor child to violate CBMC 9.35.020 and 9.35.030. [Ord. 226 § 4, 1996].


9.35.050 Penalties.

(1) Impoundment. At the time any person is stopped and a citation is issued for a violation of this chapter, any graffiti implements in possession of such person may be immediately seized and impounded by the officer issuing the citation. Upon determination of guilt, all such impounded graffiti implements shall be forfeited.

(2) Fines. Violations of CBMC 9.35.020 and 9.35.030 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00; a mandatory minimum fine of $100.00 shall be imposed upon conviction. Violation of CBMC 9.35.040 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.00; a mandatory minimum fine of $250.00 shall be imposed upon conviction.

(3) Restitution. Any person found guilty of violations of CBMC 9.35.020, 9.35.030 and 9.35.040 shall be ordered to pay restitution to the injured property owner.

(4) Community Service. In lieu of, or in addition to, any fine imposed pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, a person convicted of violations of CBMC 9.35.020 and 9.35.030 may be ordered to perform community service for an amount of time, which shall be not less than 40 hours. The period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the court. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the person to community service which will have the greatest rehabilitative effect, including, but not limited to, community service which contributes to the removal of graffiti.

(5) Parental Civil Liability. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the parent, parents or other persons with legal custody of a minor child shall be liable for actual damages to persons or property resulting from the minor child’s violation of CBMC 9.35.020 and 9.35.030. [Ord. 226 § 5, 1996].


9.35.060 Property defaced by graffiti as nuisance.

Any graffiti which the owner allows to remain on his/her property or which the owner fails to promptly remove may be declared a nuisance, and subject to abatement proceedings as provided in Chapter 8.10 CBMC. [Ord. 226 § 6, 1996].


Chapter 9.40 SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY

Sections:

9.40.010    Definitions.

9.40.020    Specified crime property prohibited.

9.40.030    Preliminary notice.

9.40.040    Complaint – Burdens of proof – Defenses – Stay of proceedings.

9.40.050    Emergency closures.

9.40.060    Closure order and civil penalties – Costs.

9.40.070    Relocation costs.

9.40.080    Relief from closure order.


9.40.010 Definitions.

“Costs” means those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of real property, court costs, and other expenses incurred in enforcing this chapter.

“Enforcement officer” means the chief of police for the city of Coos Bay, or his or her designee.

“Owner” means any person holding or claiming to hold title to real property, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee in possession, a vendee under a land sale contract, or a beneficiary under a deed of trust; any person having or claiming to have lawful care, custody, control or possession of real property by any method or manner whatsoever; an occupant of any real property who is engaging or has engaged in any criminal activity on the real property which may be the basis for a determination the property is specified crime property, and who is known by the person holding or claiming title to the real property or who otherwise has or claims to have lawful care, custody, control or possession of the property to be engaging or to have engaged in such criminal activity.

“Person” means any natural person, association, partnership or corporation, or other form of legal entity or entity in fact capable of owning or using property.

“Real property” means any real property, including, but not limited to, lots, parcels, buildings, houses, rooms, structures or any separate part or portion thereof, whether temporary or permanent.

“Specified crime property” means any kind of real property where a crime involving controlled substances as defined in ORS Chapter 475, gambling as defined in ORS 167.117, or prostitution as defined by ORS 167.007 has occurred or is occurring.

“Tenant” means a residential tenant, as defined by the Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, and any other person holding real property under the terms of a lease. [Ord. 225 § 1, 1996].


9.40.020 Specified crime property prohibited.

(1) It is unlawful for any real property to be used or maintained as specified crime property within the city of Coos Bay.

(2) It is unlawful for any owner to use or maintain or to allow the use or maintenance of real property as specified crime property.

(3) It is unlawful for an owner to use or occupy or to allow or permit any person to use or occupy, by lease or otherwise, any real property during any period such property is subject to an order of closure pursuant to CBMC 9.40.060. [Ord. 225 § 2, 1996].


9.40.030 Preliminary notice.

(1) When the enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe real property has been or is being used or maintained in violation of CBMC 9.40.020, the enforcement officer may institute proceedings against the owner for the closure of the real property and the imposition of civil penalties.

(2) The enforcement officer shall provide preliminary notice of the institution of proceedings in the following manner:

(a) The enforcement officer shall notify the owner in writing that the structure is believed to be specified crime property. The notice shall contain the following information:

(i) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the structure;

(ii) A statement the structure is specified crime property, along with specific findings supporting this determination. The findings shall contain a concise description of the conditions establishing a violation of this chapter.

(b) A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at least 10 days prior to the filing of a complaint. Service of the notice shall be made by personal delivery or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the owner at the address as it appears on the tax rolls and the address as it appears on the last recorded instrument of conveyance, if different from the address specified on the tax rolls, and to the owner’s actual address, if known to be different from the above.

(c) A copy of the notice shall be served on the occupant or occupants of the real property not less than 10 days prior to the filing of a complaint. Notice shall be made by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, or by personal delivery to the occupant or occupants at the real property.

(d) A copy of the notice may be posted at the real property if 10 days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner, and no response has been received by the city during that time.

(e) The enforcement officer shall send a copy of the notice to the district attorney for Coos County, as well as any other documentation supporting closure and the imposition of civil penalties.

(3) After notice has been given pursuant to this section, the city manager may authorize the filing of a complaint. Nothing in this section shall limit the power of the city manager to enter into an agreement with the owner for the voluntary abatement of conditions giving rise to the violation. [Ord. 225 § 3, 1996].


9.40.040 Complaint – Burdens of proof – Defenses – Stay of proceedings.

(1) An action shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint alleging facts constituting a violation, containing a legal description of the real property and alleging that the owner has been notified of the violation at least 10 days prior to the filing of the complaint.

(2) The city shall have the initial burden to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, the real property is specified crime property.

(3) Evidence of the real property’s general reputation and the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting the real property shall be admissible and competent.

(4) It is a defense to an action seeking closure of the real property that the owner, at the time in question, could not in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence determine that the real property was being used or maintained as specified crime property.

(5) If prior to trial, the owner and the city enter into an agreement, stipulating to the abatement of the conditions giving rise to the complaint, the court upon motion by the city may stay proceedings for a period not to exceed 60 days. The owner may thereafter petition the court for additional periods of time as may be necessary to complete the actions stipulated to in the agreement. If the owner is not diligently pursuing the actions stipulated to in the agreement, the city may apply for release at any time prior to the end of the stay. [Ord. 225 § 4, 1996].


9.40.050 Emergency closures.

If the enforcement officer determines real property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare by virtue of activity which would establish a violation of this chapter, the city may apply to the court for a preliminary injunction ordering closure of the real property. In such event, no preliminary notice required under CBMC 9.40.030 need be given. [Ord. 225 § 5, 1996].


9.40.060 Closure order and civil penalties – Costs.

(1) If real property is determined to be specified crime property, the court may order closure of such property for a period of up to one year, and assess a civil penalty against the owner of up to $500.00 for each day the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions constituting the violation. A person shall be deemed to have had knowledge at a date no later than the date preliminary notice is provided pursuant to CBMC 9.40.030. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider the following factors:

(a) The actions taken by the owner or owners to mitigate or correct the problem at the real property;

(b) The financial condition of the owner;

(c) Whether the problem at the real property was repeated or continuous;

(d) The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

(e) The economic or financial benefit accruing or likely to accrue to the owner as a result of the failure to correct conditions at the real property;

(f) The cooperativeness of the owner with the city;

(g) The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition;

(h) Any other factors deemed material by the court.

(2) If an order of closure is granted, the city may physically secure the real property against use or occupancy if the owner fails to do so within the time specified by the order. All costs reasonably incurred by the city in such action shall be a lien upon the property.

(3) The city shall prepare a statement of costs, which shall be served on the owner and filed with the court. If no objection to the statement is filed with the court within 14 days of the date of service, the statement of costs shall be entered as part of the judgment, and a certified copy filed as a lien against the real property in the city’s lien docket. Liens shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum, commencing with the date of entry of judgment or order of closure. [Ord. 225 § 6, 1996].


9.40.070 Relocation costs.

Any tenant required to relocate by a closure order is entitled to reasonable relocation costs, to be paid by the owner, if the tenant moved into the real property after either:

(1) The owner received preliminary notice under CBMC 9.40.030; or

(2) The owner was served with summons and complaint for a preliminary injunction under CBMC 9.40.050.

In any action to recover relocation costs, the tenant shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys’ fees associated with recovery. [Ord. 225 § 7, 1996].


9.40.080 Relief from closure order.

(1) The owner of real property may obtain relief from a closure order if the owner:

(a) Appears and pays all costs associated with the proceedings;

(b) Files a bond, in an amount not less than the tax-assessed value of the structure, and keeps such bond in force for a period of not less than one year; and

(c) Enters into a stipulation with the city to immediately abate the conditions, to make every effort to prevent the same or similar conditions from occurring at any time.

(2) If the owner violates any term of the stipulation entered into according to subsection (1) of this section, the entire bond shall be forfeited. [Ord. 225 § 8, 1996].


Chapter 9.45 VIOLATION – PENALTY

Sections:

9.45.010    Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinances.

9.45.020    Attempt to commit offenses.

9.45.030    Penalty.

9.45.040    Nuisance abatement.


9.45.010 Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinances.

No person shall solicit, aid, abet, employ or engage another, or confederate with another, to violate a provision of this title or any other ordinance of the city. [Ord. 100 § 22, 1987].


9.45.020 Attempt to commit offenses.

A person who attempts to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this title or any ordinance of the city, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. [Ord. 100 § 23, 1987].


9.45.030 Penalty.

A violation of any provisions of this title is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. However, if there is a violation of any provision identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in the state law. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. [Ord. 100 § 24, 1987].


9.45.040 Nuisance abatement.

No provision in this title precludes the abatement of a nuisance as provided in other city ordinances. [Ord. 100 § 25, 1987].

 


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    Uniform Traffic Ordinance

10.10    General Traffic Regulations

10.15    Parking Regulations

10.20    Bicycles

10.25    Pedestrians

10.28    Unlawful Transfer on a Highway

10.30    Skateboards and Rollerskates

10.35    Parades and Processions

10.40    Towing of Illegal Vehicles

10.45    Penalties


Chapter 10.05 UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

10.05.010    Short title.

10.05.020    Definitions.

10.05.030    Powers of the council.

10.05.040    Powers of the city manager.

10.05.050    Public danger.

10.05.060    Standards.

10.05.070    Authority of police and fire officers.


10.05.010 Short title.

This title may be cited as the Coos Bay uniform traffic ordinance. [Ord. 114 § 1, 1987].


10.05.020 Definitions.

In addition to the definition contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following mean:

“Bus or taxi stand” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign or other marking for use by buses or taxis loading or unloading passengers.

“Downtown business district” means the area of the city zoned as central commercial (C-1) pursuant to the city’s land development ordinance.

“Holiday” means Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the council to be a holiday.

“Loading zone” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.

“Play street” means that portion of a street designated and posted to restrict traffic and permit recreational use.

“Recreational vehicle” means an oversize vehicle, used primarily for recreational purposes, which cannot be parked in standard parking spaces.

Street. The terms “highway,” “road,” and “street” shall be considered synonymous, unless the context precludes such construction. “Street” includes alleys.

“Traffic lane” means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic. [Ord. 489 § 1, 2017; Ord. 174 § 1, 1991; Ord. 114 § 2, 1987].


10.05.030 Powers of the council.

(1) Subject to state laws, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated by this title or another ordinance. The powers of the council include, but are not limited to, those listed in this section.

(2) The council, by resolution, may establish or alter traffic controls which shall become effective upon the installation of appropriate signs, signals or other markings. These traffic controls may designate and regulate:

(a) The parking and standing of vehicles by:

(i) Classifying portions of streets or parking lots upon which parking or standing or both is prohibited totally, or during certain hours.

(ii) Designating the angle of parking if other than parallel to the curb.

(iii) Designating city-owned or leased lots or property upon which public parking will be permitted.

(b) Through streets and one-way streets.

(c) Truck routes.

(d) Special speed regulations for city parks and municipal parking lots.

(e) Repealed by Ord. 504.

(3) The council, by resolution, may establish a schedule of fines for improper parking.

(4) The council, by resolution, may establish a schedule of fees for permit parking and for delivery or service permit cards. [Ord. 504 § 1, 2018; Ord. 114 § 3, 1987].


10.05.040 Powers of the city manager.

The city manager or designee shall exercise the following powers and duties:

(1) Implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council and his or her own orders by installing, maintaining, removing, and altering parking and traffic control devices. The installation shall be based on the standards contained in the “Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.”

(2) After adequate signs, signals, or other markings are erected indicating such regulation, the manager may:

(a) Establish the time limit for legal parking in limited parking areas.

(b) Establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier vehicles.

(c) Designate the location of passenger loading zones for use in front of the entrance to any hotel auditorium, theater, church, school or other public building.

(d) Designate loading zones, not to exceed two on any one side of a block.

(e) Designate intersections where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U-turns, and the times when the prohibitions shall apply.

(f) Designate crosswalks.

(g) Designate safety zones of a kind and character and at such places as deemed necessary for pedestrian safety.

(h) Designate play streets, or such hours when certain streets may be used as such, on which no person shall drive a vehicle except when the driver of the vehicle has business or resides within the closed area.

(i) Designate permit parking areas.

(j) Direct the removal or reduction in height of any hedge, shrubbery, tree, or other visual obstruction to traffic safety.

(k) Make and enforce for up to 90 days temporary, experimental or emergency regulations consistent with this title after adequate signs, signals or other notices are erected clearly indicating such regulations.

(l) The temporary closing of certain streets, or portions thereof. [Ord. 504 § 2, 2018; Ord. 114 § 4, 1987].


10.05.050 Public danger.

Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the manager or his or her designee may install temporary traffic control devices. [Ord. 114 § 5, 1987].


10.05.060 Standards.

The traffic designs and control device regulations of the manager or his or her designee shall be based on:

(1) Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations.

(2) Standards, limitations, and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

(3) Other recognized traffic control standards. [Ord. 114 § 6, 1987].


10.05.070 Authority of police and fire officers.

(1) It is the duty of police officers and others designated by the manager to enforce the provisions of this title.

(2) In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the public safety department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title. [Ord. 114 § 7, 1987].


Chapter 10.10 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.10.010    Crossing private property.

10.10.020    Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

10.10.030    Unlawful riding.

10.10.040    Skateboards, skates and similar devices.

10.10.050    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.10.060    Removing glass and debris.

10.10.070    Storage of motor vehicles on streets.

10.10.080    Obstructing streets.

10.10.090    Repealed.

10.10.100    Speed limits in public parks.

10.10.110    Motor vehicles in parks.

10.10.120    Use of dynamic braking devices.

10.10.130    Existing control devices and markings.


10.10.010 Crossing private property.

No operator of a motor vehicle shall proceed from one street to another street by crossing private property or premises not open to the public. This provision does not apply to the operator of a motor vehicle who stops on the property to procure or provide goods or services. [Ord. 114 § 11, 1987].


10.10.020 Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

No person shall board or alight from any motor vehicle while the vehicle is in motion. [Ord. 114 § 12, 1987].


10.10.030 Unlawful riding.

No operator of a motor vehicle shall permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a motor vehicle on a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise. [Ord. 174 § 2, 1991; Ord. 114 § 13, 1987].


10.10.040 Skateboards, skates and similar devices.

No person shall, while riding on or by means of a skateboard, rollerskates, a coaster, skis, a sled, a toy vehicle, or a similar device:

(1) Use any street, other than a play street designated by the city, except while legally crossing at a crosswalk;

(2) Repealed by Ord. 489;

(3) Use any parking lot; or

(4) Ride on any sidewalk in a reckless manner or without exercising due care for the safety of others. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way. [Ord. 489 § 1, 2017; Ord. 114 § 14, 1987].


10.10.050 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

(1) The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive on a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

(2) No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood, or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.

(3) No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or a device moved by a motor vehicle onto a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization from the city. A person who causes damage shall be responsible for the cost of repair. [Ord. 114 § 15, 1987].


10.10.060 Removing glass and debris.

A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be on a street shall remove the glass or other debris from the street. [Ord. 114 § 16, 1987].


10.10.070 Storage of motor vehicles on streets.

No person shall store or permit to be stored on a street, without permission of the council, a motor vehicle or personal property for a period in excess of 72 consecutive hours. Failure to remove a motor vehicle or other personal property after a period of 72 consecutive hours constitutes prima facie evidence of storage. [Ord. 114 § 17, 1987].


10.10.080 Obstructing streets.

No person shall park or leave on a street, parking strip, sidewalk or curb any vehicle part, trailer, box, ware, merchandise of any description, or any other thing that impedes traffic or obstructs the view, except as is allowed by this title or other ordinances of the city. [Ord. 114 § 18, 1987].


10.10.090 Vehicles in pedestrian mall.

Repealed by Ord. 489. [Ord. 114 § 19, 1987].


10.10.100 Speed limits in public parks.

No person shall drive a vehicle on a street in a public park of this city at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour unless authorized signs indicate otherwise. [Ord. 114 § 20, 1987].


10.10.110 Motor vehicles in parks.

No person, other than a city employee in the course of his or her duties, shall operate a motor vehicle on a trail, path or road in a city park unless the trail, path or road is specifically designated by the council for motor vehicles. [Ord. 114 § 21, 1987].


10.10.120 Use of dynamic braking devices.

No person shall use any dynamic braking device on any motor vehicle, except to avoid imminent danger to persons or property. A dynamic braking device, commonly referred to as a Jake or Jacob Brake, is one used primarily on trucks and buses to convert a motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of vehicle braking without the use of wheel brakes. [Ord. 114 § 22, 1987].


10.10.130 Existing control devices and markings.

Parking and traffic control devices and markings installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title are lawfully authorized. [Ord. 114 § 69, 1987].


Chapter 10.15 PARKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.15.010    Method of parking.

10.15.020    Prohibited parking or standing.

10.15.030    Prohibited markings.

10.15.040    Prohibited parking.

10.15.050    City parking lots.

10.15.060    Use of loading zone.

10.15.070    Buses and taxicabs.

10.15.080    Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

10.15.090    Lights on parked vehicle.

10.15.100    Extension of parking time.

10.15.110    Unattended vehicles.

10.15.120    Exemption.

10.15.130    Parking permits.

10.15.140    Citation of illegally parked vehicle.

10.15.150    Repealed.

10.15.160    Registered owner presumption.

10.15.170    Repealed.


10.15.010 Method of parking.

(1) No person shall park a motor vehicle by backing into any parking space marked for diagonal, angle or perpendicular parking.

(2) Where parking spaces are designated on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible or except when it is necessary to temporarily use a portion of an abutting parking space to load and unload from the vehicle. Under such conditions, the person loading or unloading may temporarily utilize the adjacent space, but shall immediately park or stand the vehicle entirely within a single marked space on completion of the loading or unloading.

(3) No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking.

(4) When the operator of a vehicle discovers that the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. [Ord. 114 § 26, 1987].


10.15.020 Prohibited parking or standing.

No person shall park or stand:

(1) A vehicle in violation of state motor vehicle laws or in violation of a lawfully erected parking limitation sign or marking.

(2) A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of 30 consecutive minutes in any two-hour period.

(3) A vehicle upon any parkway, except where authorized by the city.

(4) A logging truck on any residential street of the city or any residential area of the city. [Ord. 114 § 27, 1987].


10.15.030 Prohibited markings.

No person shall letter, mark, paint or otherwise label a street to restrict or otherwise control parking unless the person is performing official duties for the governmental unit responsible for maintaining street markings. [Ord. 114 § 28, 1987].


10.15.040 Prohibited parking.

No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked on a street for the principal purpose of:

(1) Displaying the vehicle for sale.

(2) Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(3) Displaying advertising from the vehicle.

(4) Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized. [Ord. 114 § 29, 1987].


10.15.050 City parking lots.

No person shall:

(1) Park, store or leave any motor or other vehicle in a city parking lot for more than 24 hours.

(2) Drive, operate or place any motor vehicle in a city parking lot except for the purpose of parking.

(3) Drive or operate any vehicle in a city parking lot while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug.

(4) Drive or operate any vehicle in a city parking lot at night without lights as required by state law for operation of vehicles at night on public streets and highways.

(5) Drive or operate any motor vehicle in a city parking lot at a speed greater than five miles per hour or at a speed greater than will permit the driver to exercise proper control of the vehicle.

(6) Throw, leave or place on a city parking lot any glass, debris, junk, refuse, metal, trash or other materials.

(7) Park or drive in a city parking lot any vehicle having cleats or other metallic devices on the wheels that may damage the surfacing material on the parking lot.

(8) Park or place in a city parking lot any vehicle, truck or trailer of an overall length of 18 feet or more except in areas designated for oversize or recreational vehicles.

(9) Park or place any vehicle, truck or trailer in any city lot or on any street temporarily designated no parking. [Ord. 297 § 1, 2000; Ord. 174 § 3, 1991; Ord. 114 § 30, 1987].


10.15.060 Use of loading zone.

No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. When the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, the loading and unloading shall not exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed 10 minutes for loading or unloading of merchandise from a private vehicle or 30 minutes for loading or unloading materials or freight from a commercial vehicle. [Ord. 114 § 31, 1987].


10.15.070 Buses and taxicabs.

No person shall park or stand a bus or taxi on a street in a business district at any place other than at a bus stand or taxi stand, respectively. However, this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxi from temporarily stopping for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the loading or unloading of passengers. [Ord. 114 § 32, 1987].


10.15.080 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand, or other than a taxi in a taxi stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when it does not interfere with any bus or taxi waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. [Ord. 114 § 33, 1987].


10.15.090 Lights on parked vehicle.

No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this title on a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or object at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle. [Ord. 114 § 34, 1987].


10.15.100 Extension of parking time.

Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block or lot shall not extend the time limits for parking. Continued parking beyond the single limit for any parking space shall constitute a separate offense for each period or portion of a single limit for any such parking space during which the vehicle remains parked. [Ord. 174 § 4, 1991; Ord. 114 § 35, 1987].


10.15.110 Unattended vehicles.

When a police officer finds a motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station. [Ord. 114 § 36, 1987].


10.15.120 Exemption.

The provisions of this title that regulate the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles do not apply to:

(1) A vehicle of the city, county, state, or a public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street.

(2) A vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of mail.

(3) A vehicle of a disabled person who complies with the provisions of ORS 811.610 to 811.630.

(4) Emergency vehicles performing their duty. [Ord. 114 § 37, 1987].


10.15.130 Parking permits.

(1) Definitions.

(a) “Service or construction permit” means a permit to allow the parking of a vehicle to engage in construction or to provide a service to a downtown business in excess of posted time limits.

(b) “Customer courtesy permit” means a permit to identify customer vehicles using loading zones, or permits issued to merchants for distribution to customers needing occasionally to park in excess of posted time limits.

(c) “Merchant vehicle permit” means a permit to identify a merchant’s vehicles used for the purposes of delivery or service.

(d) “Parking permit” means a permit issued to park a vehicle in excess of posted time limits in certain designated areas.

(2) Issuance. Applications for service or construction permits, customer courtesy permits, merchant vehicle permits and parking permits shall be made to the finance department of the city of Coos Bay. No permit shall be issued by the finance department unless the applicant first demonstrates special parking needs sufficient to support the issuance of a permit. Upon finding by the finance department that the applicant has demonstrated such need, a permit shall be issued, along with necessary identification cards and instructions for the permit’s use.

(3) Fees – Additional Rules and Regulations. The city council by resolution shall establish permit fees, and may establish unmarked loading zones and other rules and regulations to implement this section.

(4) Use – Revocation – Violation.

(a) No person shall park in excess of posted time limits or in any restricted area without first having obtained the required permit.

(b) Any permit used for a purpose other than that for which it was specifically issued shall be automatically revoked without further action from the city. At the time the permit is revoked, the holder must immediately return the permit card to the finance department.

(c) Any person who parks without first obtaining the necessary permit, who uses a validly issued permit in violation of this title or who fails to return a revoked permit card will receive a citation. The police officer or parking control officer will issue a citation at the time the violation is discovered and place it on the vehicle. Violations are subject to a fine, which shall be established by resolution of the city council.

(5) Merchant Vehicle Permits.

(a) A business shall be entitled to use their merchant vehicle permits only in those parking spaces which are actually adjacent to their business and designated “merchant vehicle permit area.”

(b) Only service or delivery vehicles having valid merchant vehicle permits shall have unlimited parking in the merchant vehicle parking area. All other loading and unloading activities not covered by merchant vehicle permits shall be limited to a total of 30 minutes.

(c) The use of merchant vehicle permits in vehicles used for transportation of employees of businesses, including owners or salaried employees, is prohibited unless the vehicles are used for service or delivery in connection with the business holding the merchant vehicle permit.

(d) All businesses and firms holding valid merchant vehicle permits shall ensure their vehicles do not prevent other persons entitled to use merchant vehicle permit parking areas from using these areas for loading and unloading activities.

(6) Common Carriers. Common carriers and vehicles used for loading or unloading merchandise and having a gross weight of over 20,000 pounds shall be permitted to load and unload in front of the driveway of the business being served by the carrier or vehicle; provided, that sidewalks and streets are unobstructed and no persons are endangered by such loading and unloading; provided, however, that the common carrier or vehicle shall not be left unattended for periods of time greater than five minutes. No common carrier or vehicle utilizing a merchant vehicle permit parking area or loading zone must obtain a permit otherwise required by this section, unless use of the area will be for periods of time greater than one hour.

(7) Publicly Owned Vehicles.

(a) Vehicles owned by or under control of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Oregon State Police, any county sheriff of the state of Oregon, or any police department of any municipality of the state of Oregon may park in any area requiring a permit without first obtaining such permit.

(b) All other publicly owned or controlled vehicles shall obtain any permit required by this chapter and shall be subject to any other parking regulations of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 236 § 1, 1997; Ord. 114 § 38, 1987].


10.15.140 Citation of illegally parked vehicle.

When a vehicle is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter, the officer finding such vehicle may take its license number and any further information displayed on the vehicle that may identify its owner, and may conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation instructing the operator to answer to the charge by paying the specified penalty or by posting bail prior to the designated court appearance. The penalty shall be as set by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 174 § 5, 1991; Ord. 114 § 61, 1987].


10.15.150 Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 174. [Ord. 114 § 62, 1987].


10.15.160 Registered owner presumption.

In a proceeding against a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle was registered to the defendant at the time of the violation shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was the owner. [Ord. 114 § 63, 1987].


10.15.170 Impoundment of vehicles.

Repealed by Ord. 273. [Ord. 114 § 66, 1987].


Chapter 10.20 BICYCLES

Sections:

10.20.010    Operating rules.

10.20.020    Bike rentals.

10.20.030    Impounding of bicycles.


10.20.010 Operating rules.

In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this title and state law pertaining to bicycles, no person shall leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. [Ord. 114 § 41, 1987].


10.20.020 Bike rentals.

No person shall rent or offer a bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is equipped in accordance with the Oregon Motor Vehicle Code. [Ord. 114 § 42, 1987].


10.20.030 Impounding of bicycles.

A bicycle, or part thereof, left on public property and not secured in a public bike rack for a period in excess of 24 hours will be considered abandoned and may be impounded by the police department. A bicycle, or part thereof, left in a public bike rack for a period in excess of 72 hours will be considered abandoned and may be impounded by the police department. [Ord. 505 § 1, 2018; Ord. 114 § 43, 1987].


Chapter 10.25 PEDESTRIANS

Sections:

10.25.010    Pedestrian crossing.

10.25.020    Pedestrian walking.


10.25.010 Pedestrian crossing.

(1) No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks where crosswalks are marked.

(2) Where there is no marked crosswalk, no pedestrian shall cross a street at any place other than by the most direct route to the opposite curb. [Ord. 114 § 46, 1987].


10.25.020 Pedestrian walking.

Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon the adjacent roadway. [Ord. 114 § 47, 1987].


Chapter 10.28 UNLAWFUL TRANSFER ON A HIGHWAY

Sections:

10.28.010    Short title.

10.28.020    Offenses.

10.28.030    Applicability.

10.28.040    Penalty.


10.28.010 Short title. 

Short title: unlawful transfer on a highway. [Ord. 462 § 1, 2014].


10.28.020 Offenses.

A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer on a highway or street if the person:

(1) While a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, right-of-way, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Coos Bay, gives or relinquishes possession or control of, or allows another person in the vehicle to give or relinquish possession or control of any money or tangible personal property to a pedestrian; or

(2) While a pedestrian, accepts, receives or retains possession or control of any money or tangible personal property from a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, right-of-way, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 462 § 2, 2014].


10.28.030 Applicability.

This chapter does not apply if the vehicle is legally parked. This chapter also does not apply to persons participating in a “pedestrian activity,” as defined in OAR 734 Division 58, for which a permit has been issued by Oregon Department of Transportation, so long as all terms of such permit are being met. [Ord. 462 § 3, 2014].


10.28.040 Penalty. 

Any person found violating this chapter shall be guilty of committing a traffic violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. [Ord. 462 § 4, 2014].


Chapter 10.30 SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLERSKATES

Sections:

10.30.010    Definitions.

10.30.020    Prohibited acts.

10.30.030    Penalties.


10.30.010 Definitions.

“Downtown area” means that area within the city of Coos Bay zoned central commercial (C-1) pursuant to CBMC Title 17, as amended.

Negligent. A person is negligent when he or she fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or a circumstance exists.

Reckless. A person is reckless when he or she is aware of and consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or a circumstance exists.

“Recreational street” means any street, or portion thereof, designated and posted to restrict traffic and permit recreational use.

“Rollerskates” means a pair of shoes with small wheels attached which are used for gliding on a paved surface. As used in this chapter, “rollerskates” includes in-line skates.

“Sidewalk” means any paved walk for pedestrians. As used in this chapter, “sidewalk” includes the city of Coos Bay facility known as “the Boardwalk.”

“Skateboard” means a short board mounted on small wheels that is used for coasting and often for performing athletic stunts. As used in this chapter, “skateboard” includes coasters, toy vehicles, and other similar devices.

“Street” means any thoroughfare. As used in this chapter, “street” includes any alley. [Ord. 233 § 1, 1996; Ord. 228 § 1, 1996].


10.30.020 Prohibited acts.

(1) No person shall ride or use a skateboard or rollerskates on any street, other than a recreational street, except while crossing at a designated crosswalk. No person shall ride or use a skateboard in the downtown area or on any parking lot.

(2) No person shall ride on or use a skateboard or rollerskates in a negligent or reckless manner. All persons riding on or using a skateboard or rollerskates shall yield right-of-way to any pedestrian or motorized vehicle.

(3) No person shall ride or use a skateboard or rollerskates on any street, plaza, parking lot or other private or public area where such street, plaza, parking lot or other area has been posted against the use of skateboards or rollerskates. [Ord. 295 § 1, 2000; Ord. 233 § 2, 1996; Ord. 228 § 2, 1996].


10.30.030 Penalties.

(1) Impoundment. At the time any person is stopped and a citation issued for a violation of this chapter, any skateboard used in the violation may be immediately seized and impounded as evidence by the officer issuing the citation.

(2) Fines. Upon first conviction for a violation of this chapter, a fine shall be imposed, not to exceed $500.00; a mandatory minimum fine as prescribed by ORS shall be imposed. Subsequent convictions shall be subject to enhanced penalties as provided by subsection (3) of this section.

(3) Repeat Offenders. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter on successive occasions shall be subject to enhanced penalties. If a person is convicted of a second offense within one year of his or her first conviction, then the fine imposed shall be an amount not less than twice the amount of the fine imposed upon the first conviction. If a person is convicted of a third offense at any time thereafter, then the fine imposed shall be an amount not less than double the fine imposed for the second conviction, and the person’s skateboard shall be forfeited. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2010].


Chapter 10.35 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS

Sections:

10.35.010    Prohibited activity.

10.35.020    Parade permit.

10.35.030    Appeal to council.

10.35.040    Offenses against parade.

10.35.050    Permit revocable.

10.35.060    Funeral procession.


10.35.010 Prohibited activity.

No person shall organize or participate in a parade on a public street without obtaining a permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people using the public right-of-way and consisting of 100 or more persons or 10 or more vehicles. [Ord. 114 § 51, 1987].


10.35.020 Parade permit.

(1) Application for parade permits shall be made at the police department at least seven days prior to the intended date of the parade, unless the time is waived by the police chief.

(2) Applications shall include the following information:

(a) The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade.

(b) The date of the proposed parade.

(c) The desired route, including assembling points.

(d) The number of persons, vehicles, and animals that will be participating in the parade.

(e) The proposed starting and ending time.

(3) The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairperson.

(4) The police chief shall issue a parade permit conditioned on the applicant’s written agreement to comply with the terms of the permit unless the chief finds that:

(a) The time, route, and size of the parade will unreasonably disrupt the movement of other traffic.

(b) The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and contiguous areas that allowing the parade would deny reasonable police protection to the city.

(c) The parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has already been issued.

(d) Information contained in the application is found to be false or a material detail is omitted.

(e) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit.

(5) If one or more of the conditions listed in subsection (4) of this section, other than subsection (4)(e) of this section, exists, the police department may impose reasonable conditions in the permit, including but not limited to:

(a) Requiring an alternate date.

(b) Requiring an alternate route.

(c) Restricting the size of the parade.

(6) The police chief shall notify the applicant of the decision within three days after receipt of the application.

(7) If the police department proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the council. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 114 § 52, 1987].


10.35.030 Appeal to council.

(1) An applicant may appeal the decision of the police chief by filing a written request of appeal with the recorder within 48 hours after the police chief has proposed alternatives or refuses to issue a permit.

(2) The council shall schedule a hearing date, which shall not be later than three days following the filing of the written appeal with the recorder, and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he or she may appear either in person or by a representative. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 114 § 53, 1987].


10.35.040 Offenses against parade.

(1) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant.

(2) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade. [Ord. 114 § 54, 1987].


10.35.050 Permit revocable.

The police chief may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with public safety. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 114 § 55, 1987].


10.35.060 Funeral procession.

(1) No permit is required for a funeral procession.

(2) A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route that is both legal and practical.

(3) The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control.

(4) All motor vehicles in the funeral procession shall be operated with their lights on.

(5) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.

(6) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession.

(7) Each driver in the procession shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. [Ord. 114 § 56, 1987].

 


Chapter 10.40 TOWING OF ILLEGAL VEHICLES

Sections:

10.40.010    Definitions.

10.40.020    Towing without notice.

10.40.030    Towing after notice.

10.40.040    Inventory of vehicle.

10.40.050    Notice of removal.

10.40.060    Effect of notice of removal.

10.40.070    Release of vehicle.

10.40.080    Hearing to contest the validity of removal and custody.

10.40.090    Towing and storage liens.

10.40.100    Disposal of vehicles.

10.40.110    Abandoned vehicles prohibited.


10.40.010 Definitions.

Abandoned. For purposes of this chapter, a vehicle is considered “abandoned” if any of the following conditions exist:

(a) Is inoperable and has been left on public property or city right-of-way for more than 72 hours.

(b) Has remained illegally on public property or city right-of-way for more than 72 hours.

(c) Is not currently licensed through the Department of Transportation, if such a license is required by law, and has been left on public property or city right-of-way.

“Chief of police” means an authorized law enforcement officer of the city or another city employee authorized to enforce this chapter.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Department of Transportation” means the Oregon Department of Transportation, or other registration authority analogous to the Department of Transportation in any state other than Oregon.

“Hazardous vehicle” means a vehicle left in a location or condition that constitutes an immediate and continuous hazard to the safety of persons using the streets or alleys of the city. For example, and not for limitation, the following are hazardous vehicles:

(a) Vehicles blocking public or private rights-of-way.

(b) Vehicles with leaking petroleum or other hazardous fluids.

(c) Vehicles blocking fire hydrants.

(d) Vehicles with broken glass/windows.

“Owner” means any individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, or ownership of any interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.

“Person” means an individual; a corporation, partnership or other legal entity; and entity in fact.

“Police department” means the police department of the city of Coos Bay.

“Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. [Ord. 520 § 1, 2019; Ord. 241 § 1, 1997].


10.40.020 Towing without notice.

A police officer, without prior notice to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle, may cause a motor vehicle to be towed and impounded in the following circumstances:

(1) When the police officer reasonably believes the operator is driving the motor vehicle uninsured or without other means to prove financial responsibility as required by ORS 806.010;

(2) When the motor vehicle is illegally parked on a public street, private street, parking lot, or in a restricted space, zone, or traffic lane where parking is limited or prohibited to designated classes of vehicles or during designated periods of time, or where the motor vehicle at any time interferes with the intended use of such restricted space, zone or traffic lane;

(3) When the operator of the motor vehicle does not possess or cannot produce a valid operator’s license;

(4) When the motor vehicle is in the possession of a person taken into custody by the police officer and no other reasonable disposition of the motor vehicle is available;

(5) When the motor vehicle has not been registered or the operator is unable to produce a valid registration card;

(6) When a police officer has good cause to believe the motor vehicle is stolen;

(7) Repealed by Ord. 520;

(8) When a vehicle is left on a public right-of-way in such a location or manner as to create a hazard or obstruction to traffic. [Ord. 520 § 2, 2019; Ord. 241 § 2, 1997].


10.40.030 Towing after notice.

A police officer may provide written notice of intent to impound when the officer reasonably believes the vehicle is abandoned. Notice shall be sent to the owner of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation, and must state that the vehicle will be towed unless the owner removes the vehicle within five days of the date of mailing; notice of intent to impound shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the vehicle, and must state the vehicle will be towed on or after 10 days after the date of posting. Failure to provide notice under this section shall not affect the validity of any action taken to tow and impound an abandoned vehicle pursuant to CBMC 10.40.020.

(1) When a vehicle which has been previously tagged for tow is found in the same condition as described in CBMC 10.40.110 on which an intent-to-tow notice was affixed, within 30 days of the original notice, the owner shall be considered notified and the vehicle shall be towed without further notice by the chief of police.

(2) If no owner or previous owner information is available through the Department of Transportation or local records check the orange intent-to-tow sticker posted on the vehicle will be considered notification. [Ord. 520 § 3, 2019; Ord. 421 § 1, 2010].


10.40.040 Inventory of vehicle.

(1) The contents of any vehicle which is to be towed and impounded, with the exception of abandoned vehicles, shall be inventoried by the police officer. The inventory shall be conducted prior to towing except where there is reasonable suspicion to believe the safety of the police officer or other persons is at risk, in which case the inventory shall be made as soon as safely practical.

(2) The inventory shall be made for the following purposes only:

(a) To promptly identify personal property for the protection of such property while the vehicle is impounded;

(b) To prevent false claims for lost or stolen property;

(c) To locate toxic, flammable, explosive or other dangerous substances.

(3) The inventory shall be conducted throughout the passenger and engine compartments of the vehicle, including accessible areas under or within the dashboard areas, pockets in the doors or the back of the front seats, in any consoles between seats, and under floor mats and seats.

(4) Inventories of the following property shall be made:

(a) All personal property in plain view or in open containers;

(b) All open containers found in any unlocked compartments, including the trunk, glove box and car-top carriers;

(c) All open containers found in any locked compartments; provided, however, that person in possession of the vehicle consents to entry or the keys to the compartments have been left with the vehicle;

(d) No closed container shall be opened for inventory purposes; as used in this subsection, “closed container” means any container secured in such a manner that a reasonable person would know or should know that access requires permission.

(5) The police officer shall prepare a written list of property inventoried contemporaneously with the inventory. The inventory shall be signed and dated, including the time the inventory was complete. A copy of the inventory shall be filed with the police department, a copy shall be left with the vehicle or tendered to the person in control of the vehicle if present at the time of towing, and a copy shall be provided with the notice of removal under CBMC 10.40.050. [Ord. 421 § 2, 2010].


10.40.050 Notice of removal.

(1) After a vehicle has been towed and impounded and within 48 hours after the vehicle is towed, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, notice of removal shall be provided to the owner of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation by sending, certified mail, notice stating the following:

(a) The vehicle has been towed and impounded;

(b) The reason the vehicle has been towed and impounded;

(c) An address and telephone number that may be used to obtain information on the charges which must be paid before the vehicle will be released and on the procedures for procuring such release;

(d) The owner is entitled to and may request a hearing on the validity of the impoundment by filing a request for hearing with the Coos Bay police department within 10 calendar days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, of the receipt of the notice;

(e) The location of the vehicle;

(f) The vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of charges that have accrued as of the date of the notice, the rate of the daily storage charges and that daily storage charges will continue to accrue;

(g) The person who towed and is storing the vehicle has a lien on the vehicle for the towing and storage charges, and will retain possession of the vehicle until the charges are paid and, if the charges remain unpaid for more than 30 days, may have the vehicle sold to satisfy the lien;

(h) The vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed upon presentation to the police department of proof of ownership or right to possession, payment to the police department of the fee specified in CBMC 10.40.070, and payment to the person who towed and is storing the vehicle all towing and storage charges;

(i) The vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of if a person entitled to possession of the vehicle does not reclaim the vehicle within 30 days of the date the vehicle was towed.

(2) No notice is required under this section in the following circumstances:

(a) The vehicle does not display license plates or other identification by which registration or ownership of the vehicle can be determined; and

(b) The identity of the owner of the vehicle is not available from the Oregon Department of Transportation or other registration authority or the identity and address of the owner cannot reasonably otherwise be determined. [Ord. 241 § 5, 1997].


10.40.060 Effect of notice of removal.

If the owner of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation do not contact the city, in writing, within 30 days of the date notice of removal is provided, or 30 days from the date of towing and impoundment if no notice is required, then the vehicle shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle. [Ord. 241 § 6, 1997].


10.40.070 Release of vehicle.

A vehicle towed and impounded shall be released to a person entitled to lawful possession upon payment to the city of a fee of $75.00. Upon payment of the fee, the city shall authorize the person storing the vehicle to release the vehicle upon payment of towing and storage charges. Entitlement to lawful possession shall be established by the owner presenting proof of current ownership, proof of insurance and financial responsibility and proof of a valid operator’s license; provided, however, if the person seeking release does not have a valid operator’s license, the person may be accompanied by a licensed driver, who shall operate the vehicle after release. If the person seeking release is the holder of a validly perfected security interest, then entitlement to lawful possession shall be established by presentation of a certified copy of the document creating the security interest, along with a copy of a letter to the owner, with proof of mailing, providing notice the vehicle will be released to the secured party. [Ord. 241 § 7, 1997].


10.40.080 Hearing to contest the validity of removal and custody.

(1) A request for hearing must be filed with the police department by the owner of the vehicle within 10 days of receipt of the notice of removal under CBMC 10.40.050. The request must be in writing, and shall state with particularity the basis of the owner’s objection to the towing and impoundment of the vehicle. Failure to timely file a request for hearing shall be a waiver of right to hearing.

(2) Hearing shall be held within four calendar days of a timely filed request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, before an impartial hearing officer appointed by the city. The city shall have the burden of proving the validity of the towing and impoundment by a preponderance of the evidence.

(3) If the hearing officer finds the towing and impoundment of the vehicle was improper, the vehicle shall be ordered released to the person entitled to possession, and the city shall pay charges for towing and storage.

(4) Appeal of the decision by the hearing officer shall be by writ of review under ORS 34.010 through 34.100. [Ord. 241 § 8, 1997].


10.40.090 Towing and storage liens.

(1) A person who tows and impounds a vehicle pursuant to this chapter shall have a lien on the vehicle for just and reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain the vehicle until the charges are paid, or, if the charges are unpaid for the time specified herein, may have the vehicle sold to satisfy the lien. The lien shall be a possessory chattel lien as provided in ORS 87.152 and shall be perfected and foreclosed in the manner provided in ORS 87.152 through 87.212.

(2) A person who tows a vehicle pursuant to this chapter is immune from civil liability for towing the vehicle, unless loss, damage or injury to the vehicle is the result of the person’s negligent or willful acts. [Ord. 241 § 9, 1997].


10.40.100 Disposal of vehicles.

(1) If a vehicle is not reclaimed within 30 days after it is impounded, the city may dispose of the vehicle and its contents. The city shall first give the person who towed and is storing the vehicle 10 days’ written notice of the city’s intent to dispose of the vehicle under this section, provided such written notice may be given prior to 30 days after the vehicle is impounded.

(2) At any time after 30 days after the vehicle notice of removal has been provided pursuant to CBMC 10.40.050, or 30 days after the date the vehicle is towed if no notice is required pursuant to CBMC 10.40.020, the city may institute proceedings to sell the vehicle and its contents. The sale may occur with or without public auction. The city shall have the vehicle appraised by a person who has been issued an appraiser’s certificate by the Oregon Department of Transportation, shall photograph the vehicle and shall notify the Department of Transportation that the city will be disposing of the vehicle.

(3) Notice of sale of the vehicle shall be given to the owner and any lessors and security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation, by registered or certified mail at least 30 days prior to the sale. In addition, the city shall post notice of sale in a public place located within the Coos Bay City Hall. The notice of sale shall contain a particular description of the vehicle, the name of the owner, the amounts due under this chapter for towing, storage and other charges, and the time, place and manner of sale. If the vehicle is appraised at a value of $2,500 or greater, notice of sale shall be printed once a week for two successive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper generally circulated in Coos County.

(4) A person holding a security interest may, prior to sale, obtain release of the vehicle by providing entitlement to possession as required by CBMC 10.40.070 and by paying the amounts due under this chapter under CBMC 10.40.070 and the towing and storage charges. If a person holding a security interest in the vehicle fails to do so prior to the date of sale, the person’s security interest is extinguished. If the city fails to notify a person holding a properly perfected security interest of the sale as required by this section, then the vehicle remains subject to the security interest, and any subsequent purchaser takes the vehicle subject to the security interest.

(5) Disposal.

(a) If the vehicle is appraised at a value of $500.00 or less, the city may dispose of the vehicle and its contents by sale to a person who holds a valid wrecker’s certificate issued under ORS 822.110, or may dispose of the vehicle at public auction.

(b) If the vehicle is appraised at a value less than $1,000 but more than $500.00, the city may dispose of the vehicle and its contents by sale to a person who holds a valid wrecker’s certificate issued under ORS 822.110 if:

(i) The owner of the vehicle, any lessor or holder of a security interest shown in the records of the Department of Transportation signs a release, under oath, disclaiming any interest in the vehicle; or

(ii) The owner of the vehicle, any lessor or holder of a security interest shown in the records of the Department of Transportation has been provided notice of removal as provided in CBMC 10.40.050, and has failed to sign a release or reclaim the vehicle.

In all other cases where the vehicle is appraised at a value less than $1,000 but more than $500.00, the vehicle shall be sold at public auction.

(c) If the vehicle is appraised at a value of $1,000 or more, the city shall sell the vehicle at public auction.

(6) Upon sale and payment of the purchase price, the city shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate. The original certificate of sale shall be delivered to the purchaser and the copy retained by the city. The certificate of sale shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the date of sale, the price paid, a description of the vehicle and a stipulation that the sale is without any warranty as to the condition or title of the vehicle. The purchaser shall be notified that the purchaser might be required to apply for a salvage title under ORS 819.010. The purchaser shall be entitled to be issued title and a registration card for the vehicle, or to be issued a salvage title to the vehicle.

(7) Return of Sale and Proceeds of Sale.

(a) When a vehicle is sold pursuant to this section, the city shall provide a return of sale to the Department of Transportation setting forth a description of the vehicle, the purchase price, the name and address of the purchaser, the costs incurred in the sale, and the costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle.

(b) The city shall deduct from the proceeds of the sale the costs incurred in the sale and the costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle; provided, however, that the city shall only disburse proceeds to the person who towed and stored the vehicle if that person properly perfected their lien under ORS 87.176. The city’s finance officer shall then deposit the proceeds from the sale in a fund specifically designated for such purpose, and shall file a copy of the return of sale, along with a copy of any notices required by this section in the records of the city. At any time within two years after the sale of a vehicle, the former owner or former security interest holder may recover the proceeds, minus costs incurred in the sale and costs of removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle, and fee charged pursuant to CBMC 10.40.070, along with interest at the legal rate, by filing a claim with the city, proving the person’s ownership or security interest in the vehicle as of the date of sale. If no person has filed a claim within two years of the date of sale, then the proceeds shall be deposited in the city’s general fund. [Ord. 241 § 10, 1997].


10.40.110 Abandoned vehicles prohibited.

(1) No vehicle the chief of police has reason to believe is abandoned and displays a current license/registration through the Department of Transportation shall be parked or left standing on public property or city right-of-way for a period of 72 hours. After 72 consecutive hours, a notice of intent to tow shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the vehicle and must state the vehicle will be towed on or after 10 days of the date of posting.

(2) No vehicle that the chief of police has reason to believe is abandoned, by means of being in damaged, disabled, or dismantled condition rendering it inoperable, or not currently licensed through the Department of Transportation, if such a license is required by law, shall be parked or left standing on the public property or city right-of-way for a period of 72 hours. Failure to remove vehicle after a period of 72 consecutive hours constitutes prima facie evidence that the vehicle is abandoned.

(3) A vehicle so parked or left standing may be taken into custody by the chief of police and shall be held at the expense of the owner. The chief of police may use department personnel, equipment, and facilities for removal and storage of the vehicle or may hire other personnel, equipment, and facilities for that purpose. [Ord. 520 § 11, 2019].


Chapter 10.45 PENALTIES

Sections:

10.45.010    Penalties.


10.45.010 Penalties.

(1) Violation of Chapter 10.10 CBMC is punishable by fine not to exceed $100.00.

(2) Violation of Chapters 10.15, 10.20, 10.25 and 10.35 CBMC is punishable by fine not to exceed $50.00.

(3) Violation of a provision identical to a state statute is punishable by fine not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute. [Ord. 114 § 67, 1987].

 


Title 11 MOORAGE FACILITIES

Chapters:

11.05    General Provisions and Definitions

11.10    Registration and Moorage Agreements

11.15    Fees and Charges

11.20    Removing and Securing Vessels or Personal Property and Public Sale

11.25    Use of Facilities

11.30    Safety

11.35    Rules and Regulations – Enforcement


Chapter 11.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS

Sections:

11.05.010    General provisions.

11.05.020    Definitions.


11.05.010 General provisions.

(1) Title. This title shall be called the moorage ordinance for the city of Coos Bay.

(2) Purpose and Scope. The purpose of this title is to secure effective management and control of the dock facility of the city of Coos Bay.

(3) Interpretation. This title shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes stated herein. If any section or part of this title is in conflict with any law of the state of Oregon or of the United States, or any rules, regulations, or standards promulgated thereof, then such section shall be governed by and construed according to such law, rule, regulation or standard, whichever the case may be; however, nothing in this title shall be construed as a limitation on the powers of the city of Coos Bay.

(4) Severability. If any portion of this title is declared void by any court of competent jurisdiction, then the validity of the remainder of the ordinance or its application to vessels or persons shall in no way be affected.

(5) Application. This title is applicable to all dock facilities now owned or hereinafter constructed by the city of Coos Bay. All vessels or persons entering upon or using such facilities shall be subject to the provisions contained herein. [Ord. 217 § 1, 1995].


11.05.020 Definitions.

“Abandoned personal property” means any personal property left on or in the facility without identification, evidence of ownership, or notification to the city of ownership for a period of more than five days.

“Abandoned vessel” means any vessel not registered with the city within 48 hours after the time the vessel has become moored at the facility; any vessel which has not been removed from the facility as required under any provision of this title covering hazardous vessels or termination of moorage.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay, or the city’s designee under an agreement for the management of the facility.

“Coos Bay” means the estuary commonly known as Coos Bay, and any related estuarine or riparian areas.

“Emergency” means a state of imminent danger to life, property, navigation or the environment where time is of the essence.

“Facility” means the docks, wharves and other related structures owned by the city and commonly known as the Boardwalk of the city of Coos Bay; any other similar structures owned and controlled by the city at any time in future.

“Harbormaster” means the person designated by the city to administer the provisions of this title.

“Hazardous vessel” means any vessel which is unseaworthy or which is in such a state of disability that the marine environment, life, or property could become endangered if such state is unduly prolonged; any vessel which presents a hazard to navigation.

“Industrial waste” means any liquid, gaseous or solid waste or substance or combination of wastes or substances which results from industrial or manufacturing processes, trade, agriculture or agricultural business, or from the production or recovery of any natural resource, which causes or would reasonably be expected to cause pollution of Coos Bay.

“Litter” means any and all types of debris and substances, whether liquid or solid or any combination of liquids and solids, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, rubbish, glass, cans, bottles, paper and paper products, wrappings, decayed wood, bark, shavings, sawdust or other wood products, cement, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dyestuffs, acids, chemicals, dead animals or fish carcasses, manure, human or animal wastes, putrid or decaying substances or matter, petroleum wastes, or any machinery, appliances, automobiles or parts thereof, or any other substance which may render Coos Bay or any part of the facility unsightly or unwholesome, or which might otherwise detrimentally affect public health, safety or welfare of Coos Bay or the city.

“Moorage” means any place where a vessel lies at anchor or is made fast to a dock or is laid alongside another vessel made fast to a dock, including side and multi-side ties.

“Owner/operator” means any person who claims, expressly or otherwise, to have lawful care, custody, control or possession of a vessel by legal title, equitable interest, lease or charter, or by any other method or manner giving the person lawful care, custody, control or possession of a vessel.

“Person” means an individual; a partnership, corporation, association, or other form of legal entity; any entity in fact.

“Seaworthy” means the condition which enables a vessel to be self-propelled, to withstand ordinary attacks of wind and weather, and to be otherwise capable of operating safely in navigable waters.

“Sewage” means all manner of human or animal waste, whether solid or liquid.

“Underway” means the condition of a vessel which is not at anchor and without moorings, and is not made fast to the shore or ground.

“Vessel” means every description of watercraft, including seaplanes and jet skis. [Ord. 277 § 1, 1999; Ord. 217 § 2, 1995].


Chapter 11.10 REGISTRATION AND MOORAGE AGREEMENTS

Sections:

11.10.010    Permitted moorage.

11.10.020    Registration.

11.10.030    Moorage license agreements.

11.10.040    Live-aboard permits.

11.10.050    Renewal.

11.10.060    Scope.

11.10.070    Transferability.

11.10.080    Revocation.

11.10.090    Cancellation.

11.10.100    Denial.


11.10.010 Permitted moorage.

No vessel will be permitted to be moored at the facility, unless the vessel is properly registered, a moorage agreement entered into, and all fees and charges have been paid. All vessels mooring at the facility shall be seaworthy; upon request by the city, an owner/operator may be required to demonstrate the seaworthiness of the vessel. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(1), 1995].


11.10.020 Registration.

(1) Time for Registration. All vessels must be registered with the city within 12 hours after arrival at the facility. Registration may be made with the business office of the city or with the harbormaster. If the time within which to register is after regular business hours, or if the harbormaster is not on duty, a registration form shall be completed and deposited in the drop-box located at the facility. Payment of the fee for the initial term of moorage and any other required fees or charges shall be made at the time of registration.

(2) Information and Authorization Required. At the time of registration, the owner shall provide the owner/operator’s name, residence and mailing address, telephone number, proof of ownership, current and valid documentation and registration, current billing information, and anticipated length of moorage. If the person making the registration is an operator only, owner authorization for moorage shall be made available upon request.

(3) Notice of Vessel Condition. At the time of registration, the owner/operator of the vessel shall provide notice of the physical condition of the vessel, including any structural limitations which could result in damage to the vessel if the vessel is towed or placed in dry dock. Notice of the physical condition of the vessel shall be updated from time to time when the condition of the vessel changes. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(2), 1995].


11.10.030 Moorage license agreements.

(1) Requirements. No vessel shall be moored at the facility for more than 12 hours without the owner/operator entering into a moorage agreement with the city, according to the terms and conditions as set forth in the agreement.

(2) Period. A moorage agreement shall be either transient moorage, short-term moorage, or long-term moorage and shall be limited to the dates specified in the agreement. A “transient moorage” shall be any moorage exceeding 12 hours, but less than one week. A “short-term moorage” shall be a moorage for a period exceeding seven consecutive calendar days, but less than 30 consecutive calendar days. A “long-term moorage” shall be any moorage for a period longer than 30 consecutive calendar days.

(3) Space Assignment. Each vessel shall be assigned a dock space, which shall be the exclusive location where the vessel may be moored under the moorage agreement. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(3), 1995].


11.10.040 Live-aboard permits.

(1) Any owner/operator may apply for a live-aboard permit, which shall be in addition to the moorage agreement and may be renewed annually. No live-aboard permit shall be granted unless the owner/operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city compliance with all terms and conditions of this title and any state or federal laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, environmental regulations. Any live-aboard permit may be immediately revoked if the city determines the vessel or its owner/operator is in violation of any provision of this title.

(2) No owner/operator shall use or permit, or suffer another to sleep overnight, prepare food, or conduct any other activity normally connected with temporary or permanent lodging in any vessel moored at the facility without first obtaining a live-aboard permit. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(4), 1995].


11.10.050 Renewal.

A short-term and long-term moorage agreement may be renewed upon application to the city, and subject to the moorage rates and any generally applicable terms and conditions of moorage agreements in effect as of the time of renewal. Application for renewal shall be made no later than the end of the last day specified as the period of the moorage agreement. If the moorage agreement has not been renewed according to this title, the moorage fee shall be assessed at the transient rate. No moorage agreement shall be renewed unless all conditions for the initial issuance of the moorage agreement are still being met, and all fees and charges are paid in full. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(5), 1995].


11.10.060 Scope.

The moorage agreement shall allow the use of the facility for moorage purposes only, and shall grant no further rights, privileges or uses. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(6), 1995].


11.10.070 Transferability.

Moorage agreements shall be issued only to the owner/operator of the vessel, and shall be valid only for the specific vessel designated in the moorage agreement. A moorage agreement may not be assigned, sold, or transferred by any means whatsoever; any such transfer shall be void. Sale of a vessel shall not transfer any rights or privileges under a moorage agreement; a valid moorage agreement does not ensure the transferee will be issued a moorage agreement. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(7), 1995].


11.10.080 Revocation.

The moorage agreement may be revoked by the city upon 10 days’ written notice if the vessel or owner/operator is in violation of the terms of the moorage agreement or any provision of this title.

(1) Notice. Notice of revocation may be by personal delivery or certified mail to the owner/operator at the owner/operator’s last known address, and by posting notice on the vessel. The notice of revocation shall state the moorage agreement has been revoked, give the reasons therefor, and state the owner/operator has 10 days from the date of the notice to correct the violation or have the vessel impounded or otherwise secured at the owner/operator’s expense.

(2) Reinstatement. Upon proof of correction of any violation and payment of all costs and charges, the owner/operator may apply for reinstatement of the moorage agreement, which may be permitted by the city. If reinstatement is permitted, and a second violation occurs at any time within the next six months, the moorage agreement shall be immediately revoked, and no reinstatement shall be allowed. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(8), 1995].


11.10.090 Cancellation.

A short-term or long-term moorage agreement may be cancelled by the owner/operator upon 10 days’ written notice to the city, which shall provide an address where the owner/operator can be reached after the termination of the moorage agreement for return of any refund as hereinafter provided. Upon cancellation, the owner/operator shall be entitled to reimbursement, which shall be the difference between the short-term or long-term rate, and the transient rate which would have been charged to the owner/operator for the dates of actual use of the facility had the moorage agreement been a transient moorage. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(9), 1995].


11.10.100 Denial.

The city may deny a moorage agreement to a vessel which is a hazard to health or safety, or if the owner/operator is delinquent on any fee or charge under this title, or any other city ordinance, or if the owner/operator is unwilling or unable to provide the city with the required registration information. Immediately after a moorage agreement has been denied, the owner/operator shall remove the vessel from the facility, and shall neither moor the vessel nor permit nor suffer the vessel to be moored until all hazards to health or safety have been corrected and proof of such correction has been provided to the city, all such fees and charges are paid in full, or the required information has been completely provided. [Ord. 277 § 2, 1999; Ord. 217 § 3(10), 1995].


Chapter 11.15 FEES AND CHARGES

Sections:

11.15.010    Establishment.

11.15.020    Terms of payment.

11.15.030    Late charges.

11.15.040    Attorneys’ fees and costs.


11.15.010 Establishment.

Moorage rates, fees and other charges shall be established by resolution of the city council, and may be reviewed by the city council from time to time and raised or lowered as deemed appropriate. [Ord. 217 § 4(1), 1995].


11.15.020 Terms of payment.

The vessel’s owner/operator shall be liable for all moorage rates, fees and other charges assessed under this title. Moorage rates and live-aboard permit fees shall be paid in advance, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the city. Invoices for all other fees and charges are due and payable at time of presentation to the owner/operator. [Ord. 217 § 4(2), 1995].


11.15.030 Late charges.

A late fee shall be assessed for late payments for each month or part of a month that payments are late. An account is past due if the moorage rate, fee or other charge in whole or in part, is not paid in advance and before the first of the month. If the payment is mailed, the date of the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies. [Ord. 497 § 1, 2018; Ord. 288 § 1, 2000; Ord. 217 § 4(3), 1995].


11.15.040 Attorneys’ fees and costs.

The owner/operator shall be liable for any and all collection costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, necessary to collect delinquent moorage rates, fees or other charges or to enforce any other provision of this title. [Ord. 277 § 3, 1999; Ord. 217 § 4(4), 1995].


Chapter 11.20 REMOVING AND SECURING VESSELS OR PERSONAL PROPERTY AND PUBLIC SALE

Sections:

11.20.010    Removing or securing vessels or personal property and public sale.


11.20.010 Removing or securing vessels or personal property and public sale.

The city may employ the following procedures for the collection of delinquent moorage rates, or other charges or fees, or for the disposal of abandoned vessels or abandoned personal property:

(1) Notice Owner/Operator. If moorage rates, fees, or other charges are due and unpaid for a period in excess of 60 days, the vessel may be secured or removed and sold under the terms of this section. At least 15 days prior to securing or removing a vessel for delinquent moorage rates, fees or other charges, the city shall give notice setting forth the rates, fees, or charges then due, and stating that the city may terminate the moorage agreement and seize the vessel or other property if the charges are not paid within 15 days of the date of the notice. The notice shall be delivered by posting notice on the vessel; and personal delivery to the owner/operator or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last address provided by the owner/operator to the city.

(2) Abandoned Vessels or Personal Property. In the case of an abandoned vessel or abandoned personal property, or where no address or an incorrect address was furnished by the owner/operator, the city shall make a reasonable attempt to provide actual notice prior to securing or removing personal property; however, if, after a reasonable attempt to provide such notice, the owner/operator has not been contacted, the city may proceed as if notice had been given.

(3) Securing Vessels and Personal Property.

(a) If moorage rates, fees, or other charges are delinquent or if a vessel or personal property has been abandoned, the city may take any reasonable measure to secure the vessel or personal property and ensure that the vessel or personal property is in the possession and control of the city and cannot be removed from the facility, including, but not limited to, the use of chains, ropes, locks, and removal from the water, or removal to a storage area.

(b) At the time a vessel or personal property is secured, the city shall attach to the vessel or personal property a notice which shall state:

(i) The date and time the notice was attached.

(ii) A statement that if the account, together with all expenses incurred in securing the vessel or property and the city’s collection costs, is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the notice, the vessel or personal property may be sold at public auction with proceeds applied to satisfy the city charges.

(iii) The address and telephone number where additional information may be obtained concerning release of the vessel or personal property.

(iv) The notice may also contain the date and time public auction is to be held, and other information for notices of foreclosure under ORS 87.192(4).

(c) Notice of securing a vessel or personal property shall be sent to the owner/operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last address provided by the owner/operator to the city.

(4) Recovery of Possession by Owner/Operator. The owner/operator of a vessel or personal property secured by the city may recover possession as follows:

(a) By making payment to the city of all rates, fees or other charges including costs incurred in securing the vessel or property, notification costs, and other collection costs; or

(b) By entering into a written agreement, upon such terms and conditions as determined by the city, for payment of all unpaid rates, fees and other charges and costs by installment; or

(c) By posting a sufficient cash bond or other security with the city, to be held in trust by the city pending resolution of any disputed charges in a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon entry of final judgment, including appeal, or upon settlement between the parties, the city shall receive so much of the bond or other security as is necessary to satisfy any judgment or settlement, along with costs and interest as may be awarded to the city. If personal or real property is pledged as security, such property shall be subject to execution in the manner provided by law.

(5) Procedure for Public Sale. If a vessel or other personal property has been secured and the owner/operator does not regain possession, the city may sell the vessel or property at public sale; provided, however, that no public sale of personal property except for delinquent nonpayment of moorage rates shall be held within 180 days after abandonment occurs or after notice is given to the owner that the property has been secured, whichever is later. Gear or other personal property associated with a vessel which has been secured and is being held for public auction shall not be subject to this 180-day holding period but may be sold at public auction along with the secured vessel. All sales of vessels and other personal property under this title shall be made according to the procedures for notification, foreclosure, and sale provided by ORS 87.172 through 87.206. The city may bid all or part of its charges and expenses at the sale and may become a purchaser at the sale. Sale proceeds shall be applied first to the costs of the sale, including attorneys’ fees, then to discharge of moorage rates, fees and other charges owed by the owner/operator, and the balance shall be paid as provided by ORS 87.206.

(6) Hazardous Vessels.

(a) In the event of an emergency, a hazardous vessel may, immediately and without notice by the city, be secured or removed from the facility. If removal is required, the city may take reasonable efforts to notify the owner/operator prior to moving a hazardous vessel. If the city moves a hazardous vessel without prior notice, notice indicating the vessel has been moved shall be given as soon as practicable. In all other cases, the city shall give written notice to the owner/operator, requesting removal of hazardous vessels within 15 days of the date of such notice. Notice shall be posted on the hazardous vessel, and delivered by personal delivery to the owner/operator or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address provided by the owner/operator to the city.

(b) All risk of loss or damage resulting from securing or removing the vessel shall be borne by the vessel owner/operator. In the event the vessel is moved to another location, the vessel and its owner/operator shall be liable for any and all costs associated with removal and storage of the vessel.

(c) A hazardous vessel which remains at the facility in excess of 15 days from the date of notice requesting removal may be deemed an abandoned vessel.

(d) In the event any vessel capsizes, sinks or is otherwise disabled in such a manner as to be a hazard to navigation or use of city facilities, all loss, damage or cost of removing the same shall be chargeable to the vessel owner/operator. [Ord. 217 § 5, 1995].


Chapter 11.25 USE OF FACILITIES

Sections:

11.25.010    Use of facility.

11.25.020    Commercial use of facility.


11.25.010 Use of facility.

Every vessel moored at and all personal property located on or at the facility shall be kept and maintained in such a condition of repair, maintenance, and order so as not to constitute a nuisance, pose a substantial risk of danger or harm to persons or property, or be an obstruction to public use of the facility. [Ord. 217 § 6, 1995].


11.25.020 Commercial use of facility.

No person shall engage in any commercial activity at the facility without first obtaining a vendor’s permit and business license from the city, and paying all required fees in advance. [Ord. 217 § 7, 1995].


Chapter 11.30 SAFETY

Sections:

11.30.010    Safety.

11.30.020    Fire and safety.


11.30.010 Safety.

(1) The safekeeping of a vessel is the sole responsibility of the owner/operator. The owner/operator shall use all reasonable efforts to keep a vessel seaworthy, securely moored, and fully operational, and to otherwise attend to the needs and requirements of vessel maintenance. Failure to so maintain and secure the vessel may result in the vessel being deemed a hazardous vessel and subjected to removal under CBMC 11.20.010.

(2) If the city determines that action is necessary for the safety or protection of the facility, any vessel or vessels, or any navigable waterway, the city shall give, or attempt to give, written or verbal notice to the owner/operator at the owner/operator’s registered address.

(a) If the owner/operator fails to provide needed assistance within a reasonable time after notice has been given, or if the city is unable to notify the owner/operator within a reasonable time after action has been determined to be necessary for safety or protection, the city may, but is not required to, replace defective mooring lines, attach additional mooring lines, pump a vessel that is taking on water, move any vessel to protect the vessel from fire or other hazard, or render such other services as the city, in its sole discretion, determines are needed. [Ord. 217 § 9, 1995].


11.30.020 Fire and safety.

(1) All vessels moored at and personal property used on or about the facility shall be used and maintained in such a manner and condition so as not to constitute an actual or potential fire or safety hazard. Failure to conform to any local, state or federal law or regulation regarding fire or safety shall be conclusively presumed to be an actual fire or safety hazard.

(2) No person shall dump, discharge, or pump, or allow or cause to be dumped, discharged, or pumped, any oil, spirits, gasoline, distillates, petroleum products, or any other flammable materials onto the facility or adjacent property, or into Coos Bay. All combustible materials shall be stored in such a place and manner as to prevent accidental combustion. No person shall store, allow or cause to be stored on any vessel moored at the facility any fuel, except in tanks or containers specifically designated for that purpose. [Ord. 217 § 10, 1995].


Chapter 11.35 RULES AND REGULATIONS – ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

11.35.010    Sanitation and waste disposal.

11.35.020    Maintenance and repair of vessels.

11.35.030    Signage.

11.35.040    Supervision of children.

11.35.050    Animal control.

11.35.060    Sale of vessels.

11.35.070    Liability of owner/operator.

11.35.080    Rules and regulations.

11.35.090    Reservation of other rights and remedies.

11.35.100    Enforcement.


11.35.010 Sanitation and waste disposal.

(1) No person shall throw, place, leave, deposit or abandon, or cause, permit, or suffer to be thrown, placed, left, deposited or abandoned, any industrial waste, litter, or sewage at the facility or adjacent property, except in receptacles specifically designated for such purpose by the city. No person shall throw, place, leave, deposit or abandon, or cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, placed, left, deposited or abandoned, any industrial waste, litter, or sewage into Coos Bay.

(2) No person shall use, or cause, permit or suffer the use of, a toilet on a vessel moored at the facility or under way in Coos Bay, unless the vessel is equipped with a device, in good operating condition, adequate to treat, hold, incinerate or otherwise handle sewage in such a manner which will prevent pollution. For the purposes of this section, an acceptable control device is one approved by the U.S. Coast Guard for such purpose.

(3) No person shall clean or process fish or shellfish on any walkway, wharf, dock, barge or pier owned, managed or otherwise controlled by the city, except in places specifically designated and posted by the city for that purpose.

(4) The owner/operator of the vessel shall be personally liable for any and all cleanup costs, fines and penalties assessed by any other governmental unit resulting from a violation of this section. [Ord. 217 § 8, 1995].


11.35.020 Maintenance and repair of vessels.

Painting, spray painting, sandblasting, welding, and all major repair or outfitting of vessels is prohibited, without prior written authorization by the city. [Ord. 217 § 11, 1995].


11.35.030 Signage.

No person may write or post any written or printed matter or other signage on any place at the facility, except upon places designated by the city for that purpose. [Ord. 217 § 12, 1995].


11.35.040 Supervision of children.

No child under 12 years of age shall be allowed on the facility unless supervised by a parent or responsible adult. [Ord. 217 § 13, 1995].


11.35.050 Animal control.

No animal shall be allowed on the facility unless the animal is on a leash and under the control of an owner or other custodian. No animal shall be tied to any portion of the facility. No person having control of any animal at the facility shall allow waste or droppings of the animal to remain on any wharf, dock, barge, pier or walkway. All animal waste or droppings shall be immediately removed and placed in the nearest waste receptacle. [Ord. 217 § 14, 1995].


11.35.060 Sale of vessels.

Upon transfer of title to any vessel moored at the facility, the vendor of the vessel shall immediately notify the city, and pay any moorage or other charges due at that time. The moorage license agreement shall automatically terminate upon sale of the vessel. [Ord. 217 § 15, 1995].


11.35.070 Liability of owner/operator.

Any owner/operator shall be fully liable for any damages to persons or property caused by or resulting from the acts or omissions of the owner/operator, his/her agents, employees, invitees, or any person, independent contractor, partnership, or corporation performing any service to the owner/operator’s vessel or personal property. [Ord. 217 § 16, 1995].


11.35.080 Rules and regulations.

The city may from time to time promulgate additional rules and regulations for use of the facility. [Ord. 217 § 17, 1995].


11.35.090 Reservation of other rights and remedies.

The rights and remedies under this title are cumulative with the other city ordinances, and other rights and remedies existing at law, in equity and in admiralty. Each right and remedy may be exercised wholly or in part, from time to time and without waiving any other rights or remedies which the city may have against the vessel, the vessel’s owner/operator, or against owner/operator’s personal property. No delay in the enforcement of any right or remedy shall be deemed to constitute a waiver or election with respect to any right or remedy. [Ord. 217 § 18, 1995].


11.35.100 Enforcement.

(1) Failure to Enter into Moorage Agreement. Any owner/operator who fails to enter into a moorage agreement within the time required by Chapter 11.10 CBMC shall be issued a citation, which shall carry a fine of $100.00. Each and every day that the owner/operator fails to enter into a moorage agreement shall be a separate and distinct violation, and, in addition to other remedies provided by this title or other law, for which the owner/operator shall be assessed additional fines of $100.00 per day.

(2) Other Violations. Violation of any other provision of this title shall be grounds for immediate termination of any moorage agreement, permit or license and shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 per violation. Each day a violation persists after written notice has been provided to the offender shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.

(3) Revocation of Moorage License – Impoundment.

(a) Any vessel in violation of any provision of this title may, at the sole risk and expense of the owner/operator of the vessel, have its moorage agreement revoked and, if necessary, be moved or impounded, and any charge or expense for moving or storing the vessel shall create a lien thereon for such expense.

(b) The owner shall be notified of the revocation, removal or impoundment, as the case may be, by personal service or first class mail to the address listed on the moorage agreement. The owner shall be given an opportunity for a hearing before the city council at the earliest opportunity to determine whether revocation, removal, or impoundment, as the case may be, was just and proper. [Ord. 277 § 4, 1999; Ord. 217 § 19, 1995].


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.05    Protection of Streets

12.10    Sidewalk Construction and Repair

12.15    Service Driveways

12.20    Regulations of Public Rights-of-Way

12.25    Utility Use of Streets

12.30    Street Naming and Building Numbering

12.35    Park Regulations

12.38    Exclusion from City Facilities and Property

12.40    Viewsheds – Empire District

12.45    Public Right-of-Way Vacation


Chapter 12.05 PROTECTION OF STREETS

Sections:

12.05.010    Heavy objects on streets prohibited.

12.05.020    Exceptions.

12.05.030    Permits.

12.05.040    Bond.

12.05.050    Safety precautions.

12.05.060    Penalties.

12.05.070    Council resolutions.


12.05.010 Heavy objects on streets prohibited.

(1)(a) No person shall operate any vehicle or move any building, structure, article or material having a net or gross weight greater than 15,000 pounds across or along any residential street, except state highways, unless the street is posted to allow greater weight and the moving object does not exceed the posted weight. “Residential street” means any street within an area not zoned commercial or industrial.

(b) Notwithstanding subsection (1)(a) of this section and except as may be otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance, arterial streets, as designated by the city of Coos Bay comprehensive plan inventory, may be used for the operation of vehicles and for the moving of buildings, structures, articles or materials having a net or gross weight greater than 15,000 pounds. Arterial streets are:

U.S. 240 (Cape Arago Highway – Newmark, Broadway and Virginia);

U.S. 243 (Ocean Boulevard – Central, Commercial/Anderson);

U.S. 101 (Oregon Coast Highway – Bayshore Drive and Broadway);

Lakeshore Drive;

Newmark Avenue;

Woodland Drive and Broadway (North Bend);

10th Street;

Koosbay Boulevard;

Thompson Road;

4th Street;

Southwest Boulevard.

(2)(a) For the purpose of protecting the surface of the street, alley, roadway or other area, each owner/operator of a semi shall, at the time his or her semitrailer is parked on any city street, alley, roadway, or other area of city right-of-way which has been paved and is used for parking, place a board under the semitrailer landing gear, of sufficient length to span the feet of the landing gear, and of a width and thickness of not less than that provided by two-inch-by-six-inch dimensional lumber.

(b) Upon conviction, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed upon any owner/operator violating the terms of subsection (2) of this section, along with an additional amount sufficient to cover the costs of restitution for repair of the city street, alley, roadway, or other area. [Ord. 289 § 1, 2000; Ord. 278 § 1, 1999; Ord. 124 § 1, 1988].


12.05.020 Exceptions.

Utility company vehicles, sanitation vehicles, moving vans, vehicles delivering home heating fuel, vehicles delivering equipment and material to be used in development and improvement, and delivery vehicles are not subject to this chapter when actually going to, performing, or coming from work within the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 124 § 2, 1988].


12.05.030 Permits.

Upon application by a person other than listed in CBMC 12.05.020, the director of public works may issue a permit for moving a heavy object along a residential street. The permit must specifically describe the vehicle, building, structure, article or material and must be limited to the purpose for which the permit was requested. [Ord. 124 § 3, 1988].


12.05.040 Bond.

No permit shall be granted unless the applicant presents a bond in an amount satisfactory to the director of public works and has sureties satisfactory to the recorder in a form approved by the city attorney. The bond shall be conditioned for payment to the city of any loss, damage or injury caused by the vehicle or by the moving or transporting of a building, structure or article. [Ord. 124 § 4, 1988].


12.05.050 Safety precautions.

Any person operating under a permit shall use reasonable precautions not to injure the pavement or street surface, and shall comply with all instructions of the director of public works. [Ord. 124 § 5, 1988].


12.05.060 Penalties.

The penalties set forth in ORS 818.430 for excess weight are adopted and incorporated into this chapter as penalty provisions for this chapter. [Ord. 124 § 6, 1988].


12.05.070 Council resolutions.

The city council, under this chapter, can adopt resolutions regulating the weight upon city streets, except state highways, outside of residential areas. [Ord. 124 § 7, 1988].


Chapter 12.10 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR

Sections:

12.10.010    Definitions.

12.10.020    Maintenance of sidewalks.

12.10.030    Liability for sidewalk injuries.

12.10.040    Standards and specifications.

12.10.050    Construction, alteration, removal or repair of sidewalk.

12.10.060    Penalty.


12.10.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

“City manager” means the city manager for the city of Coos Bay, or his or her designee.

“Good repair” means a state of being free of patent and latent defects.

“Safe condition” means a state of being free of snow, ice, obstructions, or any other condition causing a hazard to persons or vehicles using public right-of-way.

“Sidewalk” means any paved area in that part of the public right-of-way located between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines; any culvert located in such part of the public right-of-way. [Ord. 249 § 1, 1998; Ord. 69 § 1, 1986].


12.10.020 Maintenance of sidewalks.

The owner of real property abutting a sidewalk shall maintain the sidewalk in good repair and safe condition. [Ord. 249 § 2, 1998; Ord. 69 § 2, 1986].


12.10.030 Liability for sidewalk injuries.

(1) The owner of real property abutting a sidewalk shall be liable to any person injured because of failure by the owner to maintain the sidewalk in good repair and safe condition.

(2) If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to any person caused by the failure of an owner to maintain a sidewalk in good repair or safe condition, the owner shall reimburse the city for the amount of the damages thus paid and for the attorneys’ fees and costs of defending against the claim for damages. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. [Ord. 249 § 3, 1998; Ord. 69 § 3, 1986].


12.10.040 Standards and specifications.

Sidewalks shall be constructed, altered, and repaired in accordance with standards and specifications determined by the city. [Ord. 69 § 4, 1986].


12.10.050 Construction, alteration, removal or repair of sidewalk.

(1) Initiation of Proceedings to Place a Sidewalk in Good Repair or in Safe Condition.

(a) When the city manager determines that public health and safety require the construction or removal of a sidewalk, or that as a result of the owner’s failure to maintain a sidewalk in good repair or in safe condition an existing sidewalk is in need of alteration, removal or repair, the city manager shall make written findings to support such determination, and shall issue a notice of initiation of proceedings to the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk.

(b) The notice shall contain a statement of the findings supporting the city manager’s determination. The notice shall also state that the owner must construct a sidewalk or alter, remove or repair an existing sidewalk; shall state that the owner is required to complete the work within 30 days after service of the notice; and shall state that if the work is not completed by the owner within the 30-day period, then the city may undertake the work and assess the costs against the property abutting the sidewalk. The notice shall also apprise the owner of the owner’s right to request reconsideration and right to appeal pursuant to subsections (1)(d) and (e) of this section.

(c) The city manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be served upon the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the owner. If the owner fails to accept the mailed notice, or if the notice is undeliverable as addressed, the city manager shall order substituted service by causing a copy of the notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the abutting property.

(d) The owner may file a written request for reconsideration with the city manager. The request for reconsideration shall be filed within 10 days of service of the notice, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the facts and arguments supporting the owner’s reasons why he or she should not be responsible for the construction, alteration, removal, or repair of the sidewalk. The city manager shall render a final written determination within 10 days of the receipt of the request for reconsideration. The filing of a request for reconsideration shall be a condition precedent to the right to appeal to the city council pursuant to this section.

(e) If the request for reconsideration is denied, the owner may file a request for appeal, in writing, with the city manager within 10 days of the owner’s receipt of his or her final written determination. A hearing shall be scheduled before the city council as soon as practicable after the receipt of a request for appeal. After the hearing, the city council shall adopt a resolution, affirming, reversing, or modifying the decision of the city manager.

(2) City May Construct, Alter, Remove, or Repair Sidewalk. If the work identified in the notice is not completed within 30 days after service of the notice, or if the owner has not entered into a written agreement with the city to cause such work to be made within a specified period of time, the city council may, by resolution, order the construction, alteration, removal or repair to be made. The resolution shall recite the means whereby notice was provided to the owner, indicate the nature of the work to be performed, and include a legal description of the abutting property. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the owner at his or her last known address by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.

(3) Assessment for Sidewalk Work Done by City. Upon completion of the work, the manager shall submit to the council a report containing an itemized statement of costs. Upon receipt of the report, the council shall by resolution assess the cost of the work against the property abutting the sidewalk. The assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be enforced and collected as provided in ORS 223.505 through 223.650.

(4) Notice of Assessment. A copy of the resolution assessing the cost of the work shall be mailed to the property owner by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.

(5) Lien Docket – Interest. The recorder shall enter into the city lien docket a statement of the amount assessed against the property; a statement that the lien is for sidewalk construction, alteration, removal, or repair; the name of the property owner; and the date of the assessment resolution. The assessment shall become a lien upon the real property at the time of entry upon the lien docket. The lien shall bear interest at the statutory rate commencing on the date the lien is entered in the city lien docket. [Ord. 249 § 4, 1998; Ord. 69 § 5, 1986].


12.10.060 Penalty.

Violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense. [Ord. 69 § 6, 1986].


Chapter 12.15 SERVICE DRIVEWAYS

Sections:

12.15.010    Intent.

12.15.020    Definitions.

12.15.030    Permit required.

12.15.040    Application for permit.

12.15.050    Fee.

12.15.060    Standards.

12.15.070    Sidewalk maintenance.

12.15.080    Unused service driveway access.

12.15.090    Enforcement.

12.15.100    Abatement.


12.15.010 Intent.

The restriction of property access and the regulation of the access construction is necessary to:

(1) Protect pedestrians by limiting the number of vehicle/pedestrian conflicts and by achieving a relatively uniform, safe walking surface.

(2) Conserve the maximum amount of on-street parking space.

(3) Clearly define traffic flow onto streets.

(4) Ensure proper sidewalk and street drainage by the design of the access.

(5) Increase the life of the access area by construction standards which can handle the vehicular load. [Ord. 84 § 1, 1986].


12.15.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

“Service driveway” means any area of public right-of-way serving as access to private property from an opened, dedicated public street or alley. [Ord. 84 § 2, 1986].


12.15.030 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain or close any service driveway without securing a permit from the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 84 § 3, 1986].


12.15.040 Application for permit.

An application for permit shall be filed in writing with the community development department showing the exact location of the access, the width of the access, the length of the driveway within the right-of-way, and the type of construction. The application shall be forwarded to and approved by the public works department. [Ord. 84 § 4, 1986].


12.15.050 Fee.

The fee for service driveway permits shall be set by resolution of council. [Ord. 84 § 5, 1986].


12.15.060 Standards.

Approval of the application, including width of access, shall be consistent with the intent of this chapter, and to allow reasonable use of the property served by such driveway, the service driveway shall in no event extend beyond the property lines of the owner requesting access. [Ord. 84 § 6, 1986].


12.15.070 Sidewalk maintenance.

No permit shall be granted unless the property owner constructs a concrete apron and/or maintains that portion of the existing sidewalk which will be used as a driveway according to the specifications and under the direction of the city engineer. Should the owner permit the driveway to become dangerous to the public for any reason, then the council may revoke any permit outstanding, with or without notice to the owner. [Ord. 84 § 7, 1986].


12.15.080 Unused service driveway access.

The curb cuts for unused service driveway accesses shall be restored at the expense of the abutting property owner within one year. [Ord. 84 § 8, 1986].


12.15.090 Enforcement.

Violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense. [Ord. 84 § 9, 1986].


12.15.100 Abatement.

Failure to comply with any of the provisions herein shall cause the service driveway to automatically constitute a public nuisance, and it may be abated pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 8.10 CBMC, Public Nuisances. [Ord. 84 § 10, 1986].


Chapter 12.20 REGULATIONS OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

Article I. Regulatory Authority over Rights-of-Way

12.20.010    Definitions.

12.20.020    Jurisdiction.

12.20.030    Encroachments.

12.20.040    Restoration of public rights-of-way.

12.20.050    Fees.

Article II. Excavations in Rights-of-Way

12.20.060    Excavation permits.

12.20.070    Excavation permits – Application.

12.20.080    Manner of excavation.

12.20.090    Inspection of work.

12.20.100    Placement of excavated material.

12.20.110    Cleanup.

12.20.120    Resurfacing.

12.20.130    Emergency excavation.

Article III. Bond or Other Security

12.20.140    Construction standards.

12.20.150    Undertaking construction of public improvements.

12.20.160    Form of bond or other security.

12.20.170    Penalties.

Article I. Regulatory Authority over Rights-of-Way


12.20.010 Definitions.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Department” means the department of community services.

“Director” means the director of community services or his or her designee.

“Excavation” means digging, scooping, hollowing out or other removal of soil or earth.

“Permittee” means the person authorized to make excavation in public rights-of-way, including the person who seeks to have the excavation made and his or her agent.

“Person” means a natural person; a corporation, partnership, limited liability company; or any other entity in law or fact.

“Public improvement” means any street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer line or other public improvement which is located in a public right-of-way and which will be dedicated or otherwise transferred to the city at the time the improvement is completed, or any other improvement over which the city has regulatory authority.

“Public rights-of-way” means any real property owned by the city that is used for the free and unimpeded passage of the public; any lesser interest in real property held by the city which contains a grant for the free and unimpeded access by the public across such property. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, public trails and paths, and all other easements which provide the public with a right of access or give the city the right to construct, maintain, repair and operate a public improvement. As used in this chapter, public rights-of-way includes subsurface and air space over the property. [Ord. 292 § 1, 2000].


12.20.020 Jurisdiction.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, the city has jurisdiction, and may exercise regulatory control, over all public rights-of-way owned by or otherwise vested in the city.

(2) The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control pursuant to this section does not obligate or create an obligation for the city to maintain, repair or improve any part of or improvement in public rights-of-way. [Ord. 292 § 2, 2000].


12.20.030 Encroachments.

No person may occupy or otherwise encroach upon public rights-of-way subject to the jurisdiction or regulatory authority of the city without first obtaining a franchise, license or permit, as the case may be, from the city for such occupation or encroachment. [Ord. 292 § 3, 2000].


12.20.040 Restoration of public rights-of-way.

(1) Whenever a person performs any work which affects a public right-of-way, the person shall, at the person’s sole expense, promptly restore such right-of-way to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the department. If the person does not promptly restore such right-of-way, the city may cause the restoration to be made, and the costs of such restoration assessed against the person.

(2) Any tree, shrub or other landscape planting which shows substantial damage attributable to the person’s actions within 18 months of completion of the work shall be replaced at the person’s sole expense. [Ord. 292 § 4, 2000].


12.20.050 Fees.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city council shall, by resolution, establish fees and other charges for permits, plan checks, and other activities by persons performing work in or otherwise utilizing public right-of-way. [Ord. 292 § 5, 2000].

Article II. Excavations in Rights-of-Way


12.20.060 Excavation permits.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, no person shall make any excavation or tunnel under any area within public rights-of-way without first obtaining an excavation permit from the department. Utilities, as defined by Chapter 12.25 CBMC, are exempt from this subsection, and must comply with the provisions of Chapter 12.25 CBMC.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent emergency excavation necessary for the immediate preservation of life or property, for locating trouble in conduit or pipe or for making emergency repairs; provided, however, that any person making such emergency excavation applies for and receives a permit on the first working day after which the work is commenced. [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000].


12.20.070 Excavation permits – Application.

(1) Applications for excavation permits shall be made on forms provided by the department. The application shall describe the purpose, location and size of the anticipated excavation, the name of the person performing the actual excavation, and the name of the person for whom the excavation is being performed. The application shall contain a provision endorsed by the person for whom the excavation is being performed or the person’s agent, and that the person performing the excavation will comply with the requirements of this chapter and any conditions imposed upon the excavation.

(2) The application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the city attorney, to insure proper restoration of the public right-of-way. From this security shall be deducted the expense, if any, incurred by the city in cleaning up and removing material and debris and restoring the public right-of-way. The balance, if any, shall be returned to the person posting the security after excavation is complete and the right-of-way has been restored to good order and condition as the property was in immediately prior to the time excavation was undertaken. [Ord. 292 § 7, 2000].


12.20.080 Manner of excavation.

(1) Permittee performing excavation shall excavate in such a manner so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience or annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring properties. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest practicable extent, noise, dust and unsightly debris. Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the permittee shall not, except in case of emergency, use any tool, appliance or other equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the peace or repose of occupants of neighboring properties.

(2) No permittee shall make any excavation at variance with, or in any way contrary to, the terms of the excavation permit issued therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground. Excavation shall not at any point extend underneath or beyond the width of the opening at ground level.

(3) No injury shall be done to pipes, cables or conduit in making excavation. Notice shall be given to all persons maintaining pipes, cables or conduit which are or may be endangered or affected by the excavation prior to the time excavation commences.

(4) No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.

(5) After excavation commences, the person performing the excavation shall proceed with diligence and promptly complete the work.

(6) The permittee shall adequately barricade the area being excavated, and shall install sufficient warning lights to protect the public. [Ord. 292 § 8, 2000].


12.20.090 Inspection of work.

All excavation shall be inspected by the city. The director shall be notified before any work commences. The permittee shall not proceed until receiving authorization from the city at each step of the project as identified in the permit. [Ord. 292 § 9, 2000].


12.20.100 Placement of excavated material.

(1) All excavated material shall be laid compactly alongside the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic as reasonably possible. Whenever necessary to expedite traffic flow or to abate a nuisance caused by dirt or dust, the city may require toe boards or bins to contain excavated material.

(2) Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit piling excavated material beside the trench, the director may require the permittee to haul the excavated material to a storage site for storage until the time the trench is to be backfilled. [Ord. 292 § 10, 2000].


12.20.110 Cleanup.

From time to time as may be ordered by the director, and immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall, at the permittee’s sole expense, clean up and remove from the site all refuse and unused material of any kind resulting from the excavation, and upon the permittee’s failure to do so, the city may cause the cleanup and removal to be made, and assess the cost to the permittee. [Ord. 292 § 11, 2000].


12.20.120 Resurfacing.

Unless otherwise provided for in the permit, all pavement resurfacing shall be inspected and approved by the city, and made solely at the cost of the permittee. If the work fails inspection, the permittee shall rectify the problem within the time specified by the director. If the applicant fails to rectify the problem, the director may cause the resurfacing to be done, and the costs therefor assessed against the permittee. [Ord. 292 § 12, 2000].


12.20.130 Emergency excavation.

When traffic conditions, safety or convenience of the public requires excavation be performed on an emergency basis, the director shall have the authority to order, at the time the excavation permit is issued, that a crew and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee on a 24-hour basis such that the excavation may be completed as soon as practicable. [Ord. 292 § 13, 2000].

Article III. Bond or Other Security


12.20.140 Construction standards.

No person shall construct, install or operate a public improvement within a public right-of-way, unless such construction, installation or operation complies with applicable codes, rules and regulations. [Ord. 292 § 14, 2000].


12.20.150 Undertaking construction of public improvements.

(1)(a) Any person desiring to construct a public improvement within a public right-of-way shall submit construction plans and specifications for the public improvement to the director along with a plan check fee. Construction plans and specifications shall be accompanied by a verification from a registered professional engineer or other qualified professional that the plans and specifications meet standards set forth in the applicable codes, rules and regulations.

(b) After receiving preliminary approval of the plans from the city, but prior to the commencement of construction of the public improvement, the person shall obtain a right-of-way construction permit and post a performance bond or other security of sufficient amount to insure completion of construction. The right-of-way construction permit shall require that the public improvement be completed within 24 months of the date of issuance, or the bond or other security will be forfeited. The proceeds from any such forfeiture shall be used by the city to complete the improvement.

(c) All public improvement shall be constructed according to the plans and specifications as approved by the city. The permittee shall retain qualified inspectors or engineers during construction to ensure the public improvement is constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. At the time the public improvement is completed, the permittee shall provide the city with two sets of “as-built” drawings certifying that construction was completed according to the approved plans and specifications, along with copies of all inspections or engineer’s reports.

(2) If the permittee is unable to complete the improvement within the 24-month period, the director may grant a one-year extension upon good cause shown. Extensions beyond the one-year period may be granted by the council, upon good cause shown. If an extension is granted, no other right-of-way use permit shall be issued to the permittee until the public improvement is completed, unless the permit is first approved, in writing, by the director. Any extension shall be conditioned upon the permittee obtaining an extension of the bond or other security and providing adequate documentation of such extension to the city. [Ord. 292 § 15, 2000].


12.20.160 Form of bond or other security.

(1) The bond or security required by CBMC 12.20.150 shall be in the form of a surety or performance bond, cash deposit, or negotiable instrument. The cost of the public improvement shall be established by a contract between the person and a contractor for the construction of the improvement. The amount of the bond or other security shall be determined by the director, but in no case shall be in an amount not less than the contract price for the construction of the public improvement.

(2) The bond or other security shall:

(a) Name the city as the obligee;

(b) Be in a form approved by the city attorney;

(c) Release shall be conditioned upon final approval of the development and transfer of the public improvement to the city by dedication or other instrument;

(d) Provide full warranty for the improvements for a minimum of two years after the date the improvements are formally transferred to the city;

(e) Be subject to forfeiture if the permittee does not complete the improvements within the stated period or if the person creates a hazard which poses imminent danger to public health or safety within the immediate vicinity of the improvement and the permittee fails to commence correction within 24 hours of the date notification of the danger is provided to the permittee by the director, in writing;

(f) Cover all costs, liquidated damages and attorneys’ fees incurred by the city as a result of the permittee’s failure to complete construction within the specified time or to correct a hazard posing imminent danger to public health or safety in a timely fashion. [Ord. 292 § 16, 2000].


12.20.170 Penalties.

(1) Monetary Penalty. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is a violation, and shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $750.00 per violation. Each day that a violation continues after notice of the violation is provided shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.

(2) Revocation.

(a) In addition to, and not in lieu of, the foregoing penalties, the director may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter and file a claim against the permittee’s bond for violation of any provision of this chapter, and may disqualify any permittee who engages in repeated violations of this chapter from obtaining permits. Notice of the director’s decision shall be provided to the permittee by mailing a copy of the notice of revocation by first class mail and certified mail, with return receipt, to the permittee’s last known address.

(b) Appeals.

(i) The permittee may appeal any decision revoking a permit or disqualifying the permittee from obtaining permits to the city manager, by filing a notice of appeal, in writing, with the director within 15 days of the date of the director’s decision.

(ii) Appeal from the decision of the city manager shall be to the city council. The permittee shall file a notice of appeal, in writing, within 15 days of the date of the city manager’s decision. [Ord. 292 § 18, 2000].


Chapter 12.25 UTILITY USE OF STREETS

Sections:

12.25.010    Purpose.

12.25.020    Definitions.

12.25.030    Rules, regulations and standards.

12.25.040    Relocation of poles, wires, or fixtures.

12.25.050    Location and profile maps.

12.25.060    Extension denial.

12.25.070    Utility to provide maps.

12.25.080    Relocation due to construction.

12.25.090    Moving of buildings.

12.25.100    Liability of utility.

12.25.110    Remedies.

12.25.120    Penalty.

12.25.130    Chapter not a grant or permit to use streets.

12.25.140    Conflicting provisions.


12.25.010 Purpose.

The council finds that the construction, alteration, and repair of streets, and the use of streets by the public, are directly affected by the existence and use of utility property within the public rights-of-way and that the use of streets by utilities should be regulated and controlled to protect the traveling public, to prevent damage to the public streets, and to prevent damage to public and private property, including the property of utilities using the streets. The council further finds that it is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience to establish rules, regulations and standards to control and regulate the use by utilities of the public streets, alleys, easements, and places within the city. [Ord. 72 § 1, 1986].


12.25.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Street” means any part of the full dedicated width or length of a public street, alley, place or easement.

“Utility” means a person, firm, corporation, company, board, or commission, whether public or private, which owns, possesses, or maintains over, on, or under the public streets, alleys, places and easements within the city any poles, wires, cables, conduits, pipelines or other fixtures. [Ord. 72 § 2, 1986].


12.25.030 Rules, regulations and standards.

The council may enact, by motion or resolution, rules, regulations, and standards for the height, location, and relocation of wires, poles, and fixtures and the depth, location and the repair and inspection thereof, for the purposes of protecting the traveling public from hazards, obstructions, and defects on public streets, of providing for the restoration of public streets to substantially their previous condition, and for the protection of utility property over, on or under the streets of the city. The council may provide for the issuance of permits for work to be done and impose reasonable fees and charges for the review and inspection of plans and construction work and for damage to streets which cannot be fully repaired. Copies of all rules, regulations and standards and amendments or additions thereto provided for in this section shall be mailed to both the local and head office of each utility using the streets of the city at least 10 days prior to the effective date thereof. The rules, regulations and standards adopted by the council shall have the effect of law; and any violation of such rules, regulations and standards shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to all the penalties and remedies provided for in this chapter. All rules, regulations and standards adopted by the council shall be filed with the city recorder and shall be open to public inspection. No failure to mail copies to utilities shall cause any rule, regulation or standard to become ineffective or invalid or relieve any utility from the obligation of complying therewith. [Ord. 72 § 3, 1986].


12.25.040 Relocation of poles, wires, or fixtures.

The council may order the relocation within any area of the city of any poles, wires or fixtures to or from streets, alleys or easements or from poles to underground conduits, where the council finds that relocation is necessary or desirable because of traffic congestion or the partial obstruction or impairment of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or the existence of hazards or dangerous conditions created by the location of the poles, wires or fixtures. The council may determine that joint use of poles by two or more utilities is feasible and desirable in a particular area or street and the city may make written request to utilities for joint use. If the request is not complied with, the council may order the utilities to provide joint use under terms and conditions deemed by the council to be fair, equitable and reasonable to all parties concerned, or the council may order the utilities to place the wires in underground conduits.

The council may order the raising or lowering of a pipeline or conduit where the council finds that a pipeline or conduit conflicts with the proposed location of any pipeline designed to carry a substance or material by gravity flow, or because of the establishment of an original grade or change in the grade of any street. Where a change is made in a legally established grade, the council may prescribe reasonable terms for raising or lowering of pipelines or conduits. [Ord. 72 § 4, 1986].


12.25.050 Location and profile maps.

No utility shall commence any work for original installation or relocation of poles, wires, pipelines or conduits on public streets unless the utility has filed a location map with the city engineer and has received approval from the city engineer for the original installation or relocation. In the case of pipelines and conduits, a utility shall file a profile map in addition to a location map with the city engineer. The city engineer shall give approval or disapproval in writing to the utility within five days after receipt of the location map and/or profile map, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Each location map and/or profile map filed with the city engineer shall designate with reasonable certainty the boundary line or lines of the public right-of-way and the proposed location for the poles, wires, pipelines or conduits. Except as provided in CBMC 12.25.060, approval or disapproval by the city engineer shall be based upon the existing or proposed location of pipelines, conduits, poles, or fixtures, the existing or proposed grade of the street, the existing or proposed improvements of the street, and the street and zoning plans and policies of the city. Upon completion of any original installation or relocation, a utility shall file with the city engineer plans and profiles of the location, if there is any material variation from the original plans and profiles.

This section shall not apply to the relocation of poles, wires, pipelines or conduits which are ordered to be relocated by the city where the new location is designated by the city with location and/or profile maps. [Ord. 72 § 5, 1986].


12.25.060 Extension denial.

The city may deny permission for the extension of utility services over streets which are dedicated but have not been accepted as public streets by the city where such extension is designed to serve only properties which are being developed in violation of city or state law. [Ord. 72 § 6, 1986].


12.25.070 Utility to provide maps.

Within 30 days after receiving written request from the city engineer, a utility shall deliver to the city location and profile maps showing the location of all pipelines and underground conduits in specified streets, which are the subject of proposed street or sewer improvements. [Ord. 72 § 7, 1986].


12.25.080 Relocation due to construction.

A utility shall, at its own expense, move and relocate poles, fixtures, wires, pipelines and conduits whenever the movement and relocation becomes necessary or expedient because of the construction of public improvements upon any street in the city. The utility shall be given at least 30 days’ written notice, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, specifying the place where the poles, fixtures, wires, pipelines or conduits should be moved and the time within which the movement should take place. Where the city has contracted for the construction of a public improvement upon any street, it shall give the written notice provided in this section at or about the time of the letting of the contract, but not less than 30 days prior to the time required for moving any poles, fixtures, wires, pipelines or conduits. If any pole, fixture, wire, pipeline or conduit is not moved within the time specified in the written notice, the utility shall, upon demand by the city, pay to the city liquidated damages and penalty in an amount equal to $100.00 for each day or part thereof, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the time specified in the notice until the pole, fixture, wire, pipeline or conduit is actually moved as directed. [Ord. 72 § 8, 1986].


12.25.090 Moving of buildings.

No person, firm, or corporation shall move, or cause to be moved, over any city street, a building or structure unless the person, firm or corporation has given at least 96 hours’ written notice, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The notice shall be given to the engineering department and police department of the city and to all utilities having wires which must be raised or lowered to permit the passage or movement of the building or structure along or across the street. The written notice shall designate the route over which the building or structure is to travel, the time that the movement is to take place, the height of the building, and the estimated weight of the building or structure. Before the time specified for the movement of the building, the city engineer may require that a different route be taken or that specified methods be used in the movement of the building if the engineer finds that damage might be caused to any street. The engineer may also designate a different time of day for the movement and give notice to the utilities in the event that an interruption of utility service at the proposed time will unduly inconvenience the public. Where utility wires must be raised or lowered, the cost of raising or lowering the wires shall be paid in advance to the utilities involved. If the notices are given and the cost paid to the utilities, it shall be the duty of the utilities to raise or lower all wires necessary at the required time. [Ord. 72 § 9, 1986].


12.25.100 Liability of utility.

A utility shall be responsible and liable for any damages caused by its failure or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or the rules, regulations, and standards adopted under the terms of this chapter, for the protection of persons or property. Neither the city nor any of its officers or employees shall be liable for a dangerous or negligently created condition caused by the utility or by the failure of the utility to comply with this chapter or the rules, regulations, and standards provided for in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a duty on the city to perform any work which is required of any utility, and a failure of a utility to perform work required by this chapter shall constitute a violation. [Ord. 72 § 10, 1986].


12.25.110 Remedies.

Insofar as it shall be permitted by law, the city may enforce any of the provisions of this chapter in a civil action or suit brought against the utility, or any of its officers, agents, or employees. [Ord. 72 § 11, 1986].


12.25.120 Penalty.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate violation of this chapter. [Ord. 72 § 12, 1986].


12.25.130 Chapter not a grant or permit to use streets.

No provision of this chapter shall constitute or be construed as granting or permitting the use of streets in the city by any utility which does not have a franchise from the city. This chapter shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment by the city of any of its powers or privileges provided for by law, franchise or contract. [Ord. 72 § 13, 1986].


12.25.140 Conflicting provisions.

This chapter is intended to be an exercise of the city’s police powers for the health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the public; but in the event that any provision hereof shall not be so construed, and shall conflict with any provision of an existing franchise or charter, then the terms of such franchise or charter shall prevail. [Ord. 72 § 14, 1986].


Chapter 12.30 STREET NAMING AND BUILDING NUMBERING

Sections:

12.30.010    Uniform system.

12.30.020    Base line.

12.30.030    Authority to assign numbers.

12.30.040    Placing numbers.

12.30.050    Location and type.

12.30.060    Penalty.


12.30.010 Uniform system.

All streets shall be named and all structures, except sheds and outbuildings, shall be numbered in accordance with this chapter. [Ord. 125 § 1, 1988].


12.30.020 Base line.

Street names shall be established by council resolution. [Ord. 125 § 2, 1988].


12.30.030 Authority to assign numbers.

The community development department shall assign numbers for all structures, except sheds and outbuildings. The owner or agent of any structure required by this chapter to be numbered must apply to the community development department for assignment of a number. [Ord. 125 § 3, 1988].


12.30.040 Placing numbers.

Owners of all existing structures that are required to be numbered shall comply within one month from the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. All structures erected after enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter are required to be numbered and must have numbers in place within one month after completion of the structure. [Ord. 125 § 4, 1988].


12.30.050 Location and type.

(1) Numbers shall be affixed in a conspicuous location which is clearly visible from the fronting street and clearly identifies the structure.

(2) Numbers shall be of contrasting color to the surface upon which they are affixed. They may be painted, metallic, plastic, or wooden fixtures that will not rust or corrode.

(3) Numbers shall be at least three inches high. [Ord. 125 § 5, 1988].


12.30.060 Penalty.

Violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $25.00 for each day’s violation. [Ord. 125 § 6, 1988].


Chapter 12.35 PARK REGULATIONS

Sections:

12.35.010    Definitions.

12.35.020    Park regulations.

12.35.030    Penalties.


12.35.010 Definitions.

“Beach and swimming area” means the area of the lower John Topits Park beginning at the old spillway at the east side of the John Topits Park parking lot and continuing to the new spillway under the entrance road to the lower John Topits Park parking lot.

“Day” means the period of time of daylight hours from dawn to dusk.

“Designated recreational area” means any area specifically designated by the city of Coos Bay for use beyond day use, including, but not limited to, softball fields, tennis courts and the walking path around Mingus Lake.

“Fireworks” means a combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.

“Park” means all parks recognized in the Coos Bay parks master plan, including but not limited to the Coos Bay Boardwalk, Empire boat ramp and the Eastside boat ramp.

“Smoking” means any inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of any lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or similar product containing tobacco, cannabis, or other illegal drug, or any similar substance. “Smoking” also includes discarding of any tobacco, cannabis, or other illegal drug product or residue such as cigarette or cigar butts, ashes, spit containing tobacco or drug residue, or other similar discarded product or residue.

“Spillway” means the outfall structures and pipes located in the middle and lower dams of the Empire Lakes used to control water levels in the Empire Lakes as directed by the Oregon Department of Water Resources.

“Vehicle” means any motorized mode of transportation, excluding motorized wheelchairs or other similar devices used for personal mobility by persons with physical disabilities.

“Watercraft” means any craft constructed or used for moving on or across water, including but not limited to boats, rafts and jet skis.

“Weapon” means a gun or weapon, including a spring or air actuated pellet gun, air gun or BB gun, bow and arrow, sling shot, or any weapon which propels a projectile in any way, not limited to gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion. [Ord. 428 § 1, 2010; Ord. 257 § 1, 1998; Ord. 248 § 1, 1998].


12.35.020 Park regulations.

(1) Bicycles, Skateboards, Rollerblades, Skates. No person shall ride or use bicycles, skateboards, rollerskates, rollerblades, or skates in any park in a negligent or reckless manner, and any person riding or using such devices shall yield to all pedestrian traffic. No person shall ride or use bicycles, skateboards, rollerskates or skates on the Mingus Park stage, or on any plaza, path or parking lot which is posted against such use.

(2) Camping. No person, other than a city of Coos Bay park host, shall camp in any park without first obtaining a special events permit from the department of community services.

(3) Day Use. All parks are for day use only, except as otherwise posted in designated recreational areas. The Coos Bay Boardwalk and the use of the ramps at Empire boat ramp and Eastside boat ramp are exempt from this regulation.

(4) Dogs. All dogs shall be on a leash and shall be controlled by the owner at all times. Dogs are not permitted in the beach and swimming area of Empire Lakes. Owners are required to remove and deposit all dog feces in appropriate trash receptacles.

(5) Weapons. No person shall discharge or otherwise use a weapon within park boundaries.

(6) Fireworks. No person shall light, ignite or burn any type of firework within park boundaries.

(7) Fishing. No person shall fish in any designated beach or swimming area.

(8) Plant Life. No person, other than a city employee in the execution of his or her job duties or designated volunteer in the course of his or her duties, shall pick, cut, mutilate or remove any plant, bush or tree within park boundaries.

(9) Skateboard Area. No person shall ride a bicycle in an area designated for skateboard use only.

(10) Speed Limit. No person shall drive a vehicle in a park at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, unless official traffic signs provide otherwise.

(11) Spillway. No person, other than a city employee in the execution of his or her job duties or a volunteer acting under the direction of an authorized city employee, shall remove or replace any spillway boards in the Empire Lakes.

(12) Vehicles. No person, other than a city employee in the execution of his or her job duties, emergency service personnel or designated volunteer in the course of his or her duties, shall operate a motor vehicle on a trail, path or road in a park unless the trail, path or road is specially designated by the council for vehicular use. No person, other than a city employee in the execution of his or her job duties, emergency personnel or designated volunteer in the course of his or her authorized duties, shall operate a vehicle off any trail or engage in any other off-road activities with the vehicle.

(13) Watercraft. Watercraft may use electric motors on Empire Lakes, if so provided by the Oregon State Marine Board. No person shall operate a watercraft on Mingus Lake with any type of motorized power. This regulation does not apply to radio-controlled boats or emergency vehicles.

(14) Wildlife. No person shall hunt, pursue, trap, kill, injure, or molest any wildlife, other than legal game fish as designated by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(15) Smoking. No person shall smoke or use e-cigarettes within the boundaries of Mingus Park, John Topits Park, Eastside Park, Ed Lund Park, Taylor/Wasson Park, Windy Hill Park, South 10th Street Park, Hollering Place Wayside, Marshfield Pioneer Cemetery, Eastside Boat Ramp and Empire Boat Ramp. In addition, no person shall smoke or use e-cigarettes upon or within 25 feet of the city’s wooden boardwalk. [Ord. 476, 2016; Ord. 458 § 1, 2014; Ord. 428 § 2, 2010; Ord. 296 § 1, 2000; Ord. 248 § 2, 1998].


12.35.030 Penalties.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $1,000. Each violation is a separate offense, and if the violation is of a continuing nature, each and every day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. [Ord. 248 § 3, 1998].


Chapter 12.38 EXCLUSION FROM CITY FACILITIES AND PROPERTY

Sections:

12.38.010    Exclusion authority.

12.38.020    Exclusion notice.

12.38.030    Appeal of exclusion.

12.38.040    Violation – Criminal trespass.


12.38.010 Exclusion authority.

(1) In addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by city ordinance or code, or state law, a law enforcement officer, or any person specifically authorized by the city manager, may exclude any individual from city parks, recreational areas, city-owned or leased properties or city-sponsored events for a period of up to 90 days based upon a reasonably objective belief by the officer (or authorized person) that the individual has engaged in:

(a) Conduct made criminal as either a misdemeanor or felony under state law;

(b) Conduct in violation of city ordinance or code;

(c) Conduct in violation of a city council adopted rule of conduct.

(2) An exclusion issued under the provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall take effect upon issuance of the notice of exclusion and remain in effect for the period set out therein, subject only to an appeal consistent with the appeal process described in this chapter. [Ord. 501 § 1, 2018].


12.38.020 Exclusion notice.

The notice of exclusion shall include the following:

(1) The provision of state law, city ordinance, code or rule which has been violated;

(2) The places within the city where the exclusion applies;

(3) The start and end dates of the exclusion period;

(4) A prominently displayed warning of the consequences (sanctions) for the failure to comply with the exclusion as described in this chapter; and

(5) A statement that the excluded person has the right to file a written appeal with the city manager for the city of Coos Bay, within five business days of the issuance of the notice, to have the exclusion rescinded or the exclusion period shortened. [Ord. 501 § 2, 2018].


12.38.030 Appeal of exclusion.

(1) A person receiving a notice of exclusion under the provisions of this chapter may file a written appeal with the city manager for the city of Coos Bay within five business days of the issuance of the notice of exclusion to have the exclusion rescinded or the exclusion period shortened.

(2) The written appeal shall contain the following:

(a) The appellant’s name;

(b) The appellant’s mailing address and contact information, including phone number and email address (if applicable);

(c) A concise statement of the basis on which the decision to exclude the appellant is invalid, unauthorized, or otherwise improper; and

(d) A copy of the notice of exclusion.

(3) The city manager shall set a date and time for the appeal hearing not less than seven days nor more than 21 days after the receipt of a properly and timely filed appeal. The city manager may alter the date and time for the hearing on his/her own motion, or at the request of the appellant or city for good cause shown.

(4) If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under subsection (1) of this section, the notice automatically stays the exclusion period until the city manager issues a decision on the appeal.

(5) The city has the burden to show, by a preponderance of evidence, that the exclusion is warranted, given the totality of the circumstances.

(6) The city manager shall issue his/her determination in writing and provide a copy to both the city and the appellant. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2018].


12.38.040 Violation – Criminal trespass.

No person shall enter or remain in any public place at any time during which there is in effect a notice of exclusion issued pursuant to this chapter. A person who knowingly violates a notice of exclusion commits the crime of criminal trespass. [Ord. 501 § 4, 2018].


Chapter 12.40 VIEWSHEDS – EMPIRE DISTRICT

Sections:

12.40.010    Definitions.

12.40.020    Findings.

12.40.030    Establishment of viewsheds.

12.40.040    Establishment of Empire area viewshed.

12.40.050    Regulation of viewshed.

12.40.060    Penalty.


12.40.010 Definitions.

“Empire district” means the Empire urban renewal district, as established by the 1995 Empire Urban Renewal Plan.

“Empire plan” means the 1995 Empire Urban Renewal Plan, as approved by Coos Bay City Ordinance No. 216.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity or entity in fact.

“Viewshed” means a street, sidewalk, and public right-of-way which has been subject to urban or affected by redevelopment activity pursuant to an urban renewal plan and designated as a viewshed by the Coos Bay city council. [Ord. 271 § 1, 1999].


12.40.020 Findings.

(1) Pursuant to ORS 457.320, a municipality may exercise any of its powers otherwise provided by law to assist an urban renewal agency in the carrying out of an urban renewal plan.

(2) The purpose of the urban redevelopment activity undertaken in urban renewal districts in the city of Coos Bay by the urban renewal agency for the city of Coos Bay is to encourage economic redevelopment of the urban renewal districts by the elimination of urban blight.

(3) For the purposes of this chapter, “urban blight” includes unregulated private and commercial activity occurring in public rights-of-way which detracts from the appearance of the urban renewal district.

(4) To eliminate urban blight and thereby encourage economic redevelopment, the city of Coos Bay finds it is necessary to establish view-sheds and reasonable regulations for private and business activity in and along streets, sidewalks and public rights-of-way in any viewshed established by this chapter. [Ord. 271 § 2, 1999].


12.40.030 Establishment of viewsheds.

The city council may, by ordinance, designate areas located within urban renewal districts as viewsheds to be regulated by this chapter. [Ord. 271 § 3, 1999].


12.40.040 Establishment of Empire area viewshed.

The street, sidewalks and all public rights-of-way lying along Newmark Avenue between the intersection of Newmark Avenue and Cammann Street and the intersection of Newmark Avenue and Empire Boulevard, and all intersecting streets, sidewalks and public rights-of-way for a distance of one block to the north and one block to the south of Newmark Avenue between Cammann Street and Empire Boulevard is hereby designated as the Empire area viewshed. [Ord. 271 § 4, 1999].


12.40.050 Regulation of viewshed.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall place or offer for sale, or allow to be placed or offered for sale, any merchandise, goods, or other personal property within any viewshed.

(2) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the temporary parking of automobiles, trucks, bicycles or motorcycles within any view-shed, or to prevent the display of merchandise, goods or other personal property in any window of any building located within any viewshed. [Ord. 271 § 10, 1999].


12.40.060 Penalty.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000. Each violation is a separate offense, and if the violation is of a continuing nature, each and every day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. [Ord. 271 § 11, 1999].


Chapter 12.45 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION

Sections:

12.45.010    General.

12.45.020    Vacations for purposes of rededication.

12.45.030    Individual ROW vacation request.

12.45.040    Pre-application and staff review of ROW vacation request.

12.45.050    Council review of ROW vacation request.

12.45.060    Notice of public hearing.

12.45.070    Public hearing and decision.

12.45.080    Conditions.

12.45.090    Title to vacated areas.

12.45.100    Vacation records to be filed – Costs.

12.45.110    Effective date.


12.45.010 General.

(1) The city may find it appropriate and necessary to vacate a public right-of-way (ROW) (street, court, alley, plat, or other public place) when the public interest will not be prejudiced by the proposed vacation. Example of an instance where the public interest would be prejudiced includes but is not limited to a situation where the vacation would adversely affect public access or hinder efficient development. Vacation may be found to be appropriate and necessary for municipal purposes or to promote public welfare.

(2) No public right-of-way (ROW) may be vacated without the consent of the owners of the abutting property if the vacation will substantially affect the access or market value of such property, unless the city governing body provides for paying damages. If the ROW vacation was requested by an individual as defined in subsection (6) of this section, provision for paying such damages shall be funded by the individual requesting the ROW vacation for a local assessment to be managed by the city but funded by the individual.

(3) Two or more streets, alleys, avenues and boulevards, or parts thereof, may be joined in one proceeding, provided they intersect or are adjacent and parallel to each other.

(4) No ordinance for the vacation of all or part of a plat shall be passed by the council until the city recorder’s office has verified that all city liens and all taxes have been paid on the lands covered by the plat or portion thereof to be vacated.

(5) Any property owner affected by the order of vacation or the order awarding damages or benefits in such vacation proceedings may appeal to the Coos County circuit court within the time and in substantially the manner provided for taking an appeal in civil cases.

(6) For the purposes of this chapter, “individual” means any party, corporation, person or persons. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.020 Vacations for purposes of rededication.

No street shall be vacated when it is proposed by an individual or the city to replat or rededicate all or part of any street in lieu of the original unless the ROW vacation application is accompanied by a plat, prepared by a qualified engineer, showing the proposed manner of replatting or rededicating. If the proposed manner of replatting or rededicating or any modification thereof which may subsequently be made meets with the approval of the city council, it shall require a suitable guarantee that such replatting or rededication is conditioned and will take effect only upon the recordation of such replatting or rededication with the county clerk. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.030 Individual ROW vacation request.

An individual may request a ROW vacation for council action subject to the requirements of this chapter by submitting the following to the public works/community development director (director) or his/her designee as a part of the pre-application meeting as noted in CBMC 12.45.040:

(1) A city ROW application form.

(2) At the discretion of the director, a legal description may be required.

(3) A notarized statement of the individual requesting the vacation that owners of the “real property affected nearby” as defined by state statute have been notified of the pending request before the city. This statement will include a copy of the names and addresses of the owners of real property affected thereby. For the purposes of this section, “real property affected thereby” shall be the land lying on either side of the street or portion thereof proposed to be vacated and extending laterally to the next street that serves as a parallel street, but in any case not to exceed 200 feet, and the land for a like lateral distance on either side of the street for 400 feet along its course beyond each terminus of the part proposed to be vacated. Where a street is proposed to be vacated to its termini, the land embraced in an extension of the street for a distance of 400 feet beyond each terminus shall also be counted.

(4) A map of the ground proposed to be vacated, the purpose and justification for the vacation, and if applicable, a plat showing the proposed manner of replatting or rededication.

(5) Any fees required by the city to process the ROW vacation request. The city recorder shall obtain from the individuals requesting council action on a ROW vacation a sum sufficient to cover the cost of publication, posting and other anticipated expenses. The city recorder shall hold the sum so obtained until the actual cost has been ascertained, when the amount of the cost shall be paid into the city treasury and any surplus refunded to the individual requesting the ROW vacation. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.040 Pre-application and staff review of ROW vacation request.

The individual seeking a ROW vacation shall meet with and submit his/her request to the public works/community development department for director review to verify consistency with CBMC 12.45.030 and routing the proposed ROW request to utility companies and any local, state or federal jurisdiction for review, comment and requests for information and requirements. The city recorder (or designee) shall verify that the notarized statement referenced in CBMC 12.45.030(3) is valid. If the ROW vacation request is found by city staff to accurately reflect the requirements of CBMC 12.45.030, the city recorder shall inform the applicant when the proposed right-of-way vacation request will come to the city council for consideration to initiate a ROW vacation. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.050 Council review of ROW vacation request.

(1) The council may initiate vacation proceedings authorized without consent of property owners. The council may also initiate vacation proceedings upon request of a property owner consistent with this chapter. Notice shall be given as provided by CBMC 12.45.060. No such vacation shall be made before the date set for hearing, nor if the owners of a majority of the area affected, computed on the basis provided in ORS 271.080, object in writing thereto, nor shall any street area be vacated without the consent of the owners of the abutting property if the vacation will substantially affect the market value of such property, unless the city provides for paying damages. If the ROW vacation was initiated by a property owner, paying such damages shall be funded by the individual requesting ROW vacation. If the ROW vacation was initiated by the city without a request from a property owner, provision for such damages may be made by a local assessment, or in such other manner as the city charter may provide.

(2) ROW vacations are authorized by ordinance.

(3) Any property owner affected by the council’s authorization of a ROW vacation or the award of damages or benefits in such vacation proceedings may appeal to the Coos County circuit court in the manner provided for taking an appeal from justice court in civil cases. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.060 Notice of public hearing.

(1) The city recorder (or designee) shall give notice of a council initiation for a ROW vacation and public hearing by publishing a notice at least 14 days before the hearing in the city official newspaper once each week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. The notices shall include an exhibit and description of the ground covered by the ROW vacation, if applicable, give the name and date of the individual who requested council initiation of a ROW vacation, and any objection or remonstrance, which may be made in writing and filed with the city recorder prior to the time of the council public hearing to consider an individual’s request for council to initiate a ROW vacation.

(2) Within five days after the first day of publication of the notice, the city recorder shall cause to be posted at or near each end of the proposed vacation a copy of the notice, which shall be headed, “Notice of Street Vacation,” “Notice of Plat Vacation” or “Notice of Plat and Street Vacation,” or “Notice of Right-of-Way Vacation,” whichever the case may be. The notice shall be posted in at least two conspicuous places in the proposed vacation area at least 14 days before the hearing.

(3) For ROW vacations requested by individuals, the city recorder shall, before publishing such notice, obtain from individuals requesting council’s initiation of a ROW vacation a sum sufficient to cover the cost of publication, posting and other anticipated expenses. The city recorder shall hold the sum so obtained until the actual cost has been ascertained, when the amount of the cost shall be paid into the city treasury and any surplus refunded to the depositor. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.070 Public hearing and decision.

(1) The city council, after holding a public hearing to accept public testimony on a ROW vacation, may authorize a ROW vacation or portion thereof subject to compliance with the following:

(a) The public notice has been provided consistent with CBMC 12.45.060.

(b) The proposal does not conflict with the comprehensive plan, including the adopted Coos Bay transportation system plan (TSP), or other applicable city or state regulations.

(c) The vacation does not prejudice the public interest.

(d) All abutting owners of the property proposed to be vacated did not object.

(e) The majority of the owners of affected property (not less than two-thirds in the area of real property affected thereby as defined in ORS 271.080(2)) did not object to the vacation in writing prior to the hearing.

(f) The vacation will not substantially affect the marketability of abutting property in terms of access, utility services, or protective services, unless the owners of the property consent to compensating the property owner for such adverse effect consistent with CBMC 12.45.050(1). [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.080 Conditions.

For ROW vacations initiated by individuals, the council may impose conditions necessary for the vacation, to be provided at the individual’s expense, including but not limited to:

(1) Retention of easements for physical access, public utilities, or other public service facilities and limitations on the use of the area adjacent to those facilities.

(2) Construction or removal of public utilities or other public service facilities and limitations on the use of the area adjacent to those facilities.

(3) Replatting or rededication of land to be vacated.

(4) Improvement of streets or alleys prior to rededication.

(5) At the discretion of the director, a right-of-way survey may be required. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.090 Title to vacated areas.

The title to the street or other public area vacated shall attach to the lands bordering on such area in equal portions. However, where the area has been originally dedicated by different persons and the fee title to such area has not been otherwise disposed of, original boundary lines shall be adhered to and as determined by the county assessor, the street area which lies on each side of such boundary line shall attach to the abutting property on such side. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.100 Vacation records to be filed – Costs.

(1) A certified copy of the ordinance vacating any street or plat area and any map, plat or other record in regard thereto which may be required or provided for by law, shall be filed for record by the city recorder with the Coos County clerk.

(2) If the ROW vacation as noted in CBMC 12.45.050(1) has been authorized by the council as a result of a request of an individual, the individual shall bear the recording cost and cost of preparing and filing the certified copy of the ordinance and the map. [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


12.45.110 Effective date.

The ROW vacation will become effective subject to compliance with the requirements of CBMC 12.45.100(1). [Ord. 517 § 6 (Exh. 1), 2019].


Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES AND SERVICES

Chapters:

13.05    Protection of Water Supply

13.10    Fluoride Supplementation

13.15    Wastewater System Users

13.20    Utility Franchises and Licenses


Chapter 13.05 PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY

Sections:

13.05.010    Definitions.

13.05.020    Offenses against the purity of the water supply.

13.05.030    Regulations for authorized persons.

13.05.040    Pollution prohibited.

13.05.050    Defacing signs.

13.05.060    Penalty.


13.05.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the following words mean:

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Person” means any individual, firm or corporation.

“Water board” means the Coos Bay/North Bend water board.

“Watershed” means all property:

(1) Occupied by the distribution system or by the domestic water supply sources by and from which the city or any person or corporation provides water to the city.

(2) Acquired, owned or occupied for the purpose of preserving or protecting the purity of the domestic water supply source.

(3) Acquired, owned or occupied by cities within the areas draining into the domestic water supply source. [Ord. 73 § 1, 1986].


13.05.020 Offenses against the purity of the water supply.

No person shall pollute or endanger the purity of the city water supply by:

(1) Going or trespassing upon the area within the watershed.

(2) Permitting any animal owned, controlled or possessed by the person to run at large or be pastured, kept or maintained within the watershed.

(3) Leaving, keeping or depositing any garbage, refuse, or offensive material within the watershed.

(4) Carrying or discharging a firearm, or killing any animal or fowl within the watershed.

(5) Picnicking, camping, hunting, fishing, smoking or lighting or maintaining a fire within the watershed, except fires authorized by the Coos Bay/North Bend water board.

(6) Driving a motor vehicle in the watershed without written permission from the city manager or the manager of the water board.

(7) Bathing or swimming or placing any article or substance in or so near as to be liable to cause pollution of the lakes, springs, streams, creeks or tributaries in the watershed. [Ord. 73 § 2, 1986].


13.05.030 Regulations for authorized persons.

No employee or contractor of the city or the water board employed in the watershed shall violate any rules and regulations adopted by the city or the board to protect the purity of the water and prevent pollution. [Ord. 73 § 3, 1986].


13.05.040 Pollution prohibited.

No person shall establish or maintain a slaughter pen, stock feeding yards or hog pens, or deposit or maintain any uncleanly or unwholesome substance, or conduct any business or occupation, or allow any condition upon or sufficiently near the sources from which the city water supply is obtained, or where water is stored, or the property or means through which it may be conveyed or conducted so that the water would be polluted or its purity destroyed or endangered. [Ord. 73 § 4, 1986].


13.05.050 Defacing signs.

No person shall alter, change, deface, or destroy any sign, warning or notice posted by the city or the water board in the watershed. [Ord. 73 § 5, 1986].


13.05.060 Penalty.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $1,000. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate violation of this chapter. [Ord. 73 § 6, 1986].


Chapter 13.10 FLUORIDE SUPPLEMENTATION

Sections:

13.10.010    Authority for supplementation.

13.10.020    State regulations.


13.10.010 Authority for supplementation.

The Coos Bay/North Bend water board, the governing body vested with the management and operation of the water system of the cities of North Bend and Coos Bay, is authorized and directed to provide for the fluoride supplementation of the public water supply of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 71 § 1, 1986].


13.10.020 State regulations.

Fluoride supplementation of the city water supply shall comply with the regulations and recommendations of the Oregon State Health Division regarding fluoride supplementation of public water supplies. [Ord. 71 § 2, 1986].


Chapter 13.15 WASTEWATER SYSTEM USERS

Sections:

13.15.010    Definitions.

Article I. General Discharge Regulations

13.15.020    General discharge prohibitions.

13.15.030    Limitations on wastewater strength.

13.15.040    Accidental discharges.

Article II. Industrial Wastes

13.15.050    Pretreatment facilities.

13.15.060    Industrial waste discharge permits.

13.15.070    Reporting requirements.

13.15.080    Inspection and sampling.

13.15.090    Change in permitted discharge.

13.15.100    Records.

13.15.110    Confidential information.

Article III. User Charges and Fees

13.15.120    User fees.

13.15.130    Water usage – Metering.

13.15.140    Collection procedures.

Article IV. Connections and Private Wastewater Disposal

13.15.150    Initiation of connection to the wastewater system.

13.15.160    New connections to wastewater system.

13.15.170    Separate private laterals required – Exceptions.

13.15.180    Owner responsibility for maintenance and repair of laterals.

13.15.190    Disconnection from the wastewater system.

13.15.200    Collection lines in new developments.

13.15.210    Private wastewater disposal.

13.15.220    Unauthorized connections.

Article V. Permits, Line Charges, and Recovery Agreements

13.15.230    Permit fees.

13.15.240    Line charges.

13.15.250    Financing options.

Article VI. Violations

13.15.260    Enforcement procedures.

13.15.270    Damages, penalties and costs.

13.15.280    Conflict.


13.15.010 Definitions.

“Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).

“Collection line” means that portion of the wastewater treatment system which collects and transmits wastewater from users to the wastewater treatment plant, excluding private laterals and service laterals, or that portion of the wastewater treatment system which collects and transmits stormwater from users to the receiving waters of Coos Bay.

“Director” means the director of the department of community services of the city or his/her duly authorized representatives.

“Discharger” means any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into the wastewater treatment system.

“Force main” means an underground pipe designed to transport wastewater under pressure from a pump station to a collection line.

“Garbage” means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of products.

“Industrial waste” means any liquid, solid, or gaseous substance, or combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, commercial food processing, business, agriculture, trade or research, including, but not limited to, the development, recovery or processing of natural resources and leachate from landfills or other disposal sites.

“Industrial waste discharge permit” means a permit to discharge industrial wastes into the city wastewater treatment system issued under the authority of this chapter and which prescribes certain discharge requirements and limitations.

“Interference” means the inhibition or disruption of the wastewater treatment system processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit.

“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.

“NPDES permit” means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the city by the United States Environmental Protection Agency setting specific requirements for discharge from the city’s treatment plants into the waters of Coos Bay.

“Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership, corporation, group, or any other legal entity.

“pH” means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.

“Private lateral” means an underground pipe, including all connections and appurtenances, owned by a property owner connecting a building to a service lateral or a collection line.

“Pump station” means a facility designed to pump wastewater into the wastewater system, where such transport may not be made through gravity.

“Sanitary sewer system” means that portion of the wastewater treatment system which disposes of the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions.

“Service lateral” means a conduit extending from the collection line to a private lateral.

“Slugload” means any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to the city wastewater treatment system.

“Storm sewer system” means that portion of the wastewater system which disposes of runoff or other surface water which does not require treatment prior to release into the environment.

“Stormwater” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.

“Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

“User” means any person or governmental entity that discharges wastewater into the city’s wastewater treatment system.

“Wastewater treatment system” means the combined sanitary sewer system and the storm sewer system of the city of Coos Bay, including all appurtenances thereof. [Ord. 331 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 132 § 1, 1989].

Article I. General Discharge Regulations


13.15.020 General discharge prohibitions.

(1) Use of Restricted Sewers. It is unlawful to discharge, permit the discharge, or permit or allow a connection which will result in the discharge of sanitary sewage, wastewater, or industrial waste into the city’s storm sewer system. It is unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge or cause or permit a connection which will result in the discharge of stormwater, roof drains and down spouts, ground water, street drainage, subsurface drainage, or yard drainage or uncontaminated water used for refrigerating or cooling purposes or steam condensation into the city’s wastewater treatment system.

(2) Prohibited Discharges. It is unlawful to discharge, cause to discharge or allow to discharge directly or indirectly into the city wastewater treatment system any of the following:

(a) Waters or wastes containing substances in such concentrations that they inhibit or interfere with the operation or performance of any wastewater treatment process, are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are only partially amenable to treatment such that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the NPDES permit requirements or that prevent the use or disposal of wastewater treatment plant sludge in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.

(b) Any liquids, solids, or gases, which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the wastewater treatment system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, alcohols, toluene, xylene, ethers, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, fuel oil, mineral oil and any other substance which the city, state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard. At no time shall two successive readings on a combustible gas meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent, nor any single reading over 10 percent, of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.

(c) Any solid or viscous substances capable of obstructing wastewater which will or may cause obstruction to the flow of wastewater or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment system. These substances include, but are not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, insoluble shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, creosote, plastics, wood, animal paunch contents, offal, blood, bones, meat trimmings and wastes, fish or fowl heads, entrails, trimmings and wastes, lard, tallow, baking dough, chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste bulk solids, hair and fleshings, or plastic or paper dishes, cups, food or beverage containers, whether whole or ground, or any matter which is not chemically or physically stable for at least five days at 20 degrees centigrade.

(d) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other substances when either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into a manhole or pump station.

(e) Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other substance, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process; to constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or to create any hazard in, or adversely affect, the receiving waters; or exceed the limitations set forth in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

(f) Any wastes, wastewaters or substances having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater treatment system. This includes, but is not limited to, battery or plating acids and wastes, copper sulfate, chromium salts and compounds, or salt brine.

(g) Any substance which may cause the wastewater plant’s effluent or any other product of the wastewater plant, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with reclamation processes. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the wastewater plant cause the wastewater plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.

(h) Any substance which will cause the wastewater treatment system to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards.

(i) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.

(j) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the wastewater treatment system which exceeds 65 degrees Centigrade (150 degrees Fahrenheit) or with a temperature which exceeds 40 degrees Centigrade (104 degrees Fahrenheit) at the treatment works influent.

(k) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the wastewater treatment system. In no case shall a slugload have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.

(l) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted to 0.65 centimeters (one-fourth inch) or less in any dimension.

(m) Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids which may interfere with the operation of the wastewater treatment system, such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, or lime residue.

(n) Any unusual concentrations of dissolved solids which may interfere with the operation of or pass through the wastewater treatment system, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride, calcium chloride, and sodium sulfate.

(o) Any radioactive material, except in compliance with the current “Oregon Regulations for the Control of Radiation.”

(p) Toxic pollutants, including, but not limited to:

(i) Aldrin;

(ii) Dieldrin;

(iii) Chlordane;

(iv) 4, 4’-DDT;

(v) 4, 4’-DDC (p, p’-DDX);

(vi) 4, 4’-DDD (p, p’-TDE);

(vii) a-endolsulfan-Alpha;

(viii) b-endolsulfan-Beta;

(ix) Endolsulfan sulfate;

(x) Endrin;

(xi) Endrin aldehyde;

(xii) Heptachlor;

(xiii) Heptachlor epoxide;

(xiv) a-BHC-Alpha;

(xv) b-BHC-Beta;

(xvi) c-BHC-(linedane)-Gamma;

(xvii) g-BHC-Delta;

(xviii) Toxaphene;

(xix) 2, 4, 5-TP (Silvex);

(xx) 2, 4-D;

(xxi) Methoxychlor;

(xxii) Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

(3) Use of Wastewater Treatment System Required.

(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.

(b) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.

(c) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

(d) The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a collection line of the city, are hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities by private lateral directly with the proper collection line in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said collection line is within 100 feet of the property line. [Ord. 132 § 2, 1989].


13.15.030 Limitations on wastewater strength.

(1) Pretreatment. Pollutants shall be accepted into the city wastewater system subject to regulations and requirements as may be promulgated by state and federal regulatory agencies or the city for the protection of wastewater facilities and treatment processes, public health and safety, receiving water quality and avoidance of nuisance. As a minimum, discharges shall comply with the applicable pretreatment standards developed under state (OAR 340-045-0063) and federal (40 CFR 403) regulations. Pretreatment standards shall be developed to ensure that at a minimum the city and all dischargers comply with Sections 207(b) and 307(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the regulations promulgated pursuant to these sections of the Act.

(2) City’s Requirements. The city reserves the right to establish through issuance of industrial waste discharge permits more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater treatment system if deemed necessary to enable the city to meet its NPDES permits.

(3) Excessive Discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state.

(4) High Strength Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing higher than 250 mg/l five-day BOD or 250 mg/l suspended solids may be required to discharge at a specific release rate or at a specified strength if, in the opinion of the director, the release of such waste in an uncontrolled manner could adversely affect proper handling and treatment in the wastewater treatment system.

(5) Grease. Water or wastes shall not contain fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin of any nature in excess of 100 mg/l. Water or wastes shall not contain cutting oil, or mineral products of mineral oil origin, whether or not emulsified, in excess of 50 mg/l.

(6) Septage. Any material from a cesspool, privy, septic tank, or other on-site disposal system shall not be discharged into the wastewater treatment system except at points and in a manner prescribed by the director.

(7) Metal Concentrations. No discharger shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:

(a) 1.0 mg/l arsenic;

(b) 1.2 mg/l cadmium;

(c) 4.5 mg/l copper;

(d) 2.0 mg/l cyanide;

(e) 3.0 mg/l lead;

(f) 0.1 mg/l mercury;

(g) 5.0 mg/l nickel;

(h) 4.0 mg/l silver;

(i) 9.0 mg/l total chromium;

(j) 4.0 mg/l zinc;

(k) 3.0 mg/l phenol.

(8) Mass Limitations. The director may impose mass limitations on discharges which are using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the director. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 132 § 3, 1989].


13.15.040 Accidental discharges.

(1) Notification. Any person becoming aware of slugloads, spills or uncontrolled discharges of prohibited or restricted substances directly or indirectly into the wastewater treatment system shall immediately report such discharge by telephone to the director. Within five days following a slugload or an accidental discharge, the user shall submit a report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expenses, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater treatment system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.

(2) Posted Notice. A notice informing employees of any discharger of the notification requirement and containing a telephone number or individual to contact in the event of such a discharge shall be posted in a conspicuous place, visible to all employees that may reasonably be expected to observe such a discharge.

(3) Prevention. Direct or indirect connections or entry points which could allow spills or uncontrolled discharges of prohibited or restricted substances to enter the wastewater treatment system shall be eliminated, labeled, or controlled so as to prevent the entry of wastes in violation of this chapter. The director may require the discharger to install or modify equipment or make other changes necessary to prevent such discharges as a condition of issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit or as a condition of continued discharge into the wastewater treatment system. A schedule of compliance shall be established by the director which requires completion of the required actions within the shortest reasonable period of time. Violation of the schedule without an extension of time by the director is a violation of this chapter.

(4) Control Plans.

(a) Dischargers that handle, store or use prohibited or restricted substances on their site shall prepare a spill prevention plan within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter directed at preventing the entrance of those substances, directly or indirectly, into the wastewater treatment system. The plan shall be available for inspection at the facility during normal business hours and shall include, but not be limited to, the following elements:

(i) A description of the potential points of entry into the wastewater treatment system;

(ii) A description of the measures to be taken to prevent entry at the described points before a spill occurs;

(iii) Measures to be taken in the event of a spill of prohibited or restricted materials to contain them;

(iv) A description of employee training in the prevention and control of spills. A valid spill prevention and control plan required under the Federal Clean Water Act may be acceptable in lieu of developing a new spill control plan, provided the plan addresses adequately the elements required.

(b) If a discharger has a spill or uncontrolled discharge of prohibited or restricted substances into the wastewater treatment system, the director may require the discharger’s spill prevention and control plan to be submitted and may require revisions to be made in the plan.

(c) Review and approval of the control plan shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.

(d) The city may adopt by council resolution a fee for reviewing control plans. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 132 § 4, 1989].

Article II. Industrial Wastes


13.15.050 Pretreatment facilities.

(1) General Requirements. If, as determined by the director, treatment facilities, operation changes or process modifications at a discharger’s facility are needed to comply with any requirements under this chapter or are necessary to meet any applicable state or federal requirements, the director may require that such facilities be constructed or modifications or changes be made within the shortest reasonable time, taking into consideration construction time, impact of the untreated wastewater on the wastewater treatment system, economic impact on the facility, impact of sludge, and any other appropriate factor.

(2) Condition of Permit. Any requirement in subsection (1) of this section may be incorporated as part of an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued under CBMC 13.15.060 and made a condition of the acceptance of the wastewater from such facility.

(3) Plans, Specifications, and Construction. Plans, specifications and other information relating to the construction or installation of pretreatment facilities required by the director under this chapter shall be submitted to the director. No construction or installation thereof shall commence until written approval of plans and specifications by the director is obtained. No person, by virtue of such approval, shall be relieved of compliance with other laws of the city, county, or state relating to construction and to permits. Every facility for the pretreatment or handling of industrial wastes shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the occupant of the property discharging the industrial wastes.

(4) Sampling and Monitoring Facility. Any person constructing a pretreatment facility, as required by the director, shall also install and maintain at his own expense a sampling manhole or other suitable monitoring access for checking and investigating the discharge from the pretreatment facility to the collection line. The sampling manhole or monitoring access shall be placed in a location designated by the director and in accordance with specifications approved by the director. [Ord. 132 § 7, 1989].


13.15.060 Industrial waste discharge permits.

(1) Requirements for a Permit. All users discharging or proposing to discharge industrial wastes into the wastewater treatment system shall obtain an industrial waste discharge permit from the city if:

(a) The discharge is subject to promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or

(b) The discharge, as determined by the director, contains pollutants in concentrations or quantities that interfere or have the potential to interfere with the operation of the wastewater treatment system; has a significant impact or potential for a significant impact on the wastewater treatment system, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries; or increases the cost of operation of the wastewater treatment system; or

(c) The discharge requires pretreatment in order to comply with the discharge limitations set forth in CBMC 13.15.030; or

(d) The discharge contains suspended solids or BOD in excess of 350 mg/l, or in excess of 30 pounds in any one day; or

(e) The discharge contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment plant; or

(f) The discharge contains wastes requiring unusual quantities of chlorine (more than 20 mg/l) for treatment at the treatment plant; or

(g) The discharge exceeds a total flow of 25,000 gallons in any one day.

(2) Permit Exemptions. Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsections (1)(b) through (g) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater treatment plant’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may at any time, on his own initiative or in response to a petition received from the industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user and exempt from the industrial waste discharge permit requirements.

(3) Permit Applications. All existing dischargers required to have a permit shall apply within 90 days of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Application for an industrial waste discharge permit shall be made to the director on forms provided by the city. The application shall not be considered as complete until all information identified on the form is provided, unless specific exemptions are granted by the director. Completed applications shall be made within 30 days or, for new dischargers, at least 90 days prior to the date that discharge to the wastewater treatment system is to begin. Any discharger with a valid permit who proposes to make a change in its existing discharge which will significantly change the volume of flow or characteristics of the discharge or establish a new point of discharge shall reapply at least 60 days before making the change.

(4) Industrial Waste Inspection. After the submitted discharge permit application has been received and reviewed, the director may schedule with the applicant an industrial waste inspection. The industrial waste inspection will consist of an interview with applicant personnel and a plant tour. At the interview, the applicant’s application, waste generating process, water consumption, wastewater composition and quantities of wastewater flow may be discussed. An industrial waste sampling point will be identified. The sampling location, if appropriate and acceptable to the director, will be used for both self-monitoring and for water quality and quantity monitoring and permit enforcement by the city.

(5) Issuance of Permit. After full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished by the director, the director shall issue an industrial waste discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided herein, and upon payment of the application fee. Dischargers shall pay the renewal fee as each renewal date is obtained. Fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(6) Permit Conditions. Industrial waste discharge permits shall specify, where applicable, the following:

(a) Fees and charges to be paid upon initial permit issuance;

(b) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;

(c) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;

(d) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities compatible with facilities of the city;

(e) Special conditions as the director may reasonably require under particular circumstances of a given discharge including sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule;

(f) Compliance schedules;

(g) Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where the same differ from those prescribed by this chapter;

(h) An effective date and expiration date of the permit;

(i) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the director, and affording city access thereto;

(j) Requirements for notification to the director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;

(k) Requirements for notification of slugload discharges;

(l) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(7) Permit Modifications. The director reserves the right to amend any industrial waste discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the city with applicable laws and regulations. Within nine months of the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the industrial waste discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standards if more stringent within the time frame prescribed by such standards. All National Categorical Pretreatment Standards adopted after the promulgation of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be enforced by the city as part of this chapter. Where a discharger subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not previously submitted an application for a waste discharge permit as required herein, the discharger shall apply for a waste discharge permit from the director within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard by the EPA. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change.

(8) Permit Duration – No Property Interest Acquired. All industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years, as determined by the director and subject to amendment, revocation, suspension or termination as provided in this chapter. No discharger acquires any property interest by virtue of permit approval and continued approval is expressly contingent upon compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local requirements.

(9) Limitations on Permit Transfer. Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a specific discharger for a specific operation and are not assignable to another discharger or transferable to any other location without the prior written approval of the director. [Ord. 209 § 1, 1994; Ord. 132 § 8, 1989].


13.15.070 Reporting requirements.

(1) Initial Compliance Report for Current Dischargers. Within 180 days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or within 90 days after receiving notification from the city that such a standard has been issued, whichever is sooner, existing dischargers subject to such standards shall submit to the director a baseline monitoring report, as required by the EPA pretreatment regulations, which includes the following:

(a) The name and address of the facility and the name of the owner and operator;

(b) A list of any environmental control permits on the facility;

(c) A description of the operation(s);

(d) The average and maximum daily flow;

(e) The levels of the particular pollutants that are regulated in the standard;

(f) A statement as to whether the applicable standards are being consistently met and, if not, what additional measures are necessary to meet them; and

(g) If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the needed pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance can be provided. The report shall be reviewed and signed by an authorized representative of the discharger and certified by a qualified professional engineer.

(2) Compliance Reports for New Dischargers. New dischargers subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards issued by the EPA shall submit to the director, following the commencement of their discharge into the wastewater treatment system, a report which contains the information listed in subsections (1)(a) through (g) of this section.

(3) Reports in General. These reports shall be completed in compliance with the specific requirements of Section 403.12 of the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources (40 CFR Part 403) promulgated by the EPA on January 28, 1981, or any subsequent revision thereto. If the information required by these reports has already been provided to the city and that information is still accurate, the discharger may reference this information instead of submitting it again.

(4) Report on Compliance. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of the new discharger, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater treatment system, any discharger subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the wastestream from the regulated process and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger and certified by a qualified professional engineer.

(5) Schedule for Compliance. If the discharger is required to install additional pretreatment or provide additional operation and maintenance, a schedule will be required to be submitted. The schedule shall contain the increment of progress in the form of dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. No increment of progress shall exceed nine months. The discharger shall submit a progress report to the director including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such a date and, if not the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the schedule established. This progress report shall be submitted no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director.

(6) Periodic Compliance Reports.

(a) Any discharger that is required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this chapter shall submit to the director during the months of June and December, unless required on other dates and/or more frequently by the director, a report indicating the nature of its effluent over the previous six-month period. The report shall include, but is not limited to, a record of the concentrations (and mass if limited in the permit) of the limited pollutants that were measured and a record of all flow measurements that were taken.

(b) The frequency of the monitoring shall be determined by the director and specified in the industrial wastewater discharge permit. If there is an applicable effective Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the frequency shall be not less than that prescribed in the standard.

(c) Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided, however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the director may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques.

(d) The director may require reporting by dischargers that are not required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit if information and/or data is needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent or determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system.

(e) The director may require self-monitoring by the discharger or, if requested by the discharger, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to prepare the periodic compliance report. If the director agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, the city will charge the discharger for the monitoring based upon the costs incurred by the city for the sampling and analysis. However, the director is under no obligation to perform the periodic compliance monitoring for a discharger. Periodic compliance monitoring is that monitoring which is necessary to provide the information on discharge quantity and quality required for the periodic compliance reports. [Ord. 132 § 9, 1989].


13.15.080 Inspection and sampling.

(1) Inspection. An authorized city representative may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The discharger shall allow the director or its authorized representatives to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection sampling or records examination. The director shall also have the right to set up on the discharger’s property such monitoring and/or metering operations. The right of entry includes, but is not limited to, access to those portions of the premises that contain facilities for sampling, measuring, treating, transporting, or otherwise handling wastes, and storing records, reports or documents relating to the pretreatment, sampling, or discharge of the wastes.

The following conditions for entry shall apply:

(a) The authorized city representative shall present appropriate credentials at the time of entry;

(b) The purpose of the entry shall be for inspection, observation, measurement, or sampling;

(c) The entry shall be made at reasonable times during normal operating or business hours unless an emergency situation exists as determined by the director; and

(d) All regular safety and sanitary requirements of the facility to be inspected shall be complied with by the city representative(s) entering the premises.

(2) Sampling. Samples of wastewater being discharged into the wastewater treatment system shall be representative of the discharge and shall be taken after treatment, if any, and before dilution by other water. The sampling method shall be one approved by the director. All sample analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication “Sampling and Analysis Pollutants,” April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

(3) Monitoring Facilities.

(a) When Required. Any person discharging industrial waste into the wastewater treatment system which requires an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall, at their own expense, construct and maintain an approved control manhole, together with such flow measurement, flow sampling and sample storage facilities as may be required by the director. The facilities required shall be such as are reasonably necessary to provide adequate information to the director to monitor the discharge and/or to determine the proper user charge.

(b) Location. Such monitoring facilities shall be located on the discharger’s premises except when, under circumstances approved by the director, it must be located in a public street or right-of-way. In no event shall the monitoring facilities be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

(c) Size. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measurement equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger.

(d) Construction. Whether constructed on private or public property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the director.

(e) Access. Dischargers shall allow the authorized representatives access to monitoring facilities on their premises at all times. The city shall have the right to set up such supplementary monitoring equipment as it may require.

(f) Charge Based on Water Flow. The director may, in lieu of requiring measurement sampling, and may, in lieu of requiring measurement sampling and monitoring facilities, procure and test, at the user’s expense, sufficient composite samples on which to base and compute the user charge. In the event that measurement sampling and monitoring facilities are not required, the user charge shall be computed using the metered water flow to the premises as a basis for waste flow and the laboratory analysis of samples procured as the basis for computing BOD and suspended solids content. Metered water flow shall include all solids content. Metered water flow shall include all water delivered to or used on the premises. In the event that private water supplies are used, they shall be metered at the user’s expense. Cooling waters or other waters not discharged into the wastewater treatment system may be separately metered at the user’s expense in a manner approved by the director, and all or portions of these waters deducted from the total metered water flow to the premises subject to director approval. [Amended during 2008 recodification; Ord. 132 § 10, 1989].


13.15.090 Change in permitted discharge.

It shall be the responsibility of every discharger with an industrial wastewater discharge permit to report to the director any changes (permanent or temporary) to the discharger’s premises or operations that change the quality or quantity of the wastewater discharge. Changes in the discharge involving the introduction of a wastestream(s) not included in or covered by the discharger’s industrial wastewater discharge permit itself shall be considered a new discharge, requiring the completion of an application as described under CBMC 13.15.060. Any such reporting shall not be deemed to exonerate the discharger from liability for violations of this chapter. [Ord. 132 § 11, 1989].


13.15.100 Records.

All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for not less than three years all records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis made by or on behalf of the discharger in connection with its discharge. All such records shall be subject to review by the city. All records which pertain to matters subject to appeals or other proceedings before the director or the council, or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city, shall be retained and preserved until such time as all enforcement or other activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any appeals have expired. [Ord. 132 § 12, 1989].


13.15.110 Confidential information.

(1) Public Inspection. Information and data furnished to the director regarding frequency and nature of discharges into the wastewater treatment system shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the discharger claims when submitting data, and satisfies the director of the validity of the claim, that release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under federal laws or ORS 192.500(1)(b), or proprietary information of the discharger. Such portion of proprietary information of the discharger and such portion of a discharger’s report which qualify as trade secrets shall not be made public.

(2) Disclosure in Public Interest. Nothing in subsection (1) of this section shall prevent disclosure of any information submitted by a discharger when the public interest in that case requires disclosure. Disclosure to other governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter is in the public interest.

(3) Notice to Discharger. No information accepted by the director as confidential shall be transmitted unless and until notice is given to the discharger who supplied it. [Ord. 132 § 13, 1989].

Article III. User Charges and Fees


13.15.120 User fees.

(1) Fees. Each user of the wastewater system shall pay a monthly fee sufficient to provide for the costs of operation and maintenance, debt service, costs of capital improvement and replacement, and administrative costs.

(2) User Classification. The city council shall designate user classifications, which shall be based on types of activities conducted by users of the wastewater system and the typical characteristics of wastewater produced by such types of activities, including, but not limited to, flow, suspended solids and BOD. The city shall assign to each user the user classification which most closely conforms to the user’s type of activity and typical wastewater characteristics.

(3) Fee Determination. The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for each user classification. The fees shall be based on the costs of operation and maintenance, debt service, costs of capital improvement and replacement, and administrative costs, and shall be structured so as to ensure equitable allocation among all user classifications for such costs.

(4) Annual Review of Fees. The city council shall review the fee schedule annually and revise the schedule as necessary to ensure adequate revenues are generated to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, debt service, costs of capital improvement and replacement, and administrative costs. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.130 Water usage – Metering.

(1) Calculation of Fees on Total Volume of Water Consumed. User fees shall be calculated upon the total amount of water consumed from all sources, public and private. Total amount of water consumed shall be determined by meters upon all public and private sources furnishing water to the user.

(2) Partial Exemption from Fees.

(a) A user may apply to the city manager for a partial exemption from the user fee. Any user seeking a partial exemption must submit a written application for an exemption, along with proof that the total amount discharged into the wastewater system by the user is materially less than the total amount of water consumed by the user. As used in this section, the volume of water discharged into the system is “materially less” if the average monthly amount of water discharged is less than 60 percent of the average monthly amount of water consumed.

(b) Any user granted a partial exemption shall pay user fees for only that volume of water actually discharged into the wastewater system.

(c) Any user granted a partial exemption shall install and maintain, at the user’s sole expense, a meter to measure the volume of water diverted to other uses. The director shall approve the type and location of the meter. At any time when deemed necessary by the director, the meter shall be tested by an approved testing contractor for accuracy, at the user’s sole expense. The user shall obtain readings from the meter on a monthly basis and provide them to the city on or before a date specified by the director. The user shall be solely responsible for the expense of all meter reading services. The supplier of such meter reading services shall be approved by the director.

(d) In order to defray the administrative costs incurred by the city in calculating a partial exemption of fees, as provided for in subsections (2)(a) through (c) of this section, the city shall assess an administrative fee of 10 percent of the partial exemption, that will be deducted from the fee returned to the user.

(3) Users Not on Water System. If a user’s property is not connected to the municipal water supply system and the director determines it is unnecessary to install a wastewater meter, for the purpose of determining the user fee the volume of water discharged may be estimated by the director. The estimate shall be based on the activity conducted on the premises, number of fixtures producing wastewater, number of residents or persons contributing to the production of wastewater, and such other factors deemed necessary by the director to estimate the volume of water discharged.

(4) Excessive Treatment Charge. If the director determines a user is discharging or has discharged wastewater on a sustained, periodic, or accidental basis, in a volume or with characteristics which cause the city to incur additional costs above normal costs associated with treating wastewater, the user shall be billed for any additional costs resulting from that user’s discharge.

(5) Adjustment to User’s Fee.

(a) If a water line serving the user’s premises is broken, and subsequently the water does not enter the sanitary sewer system, resulting in a user fee which is materially greater than the user’s average monthly user fee, the user may apply to the director for an adjustment to the user fee charged for the month or months during which the break occurred. Any such application shall be made within three months of the date of repair of the break.

(b) The user shall present evidence to the director of the break, repair of the break, and the user’s average monthly user fee. Upon satisfaction that a break has occurred, been repaired and that the user fee was materially greater than the user’s average monthly user fee, the director shall rebate an amount to the user equal to the difference between the user fee actually charged and the average monthly user fee for a period not to exceed 12 months. As used in this subsection, a user fee is “materially greater” if the user fee is 130 percent of the average monthly user fee. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.140 Collection procedures.

(1) Collection of User Fees. The city may use the Coos Bay/North Bend water board to bill users and collect user fees from users who are customers of the municipal water system; all other users will be billed and user fees collected by the city. All payments shall be deposited into the city of Coos Bay wastewater fund.

(2) Review of Fees. Any user who believes his or her user fee is based on inaccurate measurements or has grounds to contest the director’s estimate of volume of wastewater discharged may file a written request for review of his or her user fee with the city manager. The request for review shall state the basis for the user’s objection and shall include a statement of the user’s measurement or estimated volume of discharge and shall state the method whereby the user’s measurements or estimates were made. If the user demonstrates inaccurate measurements or estimates, the user fee shall be adjusted upwards or downwards, as the case may be, and the new fees shall be charged commencing with the following month’s billing.

(3) Failure to Pay.

(a) All user fees charged are debts due the city. Payments more than 15 days delinquent may be recovered by civil action against the property owner.

(b) In addition, failure to pay shall subject the user to discontinuance of water service, and the Coos Bay/North Bend water board is hereby authorized to enforce these provisions as to any and all delinquent users.

(4) Perpetual Lien. Until paid, all charges imposed by CBMC 13.15.130 and this section shall constitute a perpetual lien on and against the property connected to the wastewater treatment system. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].

Article IV. Connections and Private Wastewater Disposal


13.15.150 Initiation of connection to the wastewater system.

(1) A connection to the wastewater system may be initiated as follows:

(a) Any person may request a connection to the wastewater system to serve property owned by that person;

(b) The city council may initiate a connection to the wastewater system to serve property owned by any person, upon finding that connection is necessary to protect public health and safety.

(2) A request to connect to the wastewater system shall be in writing and shall contain a map of the property to be served by connection to the system, identifying the property by address and tax map and lot number and any other relevant information required by the director. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.160 New connections to wastewater system.

(1) Permits. Any person who intends to connect a private lateral, service lateral or new collection to an existing collection line shall apply to the director for a connection permit. The application shall include plans, specifications, or other information deemed necessary by the director to determine compliance with all ordinances, regulations, or rules relating to the wastewater system.

(2) Construction. The size, slope, alignment, and materials for private laterals and service laterals, and the methods to be used for excavating, placing pipes, jointing, testing, and backfilling trenches, shall conform to all applicable rules and regulations.

(3) Excavations. A permit shall be obtained from the director for any work performed within a public right-of-way. All excavation for installation or repair of private laterals, service laterals, force mains, collection lines or other connections or appurtenances shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights and shall meet all applicable safety standards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of installation or repair shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the director.

(4) Commencement of Construction. Construction of a building or facility to be served by the wastewater system shall be commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of the connection permit and shall be completed without suspending or abandoning the construction. Failure to commence construction within 180 days will result in cancellation of the permit and forfeiture of all fees paid.

(5) Inspection. The permittee shall notify the director when the private lateral, service lateral, force main, or new collection line is ready for connection to the existing collection line. The city shall inspect the connection but shall not be liable for any deficiency or defect in the private lateral, service lateral or force main which is not discovered during inspection. The owner or developer of the property connected to the collection line shall correct any deficiency or defect upon discovery and shall be liable for any damage resulting from deficiency or defect, known or unknown.

(6) Existing Lines. Existing unused private laterals or service laterals may be used to connect new buildings to the wastewater system only when the private lateral or service lateral is found upon inspection and testing by the director to meet all requirements of this section.

(7) Facilities Unable to Utilize Gravity Flow. In any buildings where a building drain is of insufficient elevation to allow discharge of wastewater into the service lateral or collection line by gravity flow, the wastewater discharged by such drain shall be pumped and discharged into the collection line. The means whereby the wastewater is so pumped shall be approved by the director.

(8) Connection to Wastewater System by Gravity Lines. If a pump station and force main are required to serve a development, the wastewater system for that development shall be designed, where possible, so as to permit eventual connection into the wastewater system by gravity lines. If necessary, the developer shall provide easements for eventual connection by gravity lines into the wastewater system. The city may require a deposit from the developer to pay for the eventual connection to the wastewater system by gravity lines.

(9) Costs of Construction. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, a property owner or developer shall pay all costs for construction, maintenance, and repair of all components of the wastewater system located on or within the owner’s or developer’s property or development, and for the cost of any force main connecting a private pump station with the wastewater system. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.170 Separate private laterals required – Exceptions.

(1) Separate Laterals Required. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a separate private lateral shall be provided to connect each building to a collection line.

(2) Multiple Building Exception.

(a) Multiple buildings located on a single lot, parcel, or unit of land may be connected to a single service lateral as provided by applicable codes, ordinances, and other regulations.

(b) Subdivision of Lot or Change to Separate Ownership. If the lot, parcel or unit of land upon which the multiple buildings are located is subdivided or the buildings come under separate ownership, separate private laterals shall be provided for each building and connected to a collection line.

(3) Service Lines for Multiple Buildings Not on a Single Lot, Parcel, or Unit of Land. A service lateral for multiple buildings not on a single lot, parcel, or unit of land may be approved by the director, if the property owner or owners demonstrate they have established an entity responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service lateral, and the service line meets all applicable codes, ordinances, and other regulations. Should the entity so established cease to exist or to maintain the service lateral, the owners of the property so served shall immediately notify the director of this fact, at which time separate private laterals shall be provided. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.180 Owner responsibility for maintenance and repair of laterals.

(1) Private Laterals. The owner of a building connected to the wastewater system is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the private lateral and any appurtenances, including the connection to the collection line. The owner shall keep the private lateral in good condition and repair and shall replace, at the owner’s expense, any portions which, in the opinion of the director, have become unfit for further use because of damage to or disintegration of the private line.

(2) Service Laterals.

(a) If more than one building is connected to a service lateral, then the owners of each building shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service lateral as provided in subsection (1) of this section.

(b) The director may impose additional requirements upon any owners of property connected to a service lateral to assure proper maintenance and repair and to allow the monitoring of wastewater quantity or quality.

(3) Permits and Inspections.

(a) Prior to repair or alteration of a private lateral or service lateral, the owner or owners must obtain all required permits from the city. Issuance of a permit shall be conditional upon compliance with all ordinances and regulations applying to the wastewater system.

(b) The city shall inspect the construction, but shall not be liable for any deficiency in the repair or alteration. After inspection, the owner shall return public rights-of-way to a condition acceptable to the director. The city shall not be liable for any claims for damage resulting from any deficiency or defect in the repair or alteration not reasonably discoverable at time of inspection and shall not be responsible for correction of any deficiency or defect in the repair or alteration.

(c) The city may enter upon any private property to test or inspect private laterals or service laterals. Any such entry shall be made only after a 48-hour notice of inspection has been posted on a conspicuous place on the property or properties. If leaks or unauthorized connections are located, notice will be sent to the property owners directing appropriate repairs or other corrective action be made within a specified time. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.190 Disconnection from the wastewater system.

If a user wishes to disconnect his or her building from the wastewater system, the user shall, at his or her sole expense, cap the private lateral at the property line. No new private lateral to replace an existing private lateral to be abandoned shall be approved until the abandoned private lateral is removed and properly capped. Caps shall be sufficiently tight to prevent the escape of wastewater or the infiltration of ground water or stormwater into the wastewater system. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.200 Collection lines in new developments.

(1) Plat Approval Required. No collection lines, private laterals, service laterals, force mains, pump stations or other appurtenances to the wastewater system shall be constructed in any addition or subdivision in the city until the tentative plat therefor has been approved as provided in the city’s land development ordinance.

(2) Extension of System. Collection lines from and throughout areas of new development shall be extended at the owner and/or developer’s sole expense. Private laterals and service laterals shall be extended by the owner and/or developer from the collection line to the property line of the lot or parcel to be serviced thereby. All collection lines and private laterals and service laterals shall be extended in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and other regulations. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.210 Private wastewater disposal.

(1) Where no collection line is located within 300 feet from any boundary of a property, the owner shall construct and connect to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal system at all times in a sanitary manner and at the owner’s sole expense.

(2) The owner shall obtain a written permit from the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system. Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with any requirement which may be imposed by the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality as a condition of construction or operation of a private sewage disposal system.

(3) When a collection line or service lateral becomes available within 300 feet of a property served by a private sewage disposal system, the user shall construct a private lateral to connect the property to the wastewater system, and any septic tanks, cesspools, or other private sewage disposal system shall, at the owner’s sole expense, be abandoned in accordance with state law.

(4) Recreational vehicle (RV) and marine pleasure craft wastewater containing typical residential content may be discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer system at specifically designated wastewater dump locations provided by the city for that purpose. [Ord. 460 § 1, 2014; Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.220 Unauthorized connections.

(1) Collection System. No person shall make any connection to, openings into, use, uncover, alter, or disturb any collection line, private lateral, service lateral or other appurtenance to the wastewater system, without first obtaining all required permits.

(2) Payment of Fees, Charges, Liens – Permits. No person may connect to the wastewater system unless inspections required by permits have been conducted, all charges and fees have been paid, or any security required by the city has been applied for and approved.

(3) Discharge into Manholes. No person shall discharge any substance into a manhole or other opening into the wastewater system except through an inspected and approved private lateral, service lateral or collection line unless approved by the director.

(4) Downspouts and Other Surface Runoff to Private Lateral. No person shall directly or indirectly make or maintain a connection for roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains or any other source of surface runoff or ground water to the sanitary sewer system. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].

Article V. Permits, Line Charges, and Recovery Agreements


13.15.230 Permit fees.

The city council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of permit fees for construction, maintenance, or repair of private laterals, service laterals, and collection lines, which shall be paid prior to issuance of a required permit. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.240 Line charges.

(1) The city council may, by resolution, establish a line charge to reimburse the city for each new connection to the wastewater system constructed by the city. The line charge shall be based on the actual costs of construction and shall be revised annually to reflect changes to the actual costs incurred by the city in constructing connections. The line charge shall be in addition to any other applicable permit fees and charges required for connection.

(2) The director shall maintain records, documenting payment of the line charge, which shall include the name of the owner and the location of the parcel connected to the wastewater system. No connection permit shall be issued until the line charge has been paid in full or until provision for installment payments or other acceptable security has been made and approved. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.250 Financing options.

The provision of advance financing of public improvements has been established by the enactment of Chapter 3.10 CBMC. Advance financing is described as a method of recapturing costs by a developer, where such developer installs public improvements, and where such public improvements may be utilized by intervening or future properties. [Ord. 403, 2008; Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].

Article VI. Violations


13.15.260 Enforcement procedures.

(1) Public Nuisance. Any violation of this chapter or any act or omission by a user which causes the violation of the conditions of an industrial waste discharge permit or NPDES permit is a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined as provided by law.

(2) Emergency Suspension of Service.

(a) The city manager may issue a suspension order to discontinue wastewater treatment when the city manager has good cause to believe suspension is necessary to halt actual or prevent threatened discharges which present imminent or substantial danger to health or welfare of the community or the environment, or which cause interference to the wastewater system or a violation of any condition of the city’s NPDES permit. A suspension order shall contain specific findings that an emergency exists and direct the user to immediately cease discharge into the wastewater system and that disconnection may occur if the user does not cease such discharge.

(b) Notice of suspension and a copy of the suspension order shall be served upon the user, which shall inform the user of a right to a hearing under subsection (2)(c) of this section. Upon receipt of the notice and order, the user shall immediately cease all discharge into the wastewater system. If the user fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager shall take all steps deemed necessary to prevent or minimize danger or damage, up to and including disconnection to the wastewater system.

(c) If the city initiates disconnection to the wastewater system, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city manager as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 10 days after the notice and order of suspension has been served upon the user. The user shall have the opportunity to present evidence to rebut the city manager’s finding of emergency.

(d) The city manager shall order reinstatement of wastewater service, upon proof the actual or threatened discharge has been abated. A detailed written statement shall be submitted by the user within 15 days of the date of occurrence, describing with particularity the causes of the discharge or threatened discharge and the remedial measures undertaken to correct the condition and prevent future occurrences. If the user fails to submit such report, the city may seek a temporary or permanent injunction to prevent future occurrences, and failure to submit such report shall be prima facie evidence that the user does not intend to undertake remedial measures.

(3) Violations.

(a) Notice of Violation. Whenever the director finds a user has violated or is violating any provision of this chapter, the director shall provide the user with a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for satisfactory correction thereof.

(b) Show Cause Hearing. If the violation has not been corrected within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the director shall order the user to show cause before the city manager why the specified enforcement action should not be taken.

(4) Appeals of Notices of Violation.

(a) Any user who has received notice of violation from the director and who denies the alleged violation may request a hearing before the city manager. The request shall be in writing and shall be filed not more than 20 days after the notice of violation has been served. Failure to file a request shall be jurisdictional and shall operate as a conclusive admission of all facts on which the suspension or notice of violation is based.

(b) The city manager shall set a date for hearing at the earliest practical time. Notice of the date for hearing shall be served personally or by certified mail on the user at least 10 days before the hearing.

(c) After hearing and upon review of the evidence presented, the city manager may:

(i) Issue an order stating that no violation has occurred;

(ii) Issue an order stating a violation has occurred and directing that the wastewater service be discontinued until the violation is corrected;

(iii) Issue such other or further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate.

(d) Reconsideration. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city manager may file a written request with the city manager for reconsideration within 10 days of the issuance of the order. The request for reconsideration shall set forth in reasonable detail the decision or action and the facts and arguments supporting the person’s request for reconsideration. The city manager shall render a final written determination within 10 days of the receipt of the request for reconsideration. The filing of a request for reconsideration shall be a condition precedent to the right to appeal to the city council pursuant to this section.

(5) Appeals to the City Council.

(a) A person may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council by filing a written notice of intent to appeal with the city recorder, within 10 days after user has been provided with a final written decision.

(b) The notice of intent to appeal shall be on a form provided by the city and shall set forth in reasonable detail the decision or action appealed from, and the facts and arguments supporting the appellant’s request for reversal or modification of the city manager’s determination.

(c) A hearing shall be conducted by the council on the appeal according to procedures established by the city. The council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the city manager. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.270 Damages, penalties and costs.

(1) Damages. Any person who violates this chapter shall be liable to the city for all costs resulting from such violation, and any penalties, including grant money withheld, assessed against the city for violation of state or federal permits. As used in this section, costs shall include reasonable attorneys’ fees included in defending an action brought by a regulatory agency against the city for violation of a wastewater discharge permit or environmental law.

(2) Civil Penalties.

(a) Violations. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city or to have willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, or orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.

(b) Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $5,000.

(3) Lien. Any judgment or order assessing damages, civil penalties, or fines shall be a lien on the real property served by the wastewater system which is the subject of the assessment, and shall be docketed on the city’s lien docket. [Ord. 331 § 3, 2003].


13.15.280 Conflict.

In the event that any provision of this chapter conflicts or is otherwise inconsistent with the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. [Ord. 331 § 4, 2003; Ord. 132 § 49, 1989].


Chapter 13.20 UTILITY FRANCHISES AND LICENSES

Sections:

13.20.010    Definitions.

13.20.020    Fees and licenses.

13.20.030    Exceptions and deductions.

13.20.040    Monthly payment of fee or license.

13.20.050    Sale or transfer of business.

13.20.060    Books and records – Returns confidential.

13.20.070    Recorder to investigate returns.

13.20.080    Overpayment or underpayment of fee.

13.20.090    Remedy for nonpayment.

13.20.100    Appeal to council.

13.20.110    Recorder may make rules.

13.20.120    False returns, etc.

13.20.130    Penalty.


13.20.010 Definitions. 

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

“Franchise fee” means a fee (fee) paid by every franchised utility operating in the city’s right-of-way; the tax is in an amount equal to seven percent of the gross revenues of the utility currently earned within the city.

“Gross revenue” means those revenues derived from network, infrastructure, services, communications, products, commodities, equipment, technology, access lines or channels which provide local access from the premises of a customer or subscriber within the city to the utilities’ local network, infrastructure, service, and/or commodity to effect the transfer of information, communications, services, products, commodity, and/or technology and, unless a separate tariff rate is charged therefor, any facility or service provided in connection therewith, less net uncollectible from such revenues.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or other association of natural persons, either acting individually or through an agent or employee.

“Right-of-way” means a street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement, whether physically accessible or not, that has been permanently established or dedicated for the passage of persons or vehicles. Title to this land remains with the public or private agency until the need no longer exists.

“Service” includes equipment and facilities.

Small Cell Wireless Facility. “Small wireless” and “small wireless facility” shall have the same meaning as a small wireless facility as set forth in 47 CFR 1.6002(l).

“Telecommunications utility company” includes companies providing services for standard hard-wired telephone, wireless telephone, internet connectivity, and cable television. 

“Utility license” means a license (license), the amount set by the Coos Bay city council, paid by a telecommunications or other utility for the privilege to occupy the city’s right-of-way. [Ord. 516 § 1, 2019].


13.20.020 Fees and licenses. 

Every utility occupying the city right-of-way within the city for other than travel shall enter into a franchise or license agreement with the city and pay applicable fees. Every franchised utility occupying and operating within the city right-of-way shall pay a franchise fee for the use of said right-of-way in an amount equal to seven percent of the gross revenues of the utility currently earned within the city or pay the franchise fee whichever is more. Franchise and license fees for small cell wireless facilities and services shall be consistent with federal regulations. [Ord. 516 § 2, 2019].


13.20.030 Exceptions and deductions.

Excepted and deducted from the total gross revenue upon which the fee is computed is any part derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce; or from business done for the federal government and any amount paid by the utility to the federal, state, or city government as excise taxes levied or imposed upon the sale or distribution of property or service. No fee is required which would cause a violation of federal or state laws. [Ord. 516 § 3, 2019].


13.20.040 Monthly payment of fee or license.

The utility shall pay the fee or license in monthly installments based on the gross income of the previous month. Each installment shall be paid on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month. [Ord. 516 § 4, 2019].


13.20.050 Sale or transfer of business. 

If the ownership of a utility is sold or transferred, the purchaser or transferee shall be responsible for the payment covering the period of time during which the purchaser or transferee carried on the business. [Ord. 516 § 5, 2019].


13.20.060 Books and records – Returns confidential. 

Each utility subject to this chapter shall keep proper records that accurately reflect and efficiently permit verification of the amount of gross income for the utility. The records shall be open to the inspection of the recorder or designate, and to members of the council. To the extent allowed by state law, records will not be made public and will be inspected only by authorized city officials. [Ord. 516 § 6, 2019].


13.20.070 Recorder to investigate returns. 

If a utility fails to make a payment, or if the recorder is dissatisfied as to the correctness of a payment, the utility shall allow the recorder or designee to enter the premises of the utility at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting the records of account to ascertain the amount of the fee or to determine the correctness of the statements. [Ord. 516 § 7, 2019].


13.20.080 Overpayment or underpayment of fee. 

If the recorder finds that the fee or license paid is more than the amount required of the utility, the overpaid amount shall be refunded. If the recorder finds that the fee or license is less than required, a statement showing the balance due shall be sent directing the utility to pay the amount within three days. [Ord. 516 § 8, 2019].


13.20.090 Remedy for nonpayment. 

If a utility fails to pay the fee or license within three days after it becomes due, the recorder shall determine the amount of the fee or license due and notify the utility. The city may collect the amount due by any appropriate means, including suit or action in the name of the city. [Ord. 516 § 9, 2019].


13.20.100 Appeal to council.

(1) A utility may appeal to the council a fee or license determination made by the recorder by filing a written notice of appeal with the recorder within five days from the time the utility was given notice of the amount due. The recorder shall notify the utility of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be held not more than 10 days after the filing of the notice.

(2) The utility shall be entitled to be heard and present evidence in its behalf. The appellant shall appear and produce any pertinent records if requested to do so by the council.

(3) The council shall ascertain the correct amount of the fee or license by resolution and shall immediately notify the appellant. The amount, together with costs of the appeal if the appellant is unsuccessful, must be paid within three days after notice of the determination is given. [Ord. 516 § 10, 2019].


13.20.110 Recorder may make rules. 

The recorder may adopt and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. No person shall violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. [Ord. 516 § 11, 2019].


13.20.120 False returns, etc. 

No person shall: 

(1) Fail or refuse to make a report or pay a fee when due, as required by this chapter.

(2) Make a false or fraudulent report or any false statement or representation in connection with any report required by this chapter.

(3) Aid or abet another in an attempt to evade payment of a fee required by this chapter.

(4) Testify falsely on any investigation of a report or at an appeal hearing, or in any manner hinder or delay the city or its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 516 § 12, 2019].


13.20.130 Penalty.

Violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense. [Ord. 516 § 14, 2019].


Title 14 (Reserved)

 


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    General Provisions

15.10    Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code

15.15    Dangerous Buildings

15.20    Substandard Buildings

15.25    Oregon Residential Specialty Code

15.30    Oregon Structural Specialty Code

15.35    Oregon Fire Code (International Fire Code)

15.40    Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code

15.45    Historic Preservation


Chapter 15.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

Article I. Title – Emergency Clause – Definitions

15.05.010    Building codes program established – Funding – Short title.

15.05.020    Emergency clause.

15.05.030    Severability.

15.05.040    Definitions.

Article II. Administration and Enforcement

15.05.050    Code administration.

15.05.060    Powers and duties of building official.

15.05.070    Authority and corrective action.

15.05.080    Notice of noncompliance.

15.05.090    Violations.

15.05.100    Penalties.

Article III. Permit Extension, Renewal, Suspension and Revocation

15.05.110    Permit expiration.

15.05.120    Permit extension.

15.05.130    Permit reinstatement.

15.05.140    Permit suspension.

15.05.150    Permit revocation.

Article IV. Fees

15.05.160    Establishment of fees and collection of fees and penalties.

15.05.170    Fees.

15.05.180    Fee refunds.

Article V. Appeals

15.05.190    Appeals hearing officer.

15.05.200    Powers and duties of the hearing officer.

15.05.210    Appeals.

15.05.220    Hearing schedule.

15.05.230    Scope of hearing on appeal.

15.05.240    Further appeals.

Article I. Title – Emergency Clause – Definitions


15.05.010 Building codes program established – Funding – Short title.

(1) There is hereby established an international and specialty codes inspection program for the city of Coos Bay, which shall be comprised of the following building codes inspection programs:

(a) 2007 Oregon Fire Code (International Fire Code);

(b) 2007 Oregon Structural Specialty Code;

(c) 2007 Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code;

(d) 2008 Oregon Residential Specialty Code;

(e) 2002 Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code;

(f) Substandard Building Code;

(g) Dangerous Building Code.

(2) User Fees. The city council shall establish by resolution a fee schedule for each building code inspection category. The fees so established shall make the program self-sufficient, and shall be based on actual ICC valuation tables and updated on a yearly basis to reflect changes in the ICC table.

(3) Annual Review. The city council, prior to adopting the city of Coos Bay budget, shall review each fee schedule annually and shall revise each schedule to ensure adequate revenues are generated from the collection of user fees to pay the costs of operating and maintaining the building codes inspection program.

(4) Dedicated Fund. All revenues collected by the building codes inspection program shall be dedicated to funding the program, and will be placed in a dedicated fund created for that purpose.

(5) Short Title. This title shall be referred to as the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 1, 2008].


15.05.020 Emergency clause.

Because prompt and continuous administration and enforcement of international and specialty codes is necessary for the peace, health, and safety of the people of the city of Coos Bay, an emergency is declared to exist, and this international and specialty code shall be effective upon the passage of the ordinance codified in this title. [Ord. 405 § 3, 2008].


15.05.030 Severability.

All international and specialty codes used by this jurisdiction will automatically update upon adoption by the state of Oregon. The sections and subsections of this code are severable. The invalidity of any one section or subsection shall not affect the remaining sections and subsections. [Ord. 405 § 4, 2008].


15.05.040 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise clearly requires, as used in this code, the following mean:

“Building official” means the director of the community development department of the city of Coos Bay or his or her duly authorized representative.

“Chief of the bureau of fire prevention” means, except as required under CBMC 15.35.030, the fire chief.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Code” means Ordinance No. 405, “The International and Oregon Specialty Codes of the City of Coos Bay,” and any amendments hereafter adopted.

“Corporation counsel” means the city attorney for the city of Coos Bay.

“Director” means the director of the community development department of the city of Coos Bay or his or her duly authorized representative.

“Fire chief” or “chief” means the city of Coos Bay fire chief or his/her representative in charge.

“Fire department,” “bureau of fire prevention,” or “fire prevention division” means, except as required by CBMC 15.35.030, the fire department.

“Fire Marshal” means the Oregon State Fire Marshal, or other person appointed by the Fire Marshal to serve in that capacity.

Hearing Officer. The hearing officer will hear appeals taken from the administration of the city’s nuisance ordinance, land development ordinance, building codes ordinance (including substandard and dangerous buildings), and any other city ordinance.

“Inspecting jurisdiction” means the city of Coos Bay.

“Investigation fee” means as defined in the international and specialty codes used by this jurisdiction.

“Jurisdiction” means the city of Coos Bay.

“LPG,” “LP gas” or “liquefied petroleum gas” means any liquid composed predominately of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of the same: propane, propylene, butane (normal or isobutene), and butylene.

“Owner” means the holder of legal or equitable title to property, or any person or entity acting as the agent of record for the holder of legal or equitable title.

“Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or other entity in law or fact.

“Work” is defined as a passing valid inspection, which proves progress has been made as defined by the code, as inspected by the city of Coos Bay or their representative. [Ord. 463 § 5, 2014; Ord. 405 § 5, 2008].

Article II. Administration and Enforcement


15.05.050 Code administration.

The city of Coos Bay shall provide for administration of all plan check, permit, and inspection programs adopted under this code and applicable to buildings and/or structures in the city of Coos Bay. Except as otherwise provided in this code, this chapter shall be the administrative and enforcement provisions for all international and specialty codes adopted by the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 6, 2008].


15.05.060 Powers and duties of building official.

The building official shall enforce all the provisions of this code and shall have for such purposes the powers of a law enforcement officer. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions; provided, that such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall conform to the intent and purpose of this code. [Ord. 405 § 7, 2008].


15.05.070 Authority and corrective action.

In addition to any authority and power granted to the building official under the specific international and Oregon specialty codes adopted by this code, and except where inconsistent with other provisions of law, the building official may enforce the provisions of this code against any person regardless of whether a permit, certificate, license, or other form of authorization has been issued. The building official may investigate, order corrective action, and issue orders to stop any or all work not in compliance with any applicable provisions of this code. [Ord. 405 § 8, 2008].


15.05.080 Notice of noncompliance.

The building official shall have authority to file notices of noncompliance in the records of Coos County stating that a particular property is not in compliance with or in violation of this code. [Ord. 405 § 9, 2008].


15.05.090 Violations.

Any violation of this code constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedies provided for enforcement, the city may bring civil suit to enjoin the violation of any provision of this code. [Ord. 405 § 10, 2008].


15.05.100 Penalties.

Failure to comply with any provision of this code is a violation, and shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $750.00 per violation. Each day that a violation persists after notice of the violation is provided to the owner shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. [Ord. 405 § 11, 2008].

Article III. Permit Extension, Renewal, Suspension and Revocation


15.05.110 Permit expiration.

Every permit issued by the city of Coos Bay under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issue date of the permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days or more. [Ord. 405 § 12, 2008].


15.05.120 Permit extension.

Every permit issued by the city of Coos Bay will automatically extend the expiration date by a period of 180 days every time work as defined in this chapter is progressed through an inspection. This will apply to all permits issued to the associated address. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each on any unexpired permit with justifiable cause stated. [Ord. 405 § 13, 2008].


15.05.130 Permit reinstatement.

Any permit which has expired for 180 days or less may be reinstated upon request by the permittee for a fee equal to 50 percent of the original building permit, as long as no changes have been made to the original plans, specifications, or codes and subject to any conditions imposed in the original permit. Any permit which has expired for a period greater than 180 days will become null and void and a new permit application and all permit related fees paid in full. The permit must be issued prior to recommencing construction activity. [Ord. 405 § 14, 2008].


15.05.140 Permit suspension.

The building official may suspend any permit upon finding any of the following:

(1) The permittee’s activity presents a serious danger to public health or safety;

(2) The permittee has refused, prevented, interfered with, or otherwise obstructed any inspection required by this code;

(3) The permittee made inaccurate or misleading representations on the permit application;

(4) The permittee is failing to use required licensed contractors;

(5) The permittee is intentionally or negligently failing to comply with the requirements of this code or other city ordinance;

(6) For any other good cause shown.

Notice and order of suspension shall be provided by the building official, in writing, to the permittee, and shall state the specific reasons for suspension, along with a statement of the permittee’s right to appeal the building official’s action. Service may be by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail. [Ord. 405 § 15, 2008].


15.05.150 Permit revocation.

The building official shall revoke any permit upon finding the permittee made fraudulent or intentional misrepresentations on the permit application, lacks sufficient funds to cover the costs of the permit, or has engaged in any other actions which provide good cause for revocation.

The building official shall serve written notice of intent to revoke and an order of revocation on the permittee. Service may be by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail.

The notice of intent to revoke shall include a short and plain statement of facts sufficient to apprise the permittee of the basis of the building official’s action. The notice of intent to revoke shall contain a statement advising the permittee of a right to appeal the building official’s action as provided by this code. [Ord. 405 § 16, 2008].

Article IV. Fees


15.05.160 Establishment of fees and collection of fees and penalties.

Except as otherwise provided by this code, fees for plan review, permits, labels, and other services required by this code shall be established by resolution of the city council. Except as otherwise provided by this code, all fees and penalties shall be collected by the city. [Ord. 405 § 17, 2008].


15.05.170 Fees.

Except as otherwise provided by this code, when a plan or other data is submitted for review, a field review is requested, or a permit is requested to perform work, a plan review fee, or permit fee, or both, shall be paid at the time of submission, request, or application.

(1) Permit Fees. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finished work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing system and any other permanent equipment based on the International Code Council table.

(2) Plan Review Fees.

(a) When a plan or other data is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time the plans and specifications are submitted for review. The plan review fee shall be equal to 65 percent of the building permit fee.

(b) When required, there shall be an additional plan review fee (fire, life, and safety) equal to 40 percent of the building permit fee.

(c) Plan review fees required by this section are separate fees from permit fees and shall be paid in addition to permit fees.

(d) When the applicant has submitted incomplete plans or has changed or amended the plans to such an extent that additional plan review is required, an additional plan review fee shall be charged.

(3) Investigation Fees. In addition to the permit fee, an investigation fee shall be collected, regardless of whether a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee which would be required by this code if a permit were issued. Payment of the investigation fee shall not exempt a person from compliance with any other provision of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. [Ord. 405 § 18, 2008].


15.05.180 Fee refunds.

(1) A fee shall be refunded in full in the following circumstances:

(a) When dual payment has been received for one permit or plan review;

(b) When the city has no jurisdiction to inspect the work for which the permit was issued;

(c) When an applicant submits plans for review which do not show the required architect’s or engineer’s stamp, or a licensed supervising electrician’s stamp for electrical plans; provided, also, that the plans shall be returned.

The building official shall not authorize any refunds except on written application by the original permittee filed not later than 180 days after the date of payment of the fee.

(2) Fee refunds shall not be allowed under the following circumstances:

(a) An applicant obtains a permit but is unable or unwilling to proceed with the project;

(b) An applicant submits plans for review but is unable or unwilling to proceed with the project. [Ord. 405 § 19, 2008].

Article V. Appeals


15.05.190 Appeals hearing officer.

A hearing officer shall be appointed to hear and decide appeals of offers, decisions, or determinations made by the building official under this code. [Ord. 463 § 20, 2014; Ord. 405 § 20, 2008].


15.05.200 Powers and duties of the hearing officer.

(1) The hearing officer shall adopt written rules of procedure for conducting business. Copies of all rules shall be made freely accessible to the public by the building official. The hearing officer shall render all decisions and findings in writing. Copies of the decision shall be provided to the appellant and a duplicate copy shall be provided to the building official.

(2) The hearing official shall receive written appeals from the city recorder; schedule a hearing date and time with the city recorder; hold a hearing, receive oral and written testimony from the city and appellant; provide a recording of the proceeding; and issue a written order within 10 days following the hearing.

(3) The hearing officer shall enforce the code according to its terms and the rules, supplemental regulations, and interpretations of the building official. The hearing officer shall not waive any requirement of this code. If a provision of the code is ambiguous, the hearing officer shall obtain an interpretation of the provision from the Oregon Building Code Division. [Ord. 463 § 21, 2014; Ord. 405 § 21, 2008].


15.05.210 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by an order, decision, or determination of the building official under Chapters 15.10 and 15.25 through 15.40 CBMC may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal at the office of the building official.

The notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision, determination or service of the order by the building official.

The notice of appeal shall contain the following:

(1) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land subject to the order, decision or determination.

(2) A brief statement in simple and concise language of the specific decision, determination or order being appealed, together with material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.

(3) A brief statement in simple and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the order, decision or determination of the building official should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.

(4) The names of all parties designated as appellants and their official mailing addresses.

(5) Verification by the appellant or appellants by declaration under penalty of perjury of the truth of the matters stated in the notice of appeal.

Failure of any person to file a notice of appeal in accordance with the provisions of this code shall constitute a waiver of the right to administrative hearing and adjudication of any notice, order, decision or determination of the building official, or any portion thereof. [Ord. 405 § 22, 2008].


15.05.220 Hearing schedule.

As soon as practical after receiving a notice of appeal, the building official shall fix a date, time, and place for hearing, which shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date of the filing of the notice of appeal.

Written notice of the time and place for hearing shall be given to each person identified as an appellant in the notice of appeal at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, either by personal delivery of a copy of the notice to each appellant or by mailing a copy of the notice first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address of each appellant as set forth on the notice of appeal. [Ord. 405 § 23, 2008].


15.05.230 Scope of hearing on appeal.

Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing on the appeal. [Ord. 405 § 24, 2008].


15.05.240 Further appeals.

An appeal from a decision of the hearing officer shall be as provided under state law. [Ord. 463 § 25, 2014; Ord. 405 § 25, 2008].


Chapter 15.10 OREGON MECHANICAL SPECIALTY CODE

Sections:

15.10.010    Short title.

15.10.020    Adoption of code.

15.10.030    Deletions.


15.10.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the mechanical specialty code provisions of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 50, 2008].


15.10.020 Adoption of code.

As authorized by ORS 455.010 through 455.990, the city of Coos Bay hereby adopts the “State of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code,” 2007 Edition, as the mechanical code of the city of Coos Bay, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, provided such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions as set forth herein. A copy of the State of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, 2007 Edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and development department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. [Ord. 405 § 51, 2008].


15.10.030 Deletions.

The following sections and subsections are deleted from the State of Oregon Mechanical Code, 2007 Edition:

(1) Table No. 1-A. [Ord. 405 § 52, 2008].


Chapter 15.15 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.15.010    Dangerous buildings.

15.15.020    Dangerous conditions or defects.

15.15.030    Structural survey.

15.15.040    Notice to vacate dangerous buildings.

15.15.050    Compliance.

15.15.060    Extension of time to perform work.

15.15.070    Initiation of abatement proceedings.

15.15.080    Notice.

15.15.090    Nuisance determination.

15.15.100    Order of abatement.

15.15.110    Costs of abatement performed by the city.

15.15.120    Summary abatement.


15.15.010 Dangerous buildings.

This chapter shall be known as the dangerous building provisions of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay.

Buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be dangerous as defined by this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. [Ord. 405 § 90, 2008].


15.15.020 Dangerous conditions or defects.

A building or structure which has any or all of the following defects or conditions is deemed a dangerous building, to the extent such conditions or defects endanger the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or the public:

(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is of insufficient size or width or is not arranged so as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(2) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise rendered unsafe as not to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(3) Whenever stress from any load on any material, member or portion thereof is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed under the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

(4) Whenever any building or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause, such that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such cause and is less than the minimum requirements under the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

(5) Whenever any portion or member of a structure, or appurtenance thereof, is likely to fail, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.

(6) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting wind pressure of one-half that specified under the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted under the building code for such buildings.

(7) Whenever any portion of a building has cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind or earthquake than is required for similar new construction.

(8) Whenever partial or total collapse of a building or structure, or any portion thereof, is likely because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for support of such building, or deterioration, decay or inadequacy of the foundation, or any other cause.

(9) Whenever, for any reason, a building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose to which it is being used.

(10) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members of a building list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

(11) Whenever a building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows damage or deterioration to 33 percent of its supporting members, or damage or deterioration to 50 percent of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

(12) Whenever a building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children, a harbor for vagrants or criminals, or a place for the commission of unlawful or immoral acts.

(13) Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, maintained, or exists in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the building or structure under the building regulations of the city, or any law or ordinance of this state or the city relating to condition, location or structure of buildings.

(14) Whenever any building or structure, whether or not erected in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has, in any nonsupporting part, member or portion, less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent, of the strength, fire-resistant qualities or characteristics, or weather-resistant qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of newly constructed buildings of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.

(15) Whenever any building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or likely to cause sickness or disease because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, insufficient light or air or inadequate sanitation facilities, or other cause.

(16) Whenever any building or structure is determined by the fire chief or building official to be a fire hazard because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistant construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause.

(17) Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on site after demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months and constitutes an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(18) A structure which is liable to cause fire because of lack of proper repairs, age and dilapidated condition, substandard electrical wiring or equipment, defective chimney, gas connection, or heating apparatus, or any other reason and is situated in such a manner that endangers other property or human life.

(19) A structure containing combustible or explosive materials or inflammable substances which are liable to cause fire or endanger the safety of the building, premises or human life.

(20) A structure in such a filthy or unsanitary condition that there is the probability of the spread of contagious or infectious diseases.

(21) A structure in such weak, dilapidated or deteriorated condition that the probability of partial or total collapse endangers persons or property. [Ord. 405 § 91, 2008].


15.15.030 Structural survey.

For the purpose of this code, any building or structure may be deemed to be a dangerous building based on a structural and condition survey.

A structural survey may be ordered by the building official at the expense of the building owner. The surveyor will be mutually acceptable to the department of public works and development director and the building owner. [Ord. 405 § 92, 2008].


15.15.040 Notice to vacate dangerous buildings.

(1) If the building official determines a building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of its occupants or the public, the building official shall issue a notice to vacate, order the building or structure vacated and secured, and commence abatement proceedings under CBMC 15.15.070.

(2) The building official shall issue a notice of dangerous building and order directed to the owner of record of the building, stating action to be taken:

(a) If the building official has determined the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be obtained and the work commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable under all of the circumstances.

(b) If the building official has determined the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require such vacation within a time certain as determined by the building official to be reasonable.

(3) The notice and order shall also contain a statement advising that any person holding record title or having legal interest in the building shall comply with the notice and order, and that proceedings have been commenced to abate the building as a public nuisance.

(4) The notice and order shall be posted on the property and served, by personal service or certified mail, on the owner of record and each of the following, if known: the holder of a mortgage or deed of trust; the holder of a lien or other encumbrance of record; the holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in the building or real property on which the building is located. The failure of the building officer to serve any person shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section.

(5) Any notice and order issued pursuant to this section shall require the following:

(a) The building be repaired in accordance with current international and specialty code applicable to the substandard condition which is the subject of the order; or

(b) The building be demolished at the option of the owner; and

(c) If the building is in such a condition that it is immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public, the building shall be ordered vacated.

(6) Posting of Notice to Vacate. Every notice to vacate shall be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:

DANGER

DO NOT ENTER

THIS BUILDING DEEMED UNSAFE FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY

It is unlawful for any person to occupy or reside in this building or to remove or deface this notice.

(8) Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall also provide written notice to the owner and occupant of the building or structure, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting.

(9) No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit.

(10) No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal has been completed, a final inspection performed, and the building approved for occupancy. [Ord. 405 § 93, 2008].


15.15.050 Compliance.

After any notice to vacate issued under CBMC 15.15.040 has been issued, any person to whom such order is directed shall not fail, neglect, or refuse to obey the order. If the person does so, the building official may issue a citation for violation of this code. [Ord. 405 § 94, 2008].


15.15.060 Extension of time to perform work.

At any time within 15 days after the notice and order to vacate is issued, and upon receipt of an application by the owner of record for an extension of time to comply with the notice and order, the building official may grant an extension of time within which to complete the repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the building. [Ord. 405 § 95, 2008].


15.15.070 Initiation of abatement proceedings.

When the building official has issued a notice and order to vacate in this code, and any extensions of time have lapsed, the building official shall provide a report to the city manager, which shall fix a time and place for a hearing to determine whether the building is a public nuisance and should be abated. [Ord. 405 § 96, 2008].


15.15.080 Notice.

The city recorder shall provide written notice to the owner of the building and, if different, the owner of the property on which the building is situated that a hearing on abatement will be held before the city hearing officer concerning the property. The notice shall specify the time and place for the hearing and the violations which will be the subject of the hearing.

A copy of this notice shall be posted on the property. Ten days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or shall be posted in three public places in the city. [Ord. 405 § 97, 2008].


15.15.090 Nuisance determination.

After hearing, and upon evidence presented, any building or structure or portion thereof determined by the city hearing officer to be a substandard or dangerous building shall be declared a public nuisance which shall be abated. [Ord. 405 § 98, 2008].


15.15.100 Order of abatement.

The city hearing officer shall issue an order of abatement or summary abatement, which shall be served on the owner within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The order shall specify a time certain within which the owner shall either make the building safe or have the building demolished and shall state that if the owner fails to act within the specified time, the city may, at the owner’s expense, make the building safe or have the building demolished. [Ord. 405 § 99, 2008].


15.15.110 Costs of abatement performed by the city.

(1) Assessment of Costs of Abatement. If the owner fails to comply with the order of abatement or summary abatement is ordered pursuant to CBMC 15.15.100, and the city makes the building or structure safe or has the building or structure demolished, the building official shall submit to the city manager a report containing an itemized statement of all costs incurred by the city in making the building or structure safe or demolishing the building or structure, including administrative costs. Upon receipt of the report, the city manager shall assess such costs of abatement against the property. The assessment shall be a lien against the property, and may be enforced and collected as provided in ORS 223.505 through 223.650.

(2) Notice of Assessment. A copy of the hearing officer order of abatement or summary abatement and the city manager’s assessment of the cost of abatement shall be mailed to the property owner by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.

(3) Lien Docket – Interest. The city recorder shall enter into the city lien docket a statement of the amount assessed against the property; the name of the property owner; the date of the hearing officer’s order of abatement or summary abatement; and a statement that the lien is for the costs of abatement of a dangerous building or structure. The assessment shall become a lien upon the real property at the time of entry upon the lien docket. The lien shall bear interest at the statutory rate commencing on the date the lien is entered in the city lien docket. [Ord. 405 § 100, 2008].


15.15.120 Summary abatement.

Notwithstanding any other provision in the code, when a public safety officer finds a building or structure is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers human life or property, the public safety officer may summarily declare the building or structure a nuisance and commence abatement. In event summary abatement occurs, the property owner shall be afforded a post-abatement hearing before the city hearing officer at the earliest opportunity to determine whether summary abatement was proper. Notice of the post-abatement hearing shall be provided according to this code. After hearing upon summary abatement, the city hearing officer shall issue a written order to determine whether abatement was proper or not, and, if proper, assess the costs of abatement as provided by city code. As used in this section, “public safety officer” means the fire chief, the fire marshal, the building official or the police chief. [Ord. 405 § 101, 2008].


Chapter 15.20 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.20.010    Substandard buildings – Nuisances.

15.20.020    Substandard conditions or defects.

15.20.030    Initiation of enforcement proceedings.

15.20.040    Compliance.

15.20.050    Failure to commence work.

15.20.060    Extension of time to perform work.


15.20.010 Substandard buildings – Nuisances.

This chapter shall be known as the substandard building provisions of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay.

Buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as defined by this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. [Ord. 405 § 80, 2008].


15.20.020 Substandard conditions or defects.

Any building or structure or portion thereof in which there exists any of the following conditions is a substandard building:

(1) Inadequate sanitation, including, but not limited to:

(a) Lack of, or improper, toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.

(b) Lack of, or improper, toilets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel.

(c) Lack of, or improper, kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.

(d) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.

(e) Lack of hot and cold running water to the plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house.

(f) Lack of adequate heating facilities.

(g) Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilation equipment.

(h) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required under city specialty codes.

(i) Room and space dimensions less than required under city structural codes.

(j) Lack of required electric lighting.

(k) Dampness in habitable rooms.

(l) Infestation by insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the health officer or building officer.

(m) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.

(n) Lack of connection to sewage disposal system.

(o) Lack of garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the building official.

(2) Structural hazards, including, but not limited to:

(a) Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.

(b) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.

(c) Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

(d) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

(e) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

(f) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof support or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

(g) Members of ceilings, roofs, supports for ceilings and roofs or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

(h) Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration.

(i) Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety.

(3) Hazardous Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation, which was not installed according to generally accepted construction practices in locations where no codes were in effect at the time of installation, which has not been maintained in good condition, or which is not being used in a safe manner.

(4) Hazardous Plumbing. Plumbing which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation, which was not installed according to generally accepted construction practices in locations where no codes were in effect, which has not been maintained in good condition, or which is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures.

(5) Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation, which was not installed according to generally accepted construction practices in locations where no codes were in effect at the time of installation, or which has not been maintained in good and safe condition.

(6) Faulty weather protection, including, but not limited to:

(a) Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.

(b) Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundation or floors, including broken windows or doors.

(c) Lack or defective weather protection of exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering.

(d) Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.

(7) Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, or any device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the fire chief or the building official, is in such condition as to cause threat of fire or explosion or provide ready fuel to augment the spread or intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause.

(8) Faulty Materials of Construction. Any construction material other than those which are specifically allowed or approved by this code, and any specifically allowed or approved construction materials which have not been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.

(9) Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises. Premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harbors, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute a fire, health or safety hazard.

(10) Inadequate Exits.

(a) Buildings or portions thereof whose exits were installed in violation of code requirements in effect at time of construction, or whose exits have not been increased in number or size in relation to any increases in occupancy subsequent to the time of construction.

(b) Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at time of construction, exits in buildings or portions thereof which the building official finds are unsafe because of improper location, a lack of adequate number or width, or other conditions which are dangerous to human life.

(11) Inadequate Fire-Protection or Fire-Fighting Equipment. Any building or portion thereof which is not provided with fire-resistant construction, fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at time of construction and whose fire-resistant integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, or any alteration, addition or change in occupancy.

(12) Improper Occupancy. Any building or portion thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which was not designed or intended to be used for such purposes. [Ord. 405 § 81, 2008].


15.20.030 Initiation of enforcement proceedings.

(1) Whenever the building official has inspected any building and has determined the building is a substandard building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, or vacation of the building.

(2) The building official shall issue a notice of substandard building and order directed to the owner of record of the building, stating action to be taken:

(a) If the building official has determined the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be obtained and the work commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable under all of the circumstances.

(3) The notice and order shall also contain a statement advising that any person holding record title or having legal interest in the building may appeal the action of the building official to the public works and development director, by filing an appeal with the public works and development director, in writing, within 30 days from the date of service of the notice and order; and that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to hearing and determination of the matter. If the notice and order are appealed, the hearing officer may, after hearing upon the appeal, declare the building to be a nuisance, and issue an order of abatement.

(4) The notice and order shall be posted on the property and served, by personal service or certified mail, on the owner of record and each of the following, if known: the holder of a mortgage or deed of trust; the holder of a lien or other encumbrance of record; the holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in the building or real property on which the building is located. The failure of the building officer to serve any person shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section.

(5) Any notice and order issued pursuant to this section shall require one or more of the following:

(a) The building be repaired in accordance with current international and specialty code applicable to the substandard condition which is the subject of the notice and order; or

(b) The building be demolished at the option of the owner; or

(c) If the building is in such a condition that it may become dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public in the immediate future, the building may be ordered vacated within a time certain not to exceed 30 days from the date of the issuance of the notice and order. [Ord. 405 § 82, 2008].


15.20.040 Compliance.

After any notice and order becomes final, the person to whom such order is directed shall not fail, neglect, or refuse to obey the order. If the person does so, the building official may issue a citation for violation of this code and institute proceedings to abate the building as a nuisance pursuant to CBMC 15.15.070 through 15.15.110. [Ord. 405 § 84, 2008].


15.20.050 Failure to commence work.

Whenever required repair or demolition is not commenced within 60 days after any notice and order of substandard building is issued, the building official may cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance the notice set forth in this code, and commence proceedings to declare the building a nuisance pursuant to CBMC 15.15.070 through 15.15.110. [Ord. 405 § 85, 2008].


15.20.060 Extension of time to perform work.

At any time after the notice and order is issued and prior to the hearing upon abatement, upon receipt of an application by the owner of record of the building for an extension of time to comply with the notice and order, the building official may grant an extension of time within which to complete the repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the building. [Ord. 405 § 86, 2008].


Chapter 15.25 OREGON RESIDENTIAL SPECIALTY CODE

Sections:

15.25.010    Short title.

15.25.020    Adoption of the code.


15.25.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the Oregon residential specialty code of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 60, 2008].


15.25.020 Adoption of the code.

As authorized by ORS 455.310 through 455.350, 455.450, 455.610 through 455.690 and 455.895, the city of Coos Bay hereby adopts the “State of Oregon Residential Specialty Code,” 2008 Edition, as the dwelling code of the city of Coos Bay, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, provided such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions set forth herein. A copy of the “State of Oregon Residential Specialty Code,” 2008 Edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and development department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. [Ord. 405 § 61, 2008].


Chapter 15.30 OREGON STRUCTURAL SPECIALTY CODE

Sections:

15.30.010    Short title.

15.30.020    Adoption of the code.

15.30.030    Amendments.

15.30.040    Creation of new sections.


15.30.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the structural specialty code provisions of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 40, 2008].


15.30.020 Adoption of the code.

As authorized by ORS 455.010 through 455.990, the city of Coos Bay hereby adopts the Oregon Structural Specialty Code 2007 Edition, as the building code of the city of Coos Bay, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, provided such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments, and additions set forth herein. A copy of the 2007 Oregon Structural Specialty Code shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and development department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. [Ord. 405 § 41, 2008].


15.30.030 Amendments.

Section 102.6 is amended as follows:

Section 102.6 General. Buildings in existence on the date this Code becomes effective may have their existing and uninterrupted use or occupancy continued, if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of the adoption of this Code, provided such continued use does not pose a danger to life. At the time of any change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or structure, that building or structure shall be brought into compliance with Section 109 and Chapter 34 of this Code. Any building or portion thereof which has a change of occupancy may be inspected and shall be subject to fire and safety requirements.

[Ord. 405 § 42, 2008].


15.30.040 Creation of new sections.

A new Section 110 is created:

Section 110. Demolition of Buildings.

110.1 Permits Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall demolish, or cause to be demolished, any building or structure in the City without first obtaining a separate demolition permit for each building or structure.

110.1.1 Exception. No Permit shall be required for the demolition of structures that did not require a permit to legally construct as regulated in this Code.

110.2 Application. To obtain a demolition permit, an application in writing shall be filed with the Building Official on a form furnished for that purpose. Every application shall:

(a) Describe the land on which the proposed demolition is to be done by lot, block or tract and house and street address or similar description which will readily and definitely identify the location of the proposed demolition.

(b) Identify the applicant’s legal interest in the property to be demolished.

(c) Identify and describe the demolition work (number of floors, basement, and cellar) to be done under the permit for which the application is filed.

(d) Specify the use or occupancy of all parts of the building to be demolished; in the case of residential buildings or structures, the number of dwelling units shall be included.

(e) Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to establish such authority.

(f) Give such other information as may be reasonably required and establish valuation of the demolition work to be done.

(g) May be required to provide asbestos survey results and abatement plan.

110.3 Plans. The Building Official may require each application for a demolition permit to be accompanied by a drawing showing the outside dimensions of the building to be demolished, the location of the building within property lines, and the overall height and type of construction of the building. The location of buildings adjacent to the demolition site shall also be indicated on the drawing.

110.4 Bond Required.

110.4.1 A demolition permit shall not be issued unless the permittee first posts a performance bond for said demolition, executed by the owner and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of Oregon as a surety, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the demolition work. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond or sign a Performance Bond Waiver Agreement. The agreement document is available from the city.

110.4.2 Every bond shall include the following conditions be placed on the permittee:

(i) The permittee will comply with all of the provisions of the Code, and all other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances;

(ii) The permittee shall comply with all the terms and conditions of the permit for demolition; and

(iii) The permittee shall complete all work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit.

110.4.3 The term of each bond shall begin upon the date of filing and shall remain in effect until the completion of the demolition work. Should a permittee fail to complete all work within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the date the permit is issued, and the Building Official extends the time to complete the work, such extension shall in no way act to release the surety upon the bond.

110.5 Failure to Complete Work. If the permittee fails to complete the demolition work or fails to comply with any terms and conditions of the permit, the Building Official may order the work completed to the Building Official’s satisfaction. The surety on the bond or the permittee under his or her cash bond or other acceptable security shall be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred by the City in causing any and all such required work to be done.

110.6 Issuance. The application and drawings filed by an applicant for a demolition permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official and may be reviewed by other departments of the City. If the application for the demolition permit conforms to the requirements of this Code and other laws and ordinances, and if the fee specified has been paid, then a demolition permit shall be issued.

110.7 Term and Expiration. Every demolition permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall contain a definite time limit during which the demolition work must be performed which shall not exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days. Every demolition permit shall expire if the demolition work is not commenced within the time limit specified on the permit. An extension of time may be granted by the Building Official if the permittee has made every effort to comply within the time specified, but has been unable to do so because of unusual or difficult conditions. Permit extensions must be requested prior to permit expiration.

110.8 Failure to Complete Work. If the permittee fails to complete the demolition within the time limit specified by the demolition permit because of failure to perform the work, the Building Official may declare the structure an unsafe, substandard building or dangerous building.

110.9 Suspension or Revocation. A demolition permit may be suspended or revoked whenever the permit is issued in error, on the basis of incorrect or misleading information, or in violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance or regulation.

110.10 Demolition Permit Fees. A fee for each demolition permit shall be paid at the time the permit is issued. The fee shall be a flat fee set by resolution of the Coos Bay City Council. The fee shall include the sewer cap and any fill necessary to bring the demolition site to a safe grade.

110.11 Protection of Public Utilities. Street lights, fire or police alarm boxes, hydrants, catch basins, manholes and other public facilities shall be protected as required otherwise by this Code.

110.12 Protection for Pedestrians. Walkways, railings, fences and canopies shall be provided for the protection of pedestrians as otherwise required by this Code.

110.13 Protection of Public Sidewalks. Public sidewalks shall be protected from damage by the installation of a pad of solid planking not less than two (2) inches thick or other similar method or materials. Any sidewalk or street which is damaged during demolition work shall be immediately replaced or repaired, as directed by the Building Official.

110.14 Notification of Utilities. All utility companies shall be notified prior to the commencement of demolition to disconnect all services from main lines to the building. It shall be the permit holder and their contractor’s responsibility to verify that all utilities have been disconnected prior to demolition.

110.15 Basement and Cellar Walls.

110.15.1 If the building or structure to be demolished has a basement or cellar, basement or cellar walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition after demolition in all areas adjacent to public sidewalks, so that any such sidewalks will be adequately supported. The City may require an engineer’s analysis. If a basement or cellar wall adjacent to a public sidewalk is not structurally sound so that support for adjacent sidewalks will not be adequate or the owner desires to remove the wall, an engineered solution shall be submitted for review.

110.15.2 A temporary fence shall be maintained along the inside edge of a public sidewalk during demolition work to protect pedestrians from basements and cellars. As soon as demolition work is completed, a permanent fence or other approved protection shall be erected or installed according to specifications provided by the Building Official. Any permanent fence shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner at all times.

110.16 Clean-up. All debris, stumps, broken concrete, brick and other irreducible materials with a maximum dimension exceeding 12 inches shall be completely removed from the premises after demolition. All ground surfaces shall be raked clean and evenly graded.

110.17 Sewer Laterals. To prevent the entry of ground water into the sewer system, each and every sewer lateral serving the subject property shall be tightly plugged. The plug shall be an appropriately sized mechanical plug and shall be installed in the building’s sewer lateral at the sewer trunk line serving the property. The Public Works and Development Department shall be notified when the sewer lateral is ready to be plugged and shall be given an opportunity to inspect the plug and, if necessary, to obtain necessary data to relocate the lateral.

110.18 Completion of Demolition. Upon completion of the demolition, the applicant shall contact the Public Works and Development Department for final inspection. Upon passing the final inspection, the city shall return the cash bond or terminate the Performance Bond Waiver Agreement for the project. The city shall notify the Coos County Assessor’s Office of completion of the demolition.

[Ord. 426 §§ 1, 2, 2010; Ord. 405 § 43, 2008].


Chapter 15.35 OREGON FIRE CODE (INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE)

Sections:

15.35.010    Short title.

15.35.020    Adoption of the code.

15.35.030    Duties of the fire prevention division.

15.35.040    Deletions.

15.35.050    Amendments.

15.35.060    Inspections.


15.35.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the fire code provisions of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 30, 2008].


15.35.020 Adoption of the code.

As authorized by ORS 476.030, the city of Coos Bay hereby adopts the “State of Oregon Fire Code,” 2007 Edition, as the fire code of the city of Coos Bay, which by this reference is made a part of this code as if each and every part was specifically set forth, provided such adoption is subject to specific deletions, amendments and additions as set forth herein. A copy of the State of Oregon Fire Code shall be kept on file in the office of the public works and development department and shall be made available for reference to any person subject to requirements of this code. [Ord. 405 § 31, 2008].


15.35.030 Duties of the fire prevention division.

The fire code shall be administered by the codes division of the public works and development department; provided, that the following fire code sections shall be jointly administered with the city of Coos Bay fire department: 102.7 Supplemental Rules and Regulations, 103.4 Liability, 104.1 General Authority and Responsibilities, 104.8 Alternate Materials and Methods/Modifications, 104.1 through 104.11.3 Authority at Fire and Other Emergency Scenes, 506.1 Key Boxes, 901.6, 901.7 Fire Protection Systems and Equipment Maintenance, Inspections, Testing, System Out of Service, 307, 603.8 General Safety Precautions – Chapter 3 (2007) Incinerators, Open Burning, 3409, 5101.9.1 through 5101.9.4. [Ord. 405 § 32, 2008].


15.35.040 Deletions.

The following sections and subsections are deleted from the International Fire Code, 2007 Edition:

(1) Section 108.1 Appeals.

(2) Section 109.2.

(3) Sections 105.1.1 permits required.

(4) Section 105.1.1 permits required disposal of waste explosive materials.

(5) Sections 3301.1 through 3308.11 Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Special Effects Materials. [Ord. 405 § 33, 2008].


15.35.050 Amendments.

The following sections and subsections of the International Fire Code, 2007 Edition, are amended to read as follows:

(1) Section 105.1 Scope. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use a building or other premises or to engage in any use or activity for which a permit is required by this Code without first obtaining a permit for such use or activity.

(2) Section 105.3 Application for Permit. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all applications for permits required by this Fire Code shall be made to the Public Works and Development Department. Applications for permits shall be in such form and detail and accompanied by such plans as may be required by the Fire Marshal. Application for a permit for any activity under Section 105.6.14 of this Fire Code shall be made to and obtained from the Coos Bay Fire Department.

(3) Section 105 Permit Required. In addition to any permit required by other applicable law, regulation or ordinance, a permit shall be obtained prior to engaging in the following activities, operations, practices or functions:

(a) Existing Buildings. Any building, except private residences erected after May 28, 1925, as coming within the provisions of ORS 479.020 to 479.120 which does not conform to the requirements of ORS Chapter 479 (this includes fire escapes, stationary ladders, standpipes, public garages, auto exhibitions, tents, school fire regulations, public building exit doors, unsafe conditions).

(b) Fireworks. Permits OAR 837-012-0620 through 837-012-0640.

Use, storage and sales OAR 837-012-0645 through 837-012-0675.

Seizure of fireworks OAR 837-012-0675.

(c) Flammable/Combustible Liquids. Installation of tanks for above-ground storage of flammable or combustible liquids in individual or aggregate quantities greater than 1,000 gallons, as specified in Chapter 34 of this code.

(4) Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access. Plans for fire apparatus access roads shall be submitted to the Public Works and Development Department and Fire Department for review and approval prior to construction of the access road.

(5) Section 508.1 Required Water Supply. Plans and specifications for required water supply systems shall be submitted to the Public Works and Development Department, Coos Bay – North Bend Water Board, and the Fire Department for review and approval prior to construction of the water supply system.

(6) Section 901.4.4 Premises Identification. All new and existing buildings shall be numbered and otherwise identified as required by Chapter 12.30 CBMC.

(7) Section 502 Fire Apparatus Access Road. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support loads imposed by all regularly used fire apparatus. Any such access road shall have a minimum of three (3) inches of rolled and compacted (60,000 lbs minimum) 1 1/2 inch minus rock, which shall be satisfactory to the Public Works and Development Department.

(8) Appendix D. Turning Radius. The turning radius of all fire apparatus access roads shall be approved by the Public Works and Development Department, provided that any proposed access road with a turning radius of less than 45 feet radius shall also be subject to approval by the Coos Bay Fire Department.

(a) The Fire Marshal and the Coos Bay Fire Department may approve a 20 ft. x 120 ft. hammer-head turn-around, upon a showing by the applicant that terrain, lot configuration, or pre-existing development makes a circular turn-around impractical.

(b) An automatic fire sprinkler system may be provided in lieu of a turn-around, subject to prior approval by the Coos Bay Fire Department.

(9) D-103.4 Dead Ends. Any dead-end fire apparatus access roads greater than 150 feet in length shall be provided with a circular turn-around with a minimum radius of 45 feet, subject to the following exceptions:

(a) The Fire Marshal and the Coos Bay Fire Department may approve a 20 ft. x 120 ft. hammer-head turn-around, upon a showing by the applicant that terrain, lot configuration, or pre-existing development makes a circular turn-around impractical.

(b) An automatic fire sprinkler system may be provided in lieu of a turn-around, subject to prior approval by the Coos Bay Fire Department.

(10) Section 902.2.2.6 Grade. The gradient for fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 10 percent without prior approval of the Coos Bay Fire Department.

(11) Section 506 Key Boxes.

(a) A key box shall be installed on all structures of 4,000 square feet or larger, and on all structures deemed by the Fire Chief to pose difficult problems of entry, including, but not limited to, barred windows on concrete structures; provided that structures without secured access, such as apartment buildings with all common areas open to the public, shall be exempt from this requirement. All key boxes shall be approved by and purchased through the Fire Department.

(b) Unless otherwise approved by the Fire Chief, key boxes shall be located to the left of the primary entrance to the building which shall bear the address or other identification required by Chapter 12.30 CBMC. The key box shall be located not less than a minimum of six (6) feet and not greater than a maximum of eight (8) feet above grade and shall be secured in an approved manner to the building.

(c) The building owner or occupant shall provide the Coos Bay Fire Department with keys to the building’s primary entrance for alarm/sprinkler devices and for any other keyed locks determined by the Coos Bay Fire Department to be necessary for fire protection or to ensure the safety of human life. The keys shall be placed in the key box by the Fire Department within 24 hours of any changes to keys for any such locks.

(12) Chapter 33. Except as provided herein, manufacture, possession, disposal, storage, sale, transportation and use of explosive materials are prohibited within city limits of the City, subject to the following exceptions:

1. Explosives used by the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Coast Guard or the Oregon National Guard;

2. Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia;

3. Sale, possession or use of Class C common fireworks;

4. Possession, transportation, storage and use of small arms ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging requirements;

5. Possession, storage, transportation and use of not more than 5 pounds (2.27 kg.) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9.07 kg.) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand-loading small arms ammunition for personal sporting use;

6. The transportation and use of explosive materials by the United States Bureau of Mines, and federal, state and local law enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities;

7. Special industrial explosive devices which contain in the aggregate less than 50 pounds (22.7 kg.) of explosive materials;

8. The possession, transportation, storage and use of blank industrial power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging regulations;

9. The use of any explosives preempted by federal regulation;

10. The use and handling of Class B fireworks (Explosives, Division 1.2 or 1.3 – see Appendix VI-H), as set forth in Oregon Fire Code;

11. Temporary storage of explosives for use in approved blasting operations. For the purposes of this exception, temporary storage is defined as storage for a total amount of time in continuous or aggregate intervals less than or equal to 72 hours;

12. Transportation as allowed in compliance with Federal Department of Transportation rules and regulations.

(13) Chapter 33 Permit. A permit issued by the Public Works and Development Department is required for storage of retail sales of “Class C” fireworks. This permit shall be in addition to any permit required by the Oregon State Fire Marshal and in accordance with OAR 837-012-0620 through 837-012-0640, Division 12.

(14) Chapter 33 Use, Storage, and Sales. Use, storage and sales of Class C fireworks shall be made in accordance with OAR 837-012-0645 through 837-012-0675, Division 12.

(15) Temporary Storage. Temporary storage of fireworks shall be made in accordance with the City of Coos Bay Building Code, Section 109.

(16) Seizure of Fireworks. The Fire Chief is authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the sole expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered for sale, exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of Chapter 33.

(17) Section 8204.2 Establishment of Limits in Which Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases is to be Restricted. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in all areas within the City of Coos Bay except those areas zoned G-1 (General Industrial).

(a) Class 1 and Class 2 liquids may be stored in above-ground tanks with a capacity in excess of 330 gallons in those areas zoned commercial and quasi-public, if the tanks meet all the regulatory requirements for secondary containment, leak monitoring and spill and overfill protection in conformity with NFPA 30 and 30A Fire Safety Standards and the 2006 Oregon Fire Code, Chapter 35. In addition, tanks shall be of double-wall construction and shall be encased in not less than six inches of rebar-reinforced concrete providing sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements for bridge construction as provided in the Federal Highway Code for protection against vehicle incursions. The installation, including the tank, shall be screened from view at ground level from neighboring properties or public ways by a fence constructed of non-flammable materials.

(18) Appendix B Section 1 includes the following exceptions:

Exceptions: The following are exempt from the fire flow requirements:

1. Any remodeling of an existing residence where the building footprint remains unchanged.

2. Any rebuilding of an existing single family or two family dwelling, excluding an attached garage, with a floor area of less than 3,600 square feet and which has been damaged or destroyed as a result of manmade demolition or natural disaster; provided such rebuilding is commenced within one year of damage or destruction.

3. Any addition to an existing single family or two family dwelling, so long as the total floor area of the structure, excluding an attached garage, does not exceed 3,600 square feet.

(19) One and Two-Family Dwellings.

One and Two-Family Dwellings on In-Fill Lots. The minimum fire flow and flow duration requirements for dwellings constructed on lots in existence prior to the adoption of this Code shall be 1,000 gallons per minute for dwellings having a fire area less than 3,600 square feet. For dwellings having a fire area greater than 3600 square feet, the fire flow shall not be less than that specified in Table B105.1, subject to the following exceptions:

1. For residential lots in existence prior to the adoption of this Code the minimum fire flow shall be at least 300 gallons per minute at 20 psi when an approved fire sprinkler system is installed in accordance with NFPA 13D and the structure is no larger than 3,600 square feet.

2. For residential lots in existence prior to the adoption of this Code the fire flow may be reduced with the following building separations:

	Building Separation	G.P.M. (2 hour duration)

	Over 100 feet	500

	31 to 100 feet	750

	Less than 31 feet	1000

When accessory detached buildings are less than 300 square feet, the above separations shall be measured from the dwelling. In no case shall the fire flow be less than 500 gallons per minute at a minimum of 20 psi residual pressure, except as permitted by subsection 5.1.1.1 of this section.

One- and Two-Family Dwellings or Lots Created After the Adoption of this Code. The minimum flow and flow duration requirements for one and two-family dwellings or lots created after the adoption of this Code and having an area which does not exceed 3,600 square feet (344.5 sq. m.) shall be 1,000 gallons per minute (3785.4 L/min.); minimum flow and flow duration requirements for dwellings having an area in excess of 3,600 square feet (344.5 sq. m) shall not be less than those specified in table B105.3.1, provided that a reduction in required fire flow of 50 percent may be approved by the Fire Chief when the building is equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

(20) Exceptions: The following are exempt from the fire hydrant requirements:

1. Any remodeling of an existing residence where the building footprint remains unchanged.

2. Any rebuilding of an existing single or two-family dwelling with a floor area, excluding attached garage, of less than 3,600 square feet which has been damaged or destroyed as a result of demolition or natural disaster; provided, however, that such rebuilding is commenced within one year of damage or destruction.

3. Any addition to an existing single or two-family dwelling, so long as the total floor area of the structure after the addition, excluding attached garage, does not exceed 3,600 feet.

(21) Appendix B 105.1:

Exceptions:

1. Except for single or two-family residential developments, the Fire Chief may accept a deficiency of up to 10 percent.

2. For single or two-family residential dwelling construction, hydrant spacing shall be a maximum of 800 feet on center, with no protected property being greater than 400 feet from a hydrant. Such distances shall be measured on the path of vehicular access.

3. For all single or two-family residential dwelling construction, and when not required by the 2007 Oregon Structural Specialty Code or used as an offset for fire flow requirements, an approved fire sprinkler system meeting NFPA 13D requirement shall allow hydrants to be spaced a maximum of 1,000 feet on center with the property being protected no greater than 500 feet from a fire hydrant as measured on the path of vehicle access.

4. For residential lots in existence prior to the adoption of this Code the maximum distance from the hydrant to the protected property shall be 600 feet, when an approved fire sprinkler system is installed in accordance with NFPA 13D and the structure is no larger than 3,600 square feet.

[Ord. 405 § 34, 2008].


15.35.060 Inspections.

(1) All regulated buildings shall be inspected as often as deemed necessary to provide a reasonable level of safety and protection from fire and for life. All institutional, primary and secondary educational occupancies shall be inspected not less than once every 12 months.

(2) Regular fire code inspections shall be performed by duly authorized inspectors acting under the direction of the fire chief. If at the time of inspection it is determined a building is in violation of the provisions of this code, a written notice of violation will be issued. The notice of violation shall specify the nature of the violation, and require the violation be remedied. The occupant, owner or manager shall be notified of a date on which a reinspection will be conducted. The date of the reinspection shall be within 30 days of the date of inspection resulting in the notice of violation.

(3) Section 308 Responsibility. When any fire is burning in violation of this code or escapes control of persons responsible for the fire, the person responsible for the fire shall be liable for any damage done to the property of another. The cost of controlling or extinguishing such fire may be recovered by the city from the person responsible for the fire according to a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council.

(4) Establishment of Limits to Which Flammable or Combustible Liquids in Outside Above-Ground Tanks Are to Be Restricted. Except as otherwise provided in the 2007 Oregon Fire Code, bulk storage of Class I and Class II liquids in excess of 330 gallons in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in all areas within the city of Coos Bay except in those areas zoned G‑I (general industrial). Existing facilities shall conform to all requirements of the city of Coos Bay land development ordinance.

(a) Class I and Class II liquids may be stored in above-ground tanks with a capacity in excess of 330 gallons in those areas zoned C (commercial) and QP (quasi-public), if the tanks meet all the regulatory requirements for secondary containment, leak monitoring and spill and overfill protection in conformity with NFPA 30 and 30A Fire Safety Standards and the 2006 Oregon Fire Code, Chapter 35. In addition, tanks shall be of double-wall construction and shall be encased in not less than six inches of rebar-reinforced concrete providing sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements for bridge construction as provided in the Federal Highway Code for protection against vehicle incursions. The installation, including the tank, shall be screened from view at ground level from neighboring properties or public ways by a fence constructed of nonflammable materials.

(5) Corrections. Any person who has received a notice of noncompliance from the building official or fire marshal shall correct an improper installation within the time set in the notice, which in no case shall be more than 30 days after date of receipt.

(6) Type of Hydrants. The type, location, and placement of fire hydrants shall be jointly approved by the Coos Bay/North Bend water board and the city of Coos Bay. The hydrant shall be provided with two two-and-one-half-inch outlets and one four-and-one-half-inch outlet. Connections to all three outlets shall have national standard thread. The hydrant shall have a five-inch barrel and valve. Hydrants shall be supplied with a minimum six-inch lead with a five-inch Storz fitting adapter. [Ord. 405 § 35, 2008].


Chapter 15.40 OREGON MANUFACTURED DWELLING AND PARK SPECIALTY CODE

Sections:

15.40.010    Short title.

15.40.020    Manufactured dwelling standards.


15.40.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the manufactured dwelling standards of the international and specialty code of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 405 § 70, 2008].


15.40.020 Manufactured dwelling standards.

The 2002 Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code Standards are hereby adopted, as authorized by ORS 446.155. [Ord. 405 § 71, 2008].


Chapter 15.45 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Sections:

15.45.010    Purpose.

15.45.020    Applicability.

15.45.030    Definitions.

15.45.040    Historic preservation committee.

15.45.050    Historic preservation duties.

15.45.060    Identification and evaluation of historic resources.

15.45.070    Local Landmark Register.

15.45.080    Treatment of historic resources listed in the Local Landmark Register.

15.45.090    Removal of landmarks from the Local Landmark Register.

15.45.100    Economic hardship.

15.45.110    Appeals.

15.45.120    Resubmittal of an application previously denied.

15.45.130    Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

15.45.140    Conflicts with other laws.


15.45.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to establish a historic preservation ordinance to identify, recognize, and preserve significant properties related to the community’s history; encourage the rehabilitation and ongoing viability of historic buildings and structures; strengthen public support for historic preservation efforts within the community; foster civic pride; and encourage cultural heritage tourism. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2015].


15.45.020 Applicability.

No provision of this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance of a landmark when such action does not involve a change in color, when color is not specifically noted in record of designation, design, materials, or appearance. No provision in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the alteration, demolition, or relocation of a landmark when the building official certifies that such action is required for public safety. At his or her discretion, the building official may find that under state law and CBMC 15.45.080(4)(c) that a landmark does not meet current building code but is not dangerous. [Ord. 471 § 2, 2015].


15.45.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to terms used in this chapter. Terms not defined have their commonly construed meaning:

“Alteration” means an addition, removal, or reconfiguration that changes the appearance of a landmark. Painting, when color is not specifically noted in landmark’s record of designation, and ordinary maintenance are excluded from this definition.

“Building” means a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar construction created principally to shelter any form of human activity.

“Certificate of appropriateness (COA)” means a document issued by the historic preservation officer indicating that the applicant has satisfactorily met the provisions of this chapter for the alteration, relocation, or demolition of a landmark.

“Demolition” means the complete destruction or dismantling of 65 percent, or greater, of the entirety of a landmark.

“District” means a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.

“Eligible/contributing” means a building, structure, object, or site originally constructed within the applicable period of significance that retains and exhibits sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These properties strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential historic district.

“Eligible/significant” means a building, structure, object, or site originally constructed within the applicable period of significance that retains and exhibits sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These properties strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential historic district, and are likely individually eligible for listing in the Local Landmark Register.

“Exceptional significance” means the quality of historic significance achieved outside the usual norms of age, association, or rarity.

“Historic integrity” means the quality of wholeness of historic location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association of a historic resource, as opposed to its physical condition.

“Historic preservation officer” means the city official responsible for the administration of this chapter.

“Historic resource” means a building, structure, object, site, or district that is at least 50 years old or is of exceptional significance and potentially meets the age, integrity, and significance criteria for listing in the Local Landmark Register, but may not necessarily be recorded in the Historic Resource Survey.

“Historic Resource Survey” means the record of buildings, structures, objects, and sites recorded by the city of Coos Bay used to identify historic resources potentially eligible for listing in the Local Landmark Register.

“Historic resources of statewide significance” means buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts that are listed in the National Register.

“Historic significance” means the physical association of a building, structure, site, object, or district with historic events, trends, persons, architecture, method of construction, or that have yielded or may yield information important in prehistory or history.

“Landmark” means a building, structure, site, object, or district listed in the city of Coos Bay’s Local Landmark Register.

“Local Landmark Register” means the list of historic resources officially recognized by the city of Coos Bay as important to its history and afforded the protection under this chapter.

“National Register of Historic Places” means the nation’s official list of buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts important in the nation’s history and maintained by the National Park Service in Washington, D.C., and hereinafter referred to as the “National Register.” Historic resources listed in the National Register are referred to as “historic resources of statewide significance” in Oregon Revised Statutes.

“Noncontributing” means a building, structure, object, or site originally constructed within the applicable period of significance that does not retain or exhibit sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These properties do not strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential historic district in their current condition.

“Not in period” means a building, structure, object, or site that was originally constructed outside the applicable period of significance.

“Object” means a construction that is largely artistic in nature or is relatively small in scale and simply constructed in comparison to buildings or structures, including a fountain, sculpture, monument, milepost, etc.

“Ordinary maintenance” means activities that do not remove materials or alter qualities that make a historic resource eligible for listing in the Local Landmark Register, including cleaning, painting, when color is not changed, and limited replacement of siding, trim, and window components when such material is beyond repair and where the new piece is of the same size, dimension, material, and finish as that of the original historic material. Excluded from this definition is the replacement of an entire window sash or more than 20 percent of the siding or trim on any one side of a landmark at any one time within one calendar year.

“Period of significance” means the time period, from one to several years or decades, during which a landmark was associated with an important historic event(s), trend(s), person(s), architecture, or method(s) of construction.

“Record of designation” means the official document created by the historic preservation officer that describes how a landmark meets the criteria for listing in the Local Landmark Register.

“Rehabilitation” means the process of returning a landmark to a state of utility through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient use while preserving those portions and features of the landmark and its site that convey its historic significance.

“Relocation” means the removal from or moving of a landmark from its original location noted in the record of designation.

“Site” means the location of a significant event, prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of any existing building, structure, or object.

“Streetscape” means the physical parts and aesthetic qualities of a public right-of-way, including the roadway, gutter, tree lawn, sidewalk, retaining walls, landscaping and building setback. [Ord. 471 § 3, 2015].


15.45.040 Historic preservation committee.

The city of Coos Bay hereby appoints the design assistance team to act as the historic preservation committee and establishes the following historic preservation provisions:

(1) The public works and community development director, or their designee, shall be the historic preservation officer and shall carry out the administrative provisions of this chapter. The historic preservation officer may appoint a designee(s) to carry out responsibilities delegated to him or her under this chapter and to serve as staff to the design assistance team.

(2) The seven members of the design assistance team shall demonstrate competence, knowledge, or interest in historic preservation with preference given to those with professional experience in the fields of preservation, architecture, archaeology, community history, building trades, real estate, or related specialties. A maximum of two members who do not reside or own a business within the Coos Bay city limits may be appointed. Members shall serve without compensation, but are eligible for reimbursement of expenses related to their service.

(3) Terms of appointment shall be four years and shall be staggered with no more than four terms expiring in any one year. The initial appointment of four members shall be for three years; the initial appointment for three members shall be for two years. Subsequent terms of appointment shall be for three years, or in the case of a replacement, for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment.

(4) A simple majority of the members of the design assistance team shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of the members present shall be required for approval or disapproval of any motion or other action of the design assistance team.

(5) A chair and vice-chair shall be elected annually by and from the seated membership. Officers are eligible for reelection.

(6) The design assistance team shall meet at least four times a year, and as required to conduct business in a timely fashion. Notice of the meetings shall be in accordance with applicable state law. Meeting minutes, applications for certificates of appropriateness, landmark nominations, records of designation, staff reports, and decisions of the design assistance team shall be created and maintained as public records in accordance with applicable local state laws.

(7) The historic preservation officer shall request that the city council consider declaring the position vacant of any member who is absent from three meetings in a single calendar year without being excused prior to the meeting by the chair of the design assistance team. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 471 § 4, 2015].


15.45.050 Historic preservation duties.

The design assistance team shall have the following historic preservation duties:

(1) Employing the procedures and criteria in CBMC 15.45.060, they shall identify and evaluate properties in the city of Coos Bay and maintain a Historic Resource Survey consistent with the standards of the Oregon State Historic Preservation Office, hereinafter referred to as “SHPO.”

(2) Employing the procedures and criteria in CBMC 15.45.070, they shall designate properties to the Local Landmark Register.

(3) Employing the procedures and criteria in CBMC 15.45.080, they shall review and act upon applications for the alteration, relocation, or demolition of landmarks.

(4) They shall support the enforcement of all state laws relating to historic preservation.

(5) They shall perform any other advisory functions that may be designated by motion of the city council.

(6) They may publish and adopt written and graphic guidelines and example materials to clarify the criteria in this chapter and to assist applicants in developing complete and viable applications to designate, alter, rehabilitate, relocate, or demolish landmarks. Documents intended to be used for the regulation of alterations as defined in this chapter must be voted on and adopted by the design assistance team.

(7) They may undertake to inform the citizens of and visitors to the city of Coos Bay regarding the community’s history and prehistory; promote research into its history and prehistory; collect and make available materials on the preservation of landmarks; provide information on state and federal preservation programs; and document landmarks prior to their alteration, demolition, or relocation and archive that documentation.

(8) For purposes consistent with this chapter and subject to the approval of the city council, they may seek, accept, and expend public appropriations; seek, accept, and expend grant and gift funds; cooperate with public and private entities; assist the owners of landmarks in securing funding for the preservation of their properties; and report on such activities to the city council.

(9) They may recommend incentives and code amendments to the city council and planning commission to promote historic preservation in the community.

(10) They may comment on local, state, or federal issues, laws, and requests relating to historic preservation. [Ord. 471 § 5, 2015].


15.45.060 Identification and evaluation of historic resources.

The Historic Resource Survey lists, describes, and determines the eligibility of historic resources for listing in the Local Landmark Register. Not all properties listed in the Historic Resource Survey are eligible for listing in the Landmark Register. A property need not be first listed in the Historic Resource Survey before being nominated to the Local Landmark Register under CBMC 15.45.070.

(1) The design assistance team shall determine and periodically revise priorities for the identification and evaluation of historic resources based on the community’s needs and interests.

(2) Before commencing inventory studies or updates, the design assistance team shall provide public notice and/or mailing and web postings describing the inventory, its purposes and timelines and invite public participation.

(3) Surveyed properties shall be identified as eligible/significant (ES), eligible/contributing (EC), noncontributing (NC), or not in period (NP). Evaluation and documentation of properties in the Historic Resource Survey shall meet the requirements of the document “Guidelines for Historic Resource Surveys in Oregon, 2010” or most recent guidance for such efforts published by the SHPO and be supplied to the agency within six months of the completion of the study.

(4) The Historic Resource Survey shall be maintained as a public record with the exception of archaeological sites, which is prohibited by state law.

(5) Citizens shall have the opportunity to review and correct information included in the Historic Resource Survey. Any member of the public may place a property in the Historic Resource Survey; however, the design assistance team retains the authority to determine the property’s eligibility for listing in the Local Landmark Register.

(6) The design assistance team may collect further information including, but not limited to, current photographs, architectural descriptions based on on-site observations, or archival documentation for properties already listed in the Local Landmark Register or National Register for the purposes of administering this chapter pursuant to the provisions of this section. [Ord. 471 § 6, 2015].


15.45.070 Local Landmark Register.

The design assistance team may designate historic resources to the Local Landmark Register as a means of providing recognition of their significance and providing incentives and guidelines for their preservation. The Local Landmark Register is maintained by the historic preservation officer and shall be available to the public.

(1) Historic resources within the corporate boundaries of the city of Coos Bay as listed in the city of Coos Bay Comprehensive Plan 2000, Volume II-Plan Inventories, Chapter 5.1 Historic Preservation and listed in the National Register, including all National Register-listed historic districts in their entirety, may be listed in the Local Landmark Register using the procedures outlined in subsection (3) of this section, but need not be documented as outlined in subsections (2)(b) through (d) of this section. In such cases, the National Register nomination shall serve as the record of designation. As historic resources of statewide significance, all National Register-listed properties, including individual properties in recognized National Register-listed historic districts, are subject to the regulations in CBMC 15.45.080(5), pursuant to Oregon state law.

(2) Criteria for Designating Historic Resources to the Local Landmark Register. Any building, structure, object, site, or district may be designated to the Local Landmark Register if it meets all the criteria of subsection (1) of this section or all of the criteria listed below:

(a) The property is located within the boundaries of the city of Coos Bay.

(b) The property is over 50 years of age or of exceptional importance, or in the case of a district, the majority of the properties are over 50 years old or have exceptional significance.

(c) The property possesses sufficient historic integrity, in that there are no major alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the significant historic features. Major alterations that may destroy the historic integrity include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main roof, enlargement or enclosure of windows on principal facades, addition of upper stories or the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with nonhistoric materials, moving the resource from its original location to one that is dissimilar to the original, additions which significantly detract from or obscure the form and appearance of the historic resource when viewed from the public right-of-way.

(d) The property has historic significance as demonstrated by meeting at least one of the following criteria:

(i) Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; and/or

(ii) Association with the lives or persons significant in our past; and/or

(iii) Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; and/or

(iv) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.

(3) Nomination Procedure. Any person, group, or government agency may nominate a property for listing in the Local Landmark Register. The nomination procedures are as follows:

(a) There is no fee associated with nominating a historic resource to the Landmark Register.

(b) The nomination for a historic resource to the Local Landmark Register must include a description of the boundaries of the proposed nominated area and the structures, objects, and sites contained therein, and a statement explaining how the historic resource(s) meet(s) the criteria under subsection (2) of this section. The historic preservation officer may establish additional standards for a complete application.

(c) Prior to setting the proposed nomination on the agenda for the next design assistance team meeting, the historic preservation officer shall inform property owners in writing of the nomination process pursuant to local and state law. To be listed in the Local Landmark Register, the property’s legal owner(s) shall provide to the city a written statement acknowledging that the owner understands the nomination process and the results of such a designation, and wishes to have their property listed in the Local Landmark Register. Within locally designated historic districts a boundary may be established, but only those that submit a statement as described above will be listed in the Local Landmark Register. In cases where multiple persons or entities own a single property, a simple majority of the property owners must submit a written statement.

The city of Coos Bay may not object to the listing of a historic resource in city ownership. This provision does not apply to individual historic resources and historic districts listed in the National Register.

(d) Upon acceptance of a complete application and receipt of written owner consent, the historic preservation officer shall schedule a public meeting before the design assistance team pursuant to applicable state and local laws.

(e) The design assistance team shall review the documentation for completeness, accuracy, and compliance with subsection (2) of this section, Criteria for Designating Historic Resources to the Local Landmark Register. The design assistance team may make a recommendation to approve, deny, or table the application pending further testimony or to allow for the petitioner to provide additional information. The design assistance team shall develop written findings to support its decisions.

(f) A public hearing before the city council is required for a final decision. The city council may approve, deny, or table the application pending further testimony or to allow for the petitioner to provide additional information as requested by the council. The council shall adopt written findings to support its decisions. If approved, the historic preservation officer shall prepare a record of designation that includes the original nomination materials, and any testimony or additional materials considered during the nomination process that establishes the eligibility of the historic resource for listing in the Local Landmark Register.

(g) Historic resources designated as landmarks shall be noted as such in the record of designation. The designation shall apply to the entirety of the recognized landmark as described in the record of designation regardless of future property division or ownership.

(h) A record of designation may be amended through the process described in this section. The historic preservation officer may administratively add additional materials gathered under the provisions of CBMC 15.45.060 to keep the record current or elaborate on established facts in the record of designation. Notice of such an action shall be provided to the design assistance team at their next regular meeting.

(4) Results of Listing in Local Landmark Register. Historic resources listed in the Local Landmark Register receive the following benefits:

(a) All uses and restrictions established by the underlying zoning, existing conditional use permits, and other applicable design standards shall remain in effect unless changed through due process.

(b) Landmarks are protected under the provisions of CBMC 15.45.080 through 15.45.130.

(c) City staff shall consider granting zoning variances and/or conditional use permits in order to encourage the productive use and preservation of landmarks.

(d) The local building official shall consider waiving certain code requirements in accordance with the existing state building code.

(e) Property owners of landmarks may seek technical or financial assistance from the design assistance team in applying for grants or tax incentives for rehabilitating their properties as resources and funds are available.

(f) Property owners of landmarks are eligible to receive city-funded grants and loans to assist with the preservation of their buildings as resources and funds are available. [Ord. 471 § 7, 2015].


15.45.080 Treatment of historic resources listed in the Local Landmark Register.

The design assistance team shall use the provisions of this section to preserve the exterior character-defining features of individual landmarks; the exterior of individual buildings in landmark historic districts; and exteriors and interior public spaces of city-owned landmarks.

(1) Activities Not Subject to the Provisions of This Section.

(a) Alterations to building interiors.

(b) Application of exterior paint color when color is not specifically noted in record of designation.

(c) Alterations to landscape features not specifically identified as historically significant in record of designation.

(2) No landmark or exterior landscape or archaeological element noted as significant in the record of designation shall be altered, relocated, or demolished, or a new building or structure constructed within the area defined in the record of designation without a certificate of appropriateness signed and issued by the historic preservation officer. Certificates must be presented to the building official before a building or demolition permit is issued.

(a) An application for a certificate of appropriateness must include a description of the proposed activity, accompanying maps, photographs, drawings, and other documentation. The historic preservation officer may establish additional standards for a complete application, including defining different criteria for a complete application under provisions in subsections (3), (4), and (5) of this section.

(b) Upon acceptance of a complete application, the historic preservation officer shall decide within 15 days if the proposed work is subject to provisions in subsection (3), (4), or (5) of this section.

(c) The historic preservation officer shall prepare a staff report for the design assistance team that summarizes the proposed project and notes the criteria specified in this chapter under which the application shall be considered. Materials that may be used in the preparation of the staff report include the record of designation; and/or National Register nomination; and/or other archival photos, maps; and/or other documentary evidence specific to the subject property; and/or observations from on-site inspections from the public right-of-way to document its historic appearance or alteration over time; and/or documents and publications of the National Park Service or Oregon State Historic Preservation Office.

Upon review of the report, the design assistance team shall make a recommendation to the city council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for a certificate of appropriateness. Documents shall be made available at least seven calendar days before a public hearing is held or administrative decision is made.

(d) The city council shall review the record and act upon applications for the alteration, relocation, and demolition of a landmark. Applications for the alteration of a landmark may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. Applications for the relocation or demolition of a landmark may be approved, approved with conditions, or the action delayed for up to one year. The council shall adopt written findings to support its decisions pursuant to this section.

(e) A certificate of appropriateness issued for the alteration of a landmark shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of its issuance. A certificate of appropriateness issued for the relocation or demolition of a historic resource shall be effective for a period of one year. A one-year extension may be granted by the design assistance team.

(f) A landmark may be altered, relocated, or demolished without a certificate of appropriateness if the building official attests in writing that the condition of a landmark poses a clear and immediate hazard to public safety. The comments of the building official with sufficient evidence to support his or her conclusions shall be provided to the historic preservation officer within 15 days of making his or her decision. The historic preservation officer will make these materials available to the design assistance team at their next regular meeting. The property owner(s) must submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness as required under this chapter within 30 days of the building official submitting his or her written statement to the historic preservation officer.

(3) The historic preservation officer may issue a certificate of appropriateness for the alteration of a landmark without a public hearing when the proposed alteration will not significantly change the qualities that merited the listing of the landmark in the Local Landmark Register. A completed certificate of appropriateness must be presented to the building official before a permit is issued. The historic preservation officer shall make a list of certificates issued in this manner available to the design assistance team at each regular meeting. Activities eligible for a certificate of appropriateness issued as described in this provision include the following:

(a) Construction of a fence that complies with the development code.

(b) Demolition of an outbuilding noted as sharing a lot with a landmark and specifically noted as not historically significant in its designation.

(4) A public hearing before the city council and a signed certificate of appropriateness shall be required for activities not exempted in subsections (1)(a) through (c) and (3)(a) and (b) of this section.

(a) Prior to submitting an application for a permit pursuant to this section, proponents are encouraged to request a pre-application conference to review concepts and proposals. The historic preservation officer may assign a staff member to perform these duties or contract with other parties to complete the consultation. The design assistance team may also form ad hoc committees for this purpose. The members shall declare ex parte contact at the time of a public hearing on the proposal.

(b) Upon acceptance of a complete application the historic preservation officer shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to applicable local and state laws.

(c) In order to approve an application for the alteration of a landmark, the design assistance team must find that the proposal meets the following guidelines as applicable:

(i) A property shall be used as it was historically or be given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships; and/or

(ii) The historic integrity of a property shall be retained and preserved. The relocation of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property shall be avoided; and/or

(iii) A property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, shall not be undertaken; and/or

(iv) Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved; and/or

(v) Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved; and/or

(vi) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. If the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence; and/or

(vii) Chemical and physical treatments, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used; and/or

(viii) Archeological resources shall be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken; and/or

(ix) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment; and/or

(x) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.

(d) In addition to meeting the applicable guidelines in subsections (4)(c)(i) through (x) of this section, in order to approve an application for the alteration of a landmark the design assistance team must find that the proposal meets the following design standards as applicable:

(i) Vacant buildings shall be weather- and vandal-proofed in order to minimize further deterioration and the threat to public safety; and/or

(ii) Rehabilitation work, especially on the exterior and the principal facades shall preserve the existing historic features or replace them if absolutely necessary with features and materials known to have existed on the building through verifiable evidence such as photographs. Alterations to landmarks shall not be based on speculation, but instead on documentary evidence; and/or

(iii) New additions shall be subordinate to the original building, meaning lower in height, attached to the rear or set back along the side, smaller in scale, and have less architectural detail; and/or

(iv) Height, width, setback, roof shape, and the overall scale and massing of new buildings within historic districts and on lots with existing landmarks or additions to landmarks shall be compatible with the existing historic building(s) and, in the case of historic districts, the overall streetscape; and/or

(v) In historic districts and on lots with existing landmarks, materials on at least the primary facade(s) of new buildings shall be similar in size, shape, color, and texture to the original materials on the facades of surrounding historic buildings; and/or

(vi) Architectural details on new construction (including wood or metal trim, porches, cornices, arches, and window and door features, etc.) shall be complementary, but shall not replicate historic features on surrounding historic buildings; and/or

(vii) Window and door openings should be similar in size and orientation (vertical to horizontal) to openings on historic buildings and shall take up about the same percentage of the overall facade as those on surrounding historic buildings; and/or

(viii) In historic districts and on lots with existing landmarks, the relationship of the width to the height of the principal elevations for new buildings and additions to existing landmarks shall be in scale with the surrounding structures and street-scape. Wider new buildings can be divided into segments that more closely resemble the facade widths of historic buildings; and/or

(ix) In historic districts and on lots with existing landmarks, the roof shape of new buildings and additions to existing landmarks shall be visually compatible with the surrounding structures and streetscape. Unusual roof shapes, materials, and pitches are discouraged; and/or

(x) Moving landmarks shall be avoided, especially to create artificial groupings; and/or

(xi) The demolition of landmarks shall be avoided whenever possible; and/or

(xii) Any applicable design guidelines adopted by the design assistance team in CBMC 15.45.050.

(5) Following a meeting before the design assistance team, a public hearing before the city council and a signed certificate of appropriateness shall be required to relocate or demolish a landmark or any property listed in the National Register of Historic Places individually or as part of a historic district.

(a) In recommending that the city council approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for the demolition of a landmark, the design assistance team shall find that:

(i) The applicant has completed a replacement plan for the site, including drawings approved by the building official. If the property is located within a historic district, plans must be submitted for review by the design assistance team pursuant to subsection (4) of this section as it relates to new construction; and

(ii) The building official determines and states in writing that the building may not be safely removed from the site; and

(iii) The value to the community of the proposed use of the property outweighs the value of retaining landmark at the original location. Public testimony shall be considered when making this determination.

(b) In recommending that the city council approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for the relocation of a landmark, the landmark design assistance team must find that:

(i) The relocated landmark remains within the corporate limits of Coos Bay.

(ii) The new site provides a suitable setting and ensures the building’s long term preservation.

(iii) The applicant has completed a plan for the new site, including drawings approved by the building official.

(c) In recommending the city council approving or denying an application for the relocation or demolition of a landmark, the design assistance team may include the following conditions:

(i) Photographic, video, or drawn recordation of the landmark in its original location; and/or

(ii) In the case of demolition, the landmark be transported to a new site, and that, to the extent possible, the new location is similar to the original site and that the original setback and orientation of the building is replicated on the new lot; and/or

(iii) In the cases of properties listed in the National Register, that the applicant attempt to obtain permission to move the landmark from the National Park Service in order to retain the property’s listing in the National Register and/or assume all responsibility and cost of removing the landmark if permission cannot be obtained; and/or

(iv) Other reasonable mitigation measures.

(d) At the hearing of an application to relocate or demolish a landmark the council may recommend that, in the interest of exploring reasonable alternatives, delay issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for up to 180 calendar days from the date of the hearing. Not more than 60 and not less than 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the delay period, the historic preservation officer shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to local and state laws to allow the design assistance team to consider if there are still reasonable alternatives to explore, and if the group will request in writing that the city council continue the delay for an additional period of up to 180 calendar days.

(e) The council may not delay the relocation or demolition of a landmark for more than 360 calendar days subject to the provisions of this section. At the end of the waiting period, the historic preservation officer shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation or demolition of the landmark.

(f) Upon issuing a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a landmark, the historic preservation officer shall post a legal notice in a local newspaper of general circulation announcing the demolition, the criteria under which the demolition was approved, the historic significance of the property, and invite the public to provide alternatives to the demolition for consideration by the design assistance team.

(g) Relocated landmarks shall remain listed in the Local Landmark Register unless removed under CBMC 15.45.090.

(h) Demolished landmarks shall be removed from the Local Landmark Register using the procedures described in CBMC 15.45.090. [Ord. 471 § 8, 2015].


15.45.090 Removal of landmarks from the Local Landmark Register.

A public hearing before the council and a signed certificate of appropriateness shall be required to remove a landmark from the Local Landmark Register.

(1) An application to remove a landmark from the Local Landmark Register shall not be considered for one year after the date of decision for the denial of an application for the relocation or demolition of the same landmark under subsection (5) of this section.

(2) Landmarks concurrently listed in the Local Landmark Register and National Register will be considered for removal from the Local Landmark Register only after the landmark is removed from the National Register and the SHPO has provided written evidence of the removal to the historic preservation officer.

(3) Any individual or group, including the design assistance team acting on its own initiative, may initiate the removal of a landmark or individual property within a historic district from the Local Landmark Register by submitting a complete application to the historic preservation officer.

(4) The historic preservation officer shall establish standards for a complete application for the removal of a landmark from the Local Landmark Register. Upon acceptance of a complete application, the historic preservation officer shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to applicable local and state laws.

(5) In order to approve an application for the removal of a landmark from the Local Landmark Register the council must find the following:

(a) The landmark has ceased to meet the criteria for listing in the Local Landmark Register because the qualities which caused it to be originally listed have been lost or destroyed; and/or

(b) The property owner at the time the property was added to the Local Landmark Register did not provide written permission for such action as required under CBMC 15.45.070.

(6) Landmarks accidentally destroyed by flood, fire, or other natural or accidental act or demolished under the provisions of CBMC 15.45.080 and meeting the definition of “demolished” as defined in this chapter may be removed administratively from the Local Landmark Register by the historic preservation officer.     Notice of this action and written evidence documenting the demolition of the landmark shall be provided to the design assistance team at their next regular meeting. This same documentation shall be provided to the SHPO. If a landmark is also listed in the National Register, the design assistance team shall request that the SHPO remove the property from the National Register if not requiring the owner to do so under CBMC 15.45.080(5)(c).

(7) Upon removing a landmark from the Local Landmark Register, the historic preservation officer shall provide final notice to the property owner and the SHPO announcing the removal, and the criteria under which the removal was approved. [Ord. 471 § 9, 2015].


15.45.100 Economic hardship.

The design assistance team shall grant a certificate of appropriateness for a relocation, demolition, or, at the design assistance team’s discretion, modify or exempt a property from the requirements of CBMC 15.45.080 if the applicant can demonstrate that complying with the provisions of this chapter creates an economic hardship that prevents the profitable use of the subject property.

(1) Economic hardship may only be considered in a separate hearing after an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the alteration, relocation, or demolition of a landmark has been issued or denied and all pending appeals to the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission, and local, state, and federal courts are resolved.

(2) Separate standards for demonstrating an economic hardship are established for investment or income-producing and non-income-producing properties:

(a) Economic hardship for an income-producing property shall be found when the property owner demonstrates that a reasonable rate of return cannot be obtained from the landmark if it retains its historic features, buildings, or structures in either its present condition or if it is rehabilitated.

(b) Economic hardship for a non-income-producing property shall be found when the property owner demonstrates that the landmark has no beneficial use as a single-family dwelling or for an institutional use in its present condition or if rehabilitated.

(3) Property owners seeking a certificate of appropriateness for economic hardship must provide sufficient information, as determined by the historic preservation officer, to support the application for the certificate. Demonstration of an economic hardship shall not be based on or include any of the following circumstances:

(a) Willful or negligent acts by the owner; and/or

(b) Purchase of the property for substantially more than market value; and/or

(c) Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs; and/or

(d) Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; and/or

(e) Failure to provide normal tenant improvements. [Ord. 471 § 10, 2015].


15.45.110 Appeals.

Decisions of the city council are appealable to the Oregon State Land Use Board of Appeals. [Ord. 471 § 11, 2015].


15.45.120 Resubmittal of an application previously denied.

An application for a certificate of appropriateness which has been denied or an application which was denied and which on appeal has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission, or the courts, may not be resubmitted for the same or a substantially similar proposal or for the same or substantially similar action for a period of at least two years from the date the final city action is made denying the application unless there is a substantial change in the facts or a change in city policy which would change the outcome. [Ord. 471 § 12, 2015].


15.45.130 Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be the same as for violation of the city of Coos Bay Development Code. [Ord. 471 § 13, 2015].


15.45.140 Conflicts with other laws.

If the provisions of this chapter are found to be in conflict with federal or state laws the federal or state law shall prevail. In cases of conflict with other city ordinances the previously established statute shall take precedence. [Ord. 471 § 15, 2015].


Title 16 (Reserved)

 


Title 17 DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:

Section 1. General Administration

17.110    General Provisions

17.120    Administration

17.130    Procedures

17.140    Code Enforcement Officer and Civil Infraction Citation Authority

17.150    Definitions

Section 2. Zoning

17.210    Establishment of Zoning Districts and Maps

17.215    Recodified

17.220    Low Density Residential Districts (LDR-6, LDR-8.5) and Overlay Zone LDR-6

17.225    Medium Density Residential District (MDR)

17.230    Commercial Districts (C and MX)

17.235    Industrial-Commercial District (I-C)

17.240    Waterfront Heritage District (WH)

17.245    Waterfront Industrial District (W-I)

17.250    Hollering Place District (HP)

17.255    Urban Public District (UP)

17.260    Medical Park District (MP)

17.265    Recodified

17.270    Watershed District (WS)

Section 3. Land Development

17.310    General Provisions

17.312    Accessory Dwelling

17.314    Accessory Use or Building on a Separate Lot or Parcel

17.316    Empire Waterfront Settlement Design Review

17.318    Flood Damage Prevention

17.320    Home Occupation

17.322    Manufactured Home Special Siting Standards

17.325    Mitigation of Adverse Impacts

17.328    Nonconforming Uses

17.330    Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements

17.333    Signs

17.335    Supplementary Development Standards

17.337    Temporary Use Permit

17.338    Telecommunications Facilities

17.340    Zero Lot Line Development

17.342    Alterations of Final Plats and Partitions

17.345    Annexation

17.347    Conditional Uses

17.349    Cultural Resources

17.352    Estuarine and Coastal Shoreland Uses and Activities

17.355    Legal Lot Determinations

17.359    Partitions

17.360    Plan Amendments and Zone Changes

17.362    Planned Unit Development

17.363    Replats and Property Line Adjustments

17.365    Site Plan Review

17.367    Subdivisions

17.370    Repealed

17.372    Variances


Chapter 17.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.110.010    Title.

17.110.020    Applicability.

17.110.030    Standards designated.

17.110.040    Purpose.

17.110.050    Organization.

17.110.060    Term construction.

17.110.070    Hierarchy of plans and regulations.

17.110.080    Timing of regulations.

17.110.090    More restrictive provision governs.

17.110.100    Severability.

17.110.110    Minor modifications to this title.


17.110.010 Title.

This title is known as “The Coos Bay Development Code (CBDC).” This title replaces all other related development chapters and ordinances within the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.020 Applicability.

No building or other structure shall be constructed, improved, altered, enlarged or moved; nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the city be commenced or changed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, except in conformity with conditions prescribed by this title. Where the CBDC imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of the CBDC shall control. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, establish, alter, enlarge, use or cause to be used, any buildings, structures, improvements or use of premises contrary to the provisions of this title. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.030 Standards designated.

The standards this title establishes are the minimum requirements necessary to protect public health, safety and general welfare. The city may impose conditions of approval beyond the standards identified to protect public health and welfare to allow the use or activity being proposed. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.040 Purpose.

The purposes of this code are to implement the Coos Bay comprehensive plan, promote orderly city growth; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to establish standards for population density; to provide adequate open space for light, air, and appropriate landscaping; to facilitate fire and police protection; to avoid traffic congestion; to provide for community facilities; and to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.050 Organization.

The text of this title is organized as follows: Section 1, General Administration; Section 2, Zoning; and Section 3, Land Development. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.060 Term construction.

(1) Defining Words. All words used in this title, unless otherwise defined in Chapter 17.150 CBDC, Definitions, shall be defined by the latest version of Merriam-Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary.

(2) Tenses and Usage.

(a) Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is true.

(b) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is true.

(c) The words “must,” “shall,” “will” and “will not” are mandatory.

(d) “May” is permissive.

(e) “Prohibited” means that the proposed use or improvement is not allowed. An adjustment, variance, conditional use or other land use review shall not be approved if the effect of the approval would circumvent a prohibition. This does not preclude the council from making legislative changes in accordance with state law.

(3) Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following conjunctions have the following meanings:

(a) “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply;

(b) “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in combination; and

(c) “Either...or” indicates that the connected items or provisions apply singly, but not in combination.

(4) Lists. Lists of items that state “including the following,” “such as,” or similar language are not limited to just those items. Lists provide examples, but do not exhaust all possibilities. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.070 Hierarchy of plans and regulations.

(1) General Hierarchy. When interpreting land use plans, policies, maps and standards, the city review authority shall apply the following general hierarchy of authority. In case of ambiguity or conflict, the review authority shall refer to and rely upon the Coos Bay comprehensive plan (CBCP) for guidance above all other city texts or maps.

(a) The CBCP is the highest authority and establishes land use policy and compliance in deference to state of Oregon planning goals. The CBCP is reviewed and updated periodically to respond to the changing needs and desires of the city. The comprehensive plan text supersedes plan designation maps.

(b) The Coos Bay Development Code (CBDC) text and zoning maps implement the CBCP. CBDC text supersedes zoning maps. Interpretations of CBDC text and zoning maps must be consistent with the CBCP.

(c) The city public works and engineering standards are utilized to implement the CDCP and the CBDC. Interpretations of the city public works and engineering standards must be consistent with the CBCP and with the CBDC text and zoning maps.

(d) The review authority shall not interpret general language in the CBCP so as to supersede specific or numeric standards in the CBDC or adopted engineering standards. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.080 Timing of regulations.

(1) Land Use Approval and Building Permits.

(a) The review authority shall not process an application until the review authority finds the application to be technically complete.

(b) A technically complete application is an application that fully complies with the relevant portions of Chapter 17.130 CBDC (Procedures) and this title.

(c) The city will process technically complete applications for land use review relying upon the regulations in effect at the time the applicant submitted a complete application to the city.

(2) Legislative Changes. Applications for legislative changes, such as a plan amendment or annexation, do not create a vested right to development regulations in effect at the time the legislative application was submitted. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.090 More restrictive provision governs.

If the requirements of this title are less restrictive than comparable requirements imposed by another provision of this CBDC or of any other ordinance of the city or requirement of the state of Oregon, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.100 Severability.

The provisions of this code are severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is judged by a court of law to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this code and shall continue in full force and effect. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.110.110 Minor modifications to this title.

The director may make minor modifications to this title using a Type I process. These minor modifications include numbering, grammar, language clarifications and other minor corrections. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.120 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

17.120.010    Planning commission.

17.120.020    Planning department.

17.120.030    Review authority.

17.120.040    Interpretations.

17.120.050    Conditions of approval.

17.120.060    Administrative authority.

17.120.070    Enforcement.

17.120.080    Record maintenance.

17.120.090    Application fee schedule.


17.120.010 Planning commission.

The Coos Bay planning commission (commission) shall consider and take actions consistent with Chapter 2.35 CBMC. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.020 Planning department.

The city council may, at its discretion, create a Coos Bay planning department (department) which shall have such duties, authority and financing as the council deems appropriate. The city manager shall assign a person with the responsibility of directing the activities of the Coos Bay planning department who shall be known as the director. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.030 Review authority.

The review authority is an individual or governing body delegated with the responsibility of issuing a final decision on a land use proposal. The review authorities responsible for issuing final decisions for land use proposals are:

(1) Type I application, director;

(2) Type II application, director;

(3) Type III application, planning commission; and

(4) Type IV application, city council, upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.040 Interpretations.

(1) The review authority responsible for making a decision regarding a given application may interpret relevant ambiguous terms in this title in the course of or in advance of making a decision on the merits of the application.

(a) If an interpretation is made in advance of a decision on the merits of an application, the interpretation shall be conducted as a Type I review and shall be included as part of the decision on the merits of the application.

(b) An interpretation may be appealed as part of an appeal of the decision on the merits of an application.

(2) A use that is not listed in any zone or district may be permitted by similar use determination pursuant to Type I process. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.050 Conditions of approval.

The review authority may impose conditions of development approval necessary to either ensure compliance with the purposes of this title, or to preserve and promote the general health, safety and welfare of Coos Bay. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.060 Administrative authority.

(1) Designation of Review Authority and Responsible Official.

(a) Unless otherwise noted, the director is the primary review authority and shall interpret and apply the provisions of the CBDC.

(b) Where noted in the CBDC, the director shall interpret and apply the provisions of the CBDC relating to transportation, water and sewer facilities and all other city infrastructure.

(c) The Coos Bay building official shall interpret and apply the building and construction provisions which the city has adopted.

(d) The Coos Bay fire chief is the responsible official for the purpose of administering the International Fire Code, CBMC 15.05.010(1)(a). [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.070 Enforcement.

The review authority shall determine the applicability of the CBDC for enforcement purposes. All departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of the CBDC and shall issue no permit, certificate or license for any use, building or purpose which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed by the CBDC. Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of the CBDC, intentionally or otherwise, shall be void. The review authority shall be responsible for carrying out the enforcement provisions of this title. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.080 Record maintenance.

(1) The director shall maintain the official Coos Bay comprehensive plan map, zoning map, and other official land use maps and shall, from time to time, update these maps to reflect amendments by the city council.

(2) The city shall maintain the complete record of all land use planning applications and decisions. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.120.090 Application fee schedule.

The city council shall establish a land use application fee schedule which shall be reviewed on a yearly basis. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.130 PROCEDURES

Sections:

17.130.010    Review required.

17.130.020    Pre-application review.

17.130.030    Application types and classification.

17.130.040    Application contents.

17.130.050    Review for technically complete status.

17.130.060    Reserved.

17.130.070    Approval criteria.

17.130.080    Type I procedure.

17.130.090    Type II procedure.

17.130.100    Type III procedure.

17.130.110    Type IV procedure.

17.130.120    Notices.

17.130.130    Appeal.

17.130.140    Expiration and extension of decisions.

17.130.145    Modifications to Type II and Type III permits.

17.130.150    Revocation of Type II and Type III permits.

17.130.160    Post-decision review.


17.130.010 Review required.

Land use project review and approval is required prior to issuance of building permits for the following:

(1) The division of land or alteration of existing lot (parcel) lines;

(2) All conditional uses and new uses in any district;

(3) All changes in the use of a structure that increase the intensity of use, such as by increasing the gross floor area, height or bulk of the structure, number of access points or parking spaces, number or size of signs, or other measures of intensity or the structure location or significant elements of the design; and

(4) Building and demolition permits or any change, except painting and minor repair, to the exterior of properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.020 Pre-application review.

(1) Applicability.

(a) Unless otherwise expressly provided in this title, all applications subject to Type III or Type IV review are subject to pre-application review unless the director waives the requirement in writing.

(b) The applicant shall submit the pre-application materials to the city.

(2) Waiver. The city discourages waiver of the pre-application process. In the event that the director waives the pre-application review, the pre-application waiver shall state that waiver of pre-application review may increase the maximum time for review for technically complete status and may increase the risk that the application will be rejected, or processing will be delayed.

(3) Application Contents.

(a) At a minimum, a pre-application submittal shall include the following:

(i) The requisite fee and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the following information;

(ii) A completed form provided by the city for that purpose;

(iii) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the owner(s), engineer, surveyor, planner, and/or attorney and the person with whom official contact shall be made regarding the application;

(iv) A preliminary site plan which shall include, where applicable, a north arrow, date, graphic scale, existing and proposed lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way, development, access, parking, maneuvering, structures and landscaping on the site; existing and proposed natural features on the site, including vegetation, topography and grades; existing and proposed utilities (water, sewer, drainage, fire hydrants); and existing lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures abutting the site; provided, information about off-site structures and other features may be approximate if such information is not in the public record. The applicant shall provide three copies of the plan reduced to fit on an eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch page. Principal features of the plan shall be dimensioned. The applicant is encouraged to submit drawings showing the elevation(s) of a proposed primary structure;

(v) Proposed dedications to the city or other agency, if applicable;

(vi) A written description of the proposed use or development. The description shall identify any variances, adjustments or exceptions needed for approval of the plan.

(4) Scheduling, Notice and Attendees.

(a) Within seven calendar days after receipt of an application for pre-application review, the city shall mail or otherwise convey written notice of the pending pre-application conference to the applicant and other interested agencies. The notice shall state the date, time and location of the pre-application conference, the purposes of pre-application review, and the nature of the conference.

(b) The pre-application conference shall be scheduled not more than 21 calendar days after the notice is mailed or otherwise conveyed.

(c) The director shall determine who shall be invited to the meeting. In addition to the applicant and representatives, possible attendees include the design assistance team (DAT), the director, the city engineer, a representative from affected service districts, and representatives from interested state agencies and neighborhood associations recognized by the city council or by Coos County.

(5) Meeting Summary. Within 14 calendar days after a pre-application conference, the director will provide a written summary of the conference to the applicant and to other persons who request it. The written summary shall, to the extent possible:

(a) Summarize the proposed application(s);

(b) Provide the relevant approval criteria and development standards in the city code or other applicable law; and exceptions, adjustments or other variations from applicable criteria or standards that may be necessary;

(c) Evaluate the information offered by the applicant to comply with the relevant criteria and standards, and identify specific additional information that is needed to respond to the relevant criteria and standards or is recommended to respond to other issues;

(d) Identify applicable application fees in effect at the time, with a disclaimer that fees may change;

(e) Identify information relevant to the application that may be in the possession of the city or other agencies of which the city is aware, such as:

(i) Comprehensive plan map designation and zoning on and in the vicinity of the property subject to the application;

(ii) Physical development limitations, such as steep or unstable slopes, wetlands, or water bodies, that exist on and in the vicinity of the property subject to the application;

(iii) Other applications that have been approved or are being considered for land in the vicinity of the property subject to the proposed application that may affect or be affected by the proposed application.

(6) Time Limit. The written summary of a pre-application conference is valid for up to one year. If more than one year has elapsed between the date of the last pre-application conference and the date an application is submitted, a new pre-application conference shall be required. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.030 Application types and classification.

(1) Applicability. Applications for land use review are subject to procedures in this chapter unless otherwise expressly provided in other chapters of the CBDC.

(2) Concurrent Application. If the applicant requests more than one type of review for a given development, an applicant shall submit all applications required for the development at one time, unless otherwise prohibited from doing so by law. Concurrent applications for a given development are subject to the highest type procedure that applies to any of the applications.

(3) Procedure Types. There are four types of land use review procedures. This chapter or the chapter that authorizes an application generally identifies the type of procedure that applies to the application. If the appropriate procedure is not clearly defined, the director shall decide which of the four procedures will apply, based on the following considerations:

(a) A Type I process involves nondiscretionary standards or standards that require the exercise of professional judgment by the director about technical issues.

(b) A Type II process involves a mix of discretionary and nondiscretionary standards that require the exercise of limited discretion by the director about nontechnical issues and about which there may be a limited public interest.

(c) A Type III process involves standards that require the exercise of substantial discretion by the planning commission or a hearings officer and about which there may be a broad public interest.

(d) A Type IV process involves the creation, implementation or amendment by the city council, with a recommendation by the planning commission, of the CBCP, CBDC or other related city land use policies or law.

(4) Undefined Review. If this title is silent as to the type of review procedure required, the director shall, using a Type I review process, determine the appropriate level of review. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.040 Application contents.

An applicant for development and/or land use review shall submit the requisite fee and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the information required by CBDC 17.130.050, except as otherwise provided therein. Additional copies may be required, depending upon who the review authority is for the application type. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.050 Review for technically complete status.

(1) Applicability and Schedule. Before accepting an application subject to a Type I, II, III or IV review, the director shall determine within 30 calendar days after the application is submitted whether the application is technically complete.

(2) Standards for Technical Completeness. An application is technically complete if it includes the information required by the CBDC section(s) that apply to the application in question. If the CBDC does not list the information a given application is required to contain, then such an application is technically complete if it includes three hard copies and one electronic copy of the following information:

(a) A completed city land use application form;

(b) Required application fee;

(c) A copy of the pre-application conference summary, if the application was subject to pre-application review, which shall include all information required by the director to address issues, comments and concerns in the summary;

(d) The name, email address, mailing address, and telephone number of the owner(s) and official contact regarding the application;

(e) Written authorization to file the application signed by the owner of the property that is the subject of the application, if the applicant is not the same as the owner as listed by the Coos County assessor;

(f) Proof of ownership document, such as copies of deeds and/or a policy or satisfactory commitment for title insurance;

(g) A written description of how the application complies, or with conditions can comply, with each applicable CBCP, CBDC, and other city policy and regulation approval criterion applicable to the application. Basic facts and other substantial evidence supporting the description must also be included in the application;

(h) Applications necessarily associated with the proposal, such as applications for variances as specified in Chapter 17.372 CBDC or for modifications to the road standards that are required to approve the proposal;

(i) A legal description of the site;

(j) A preliminary site plan at a scale of no more than one inch equals 200 feet, with north arrow, date, and graphic scale;

(k) A floor plan at a one-quarter- or one-eighth-inch scale;

(l) Elevations of all sides of the proposed structure at a one-quarter- or one-eighth-inch scale;

(m) Existing and proposed lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures on the site, and existing lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures abutting the site; provided, information about off-site structures and other features may be approximate if such information is not in the public record. The applicant shall provide three copies of the plan of a size no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches;

(n) Proposed easements or dedications to the city or other agency, if applicable;

(o) Preliminary grading, erosion control and drainage plans may be required depending upon the application and if required shall be consistent with applicable provisions of this or other applicable city documents;

(p) Information about proposed utilities, including water and sanitary waste.

(3) Excluded Information and Application Fees. The director may accept as technically complete an application without information listed as being required if such information is not necessary to make a finding required by the law. However, no application shall be accepted for review without required application fees.

(4) Missing Information. If the director determines an application is not technically complete, within 30 calendar days after the city receives the application the director shall send the applicant a written statement rejecting the application. Incompleteness shall be based solely on failure to pay required fees, failure to address the relevant criteria or development regulations, or failure to supply required information and shall not be based on differences of opinion as to quality or accuracy. The statement shall:

(a) List what is required to make the application technically complete;

(b) Specify a date by which the required missing information must be provided;

(c) State that the applicant can apply to extend the deadline for filing the required information, and explain how to do so; and

(d) Include recommendations for additional information that, although not necessary to make the application technically complete, are recommended to address other issues that are or may be relevant to the review.

(5) Final Actions for a Technically Incomplete Application. If the director decides that all of the required information is not submitted by the date specified, or as extended, he or she shall:

(a) Provide a letter rejecting the application for lack of completeness and stating the reasons for the return; or

(b) Issue a decision denying the application based on a lack of information.

(6) The application will be deemed complete by the director for the purpose of this section upon receipt of:

(a) All the missing information;

(b) Some of the missing information and written notice from the applicant that no other information will be provided; or

(c) Written notice from the applicant that none of the missing information will be provided.

(7) Pursuant to ORS 227.178, the city will reach a final decision that approves, approves with conditions, or denies the application. The city will reach its decision within 120 calendar days from the date that the application was determined to be complete or deemed complete (unless the applicant agrees to extend the 120-calendar-day timeline or unless state law provides otherwise); including time for any possible appeal up to an appeal by the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). However, an applicant may agree in writing to extend that time and may provide additional information within that time at the request of the city.

(8) The 120-calendar-day timeline may be extended at the written request of the applicant.

(9) The applicant may amend the application up to and including 14 calendar days after the application has been deemed complete.

(10) Amendments to an application submitted more than 14 calendar days after the application is deemed complete may be determined by the director to be so substantial that the application shall be treated as having been refiled. In such a case, the director shall provide the applicant with the following options: provide the city with a waiver of the 120-day time frame set forth in ORS 227.178 of a minimum of 14 calendar days from the date the amendment was submitted; treat the application as having been refiled as of the date the amendment was submitted; or, decide the application on the basis of the applicant’s materials without the amendment.

(11) For any application which has been on file with the city for more than 90 calendar days and the applicant has not met the obligations of this section, the application will be deemed withdrawn. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.060 Reserved.

[Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.070 Approval criteria.

The director shall approve an application for review if he or she finds the applicant has sustained the burden of proving that:

(1) The application complies with the applicable regulations of the Coos Bay comprehensive plan and development code; or that the application can comply with all applicable regulations by complying with adopted conditions of approval; or that necessary variances have been approved; or that adopted conditions of approval have been met prior to final plat approval.

(2) The development makes adequate provision for public services consistent with the level of service provided in adopted city policies, plans and regulations. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.080 Type I procedure.

(1) Decision. Within 30 calendar days after the date an application subject to a Type I process is accepted as technically complete, the director shall issue a notice of decision that the application is approved, approved with conditions, or denied; provided, an applicant may agree in writing to extend that time and may provide additional information within that time at the request of the city. The notice of decision shall include a brief summary of the relevant facts and applicable standards for the application and of how the application complies with those standards based on the facts and evidence, including any conditions of approval. The city shall provide an electronic copy and hard copy of the decision to the applicant and applicant’s representative(s).

(2) Appeal and Post-Decision Review. The notice of decision shall state the date by which the appeal must be filed pursuant to CBDC 17.130.130 or state that the applicant may apply for post-decision changes pursuant to CBDC 17.130.160. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.090 Type II procedure.

(1) Notice of Application. Twenty days prior to a Type II review, the city shall mail a written notice of the application as specified in CBDC 17.130.120(1) and (4) to property owners within 150 feet of the application site.

(2) Comments. The city shall mail to the applicant a copy of comments timely received in response to the notice.

(3) Decision.

(a) Pursuant to CBDC 17.130.050(7), within 120 calendar days after the date an application subject to a Type II process is accepted as technically complete, the review authority shall issue a decision that approves, approves with conditions, or denies the application; including time for any possible appeal up to an appeal by the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA); provided, an applicant may agree in writing to extend that time and may provide additional information within that time at the request of the city.

(b) The decision shall include a brief summary of the relevant facts and applicable standards for the application and a summary of how the application complies with those standards based on the facts and evidence, including any conditions of approval.

(3) Notice of Final Order. Within seven calendar days after issuing a decision, the city shall mail notice of the decision to interested agencies and property owners within 150 feet of the subject application area as provided in CBDC 17.130.120(3).

(4) Appeal and Post-Decision Review. The notice of decision shall state the date by which the appeal must be filed pursuant to CBDC 17.130.130 or state that the applicant may apply for post-decision changes pursuant to CBDC 17.130.160. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.100 Type III procedure.

(1) Hearing. An application subject to a Type III process will be considered at one or more public hearings before the city’s planning commission or a hearings officer.

(2) Notice of Hearing. At least 20 calendar days before the date of the hearing, the city shall mail public notice of the hearing to adjoining property owners within a 300-foot radius of the application site as provided in CBDC 17.130.120(1), (2) and (4).

(3) Staff Report. At least seven calendar days before the date of the hearing, the director shall make available a hard copy of the staff report regarding the application available at City Hall, an electronic copy of the staff report available on the city website, and shall mail a hard copy of the staff report to the planning commission, the applicant, and the applicant’s representative(s) and other parties who request it. The staff report shall set out the relevant facts and applicable standards for the application and a summary of how the application complies with those standards based on the facts and evidence, including any conditions of approval.

(4) Public Hearings. Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the planning commission or the hearings officer. A public hearing shall be recorded on audio or audiovisual tape.

(a) At the beginning of a hearing an announcement shall be made to those in attendance that:

(i) Lists the applicable approval criteria by development code section number.

(ii) Testimony, arguments and evidence must be directed toward the applicable criteria or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or development code which the person believes to apply to the application.

(iii) Failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence with sufficient specificity to afford the decision-making authority and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.

(iv) Failure of the applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed conditions of approval with sufficient specificity to allow the city to respond to the issue precludes an action for damages in circuit court.

(v) The decision-making authority must be impartial and that members of the decision- making authority shall not have any bias or personal or business interest in the outcome of the application. Prior to the receipt of any testimony, members of the decision-making authority must announce any ex-parte contacts. The decision-making authority shall afford parties an opportunity to challenge any member thereof based on bias, conflicts of interest, or ex-parte contacts.

(vi) State that if any member of the decision-making authority has visited the site, they shall describe generally what was observed.

(vii) Summarizes the procedure of the hearing.

(b) After the announcements, the chair shall call for presentation of the staff report. Staff shall describe the proposal and provide a recommendation.

(c) After the presentation of the staff report, the chair shall call for the applicant’s testimony, opposition testimony and neutral testimony, in that order.

(d) At the conclusion of the hearing on each application, the planning commission shall announce one of the following actions:

(i) That the hearing is continued. If the hearing is continued to a place, date and time certain, then additional notice of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed, published or posted. If the hearing is not continued to a place, date and time certain, then notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.

(ii) That the public record is held open to a date and time certain. The planning commission shall state where additional evidence and testimony can be sent and shall announce any limits on the nature of the evidence that will be received after the hearing.

(iii) That the application(s) is/are taken under advisement, denied, approved, or approved with conditions, together with a brief summary of the basis for the decision, and that a final order will be issued as provided in this section.

(4) Decision. Within 14 calendar days after the date the record closes regarding a given application(s), the director shall submit to the city a written decision regarding the application(s). The decision shall set out the relevant facts and applicable standards for the application(s) and a summary of how the application(s) complies with those standards based on the facts and evidence, including any conditions of approval.

(5) Notice of Decision. Within seven calendar days of the date of the decision, the city shall mail a notice of decision as provided in CBDC 17.130.120(3) to property owners within a 300-foot radius of the application site.

(6) Appeal and Post-Decision Review. The notice of decision shall state the date by which the appeal must be filed pursuant to CBDC 17.130.130 or state that the applicant may apply for post-decision changes pursuant to CBDC 17.130.160. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.110 Type IV procedure.

(1) Hearing. An application subject to a Type IV process will be considered at one or more public hearings before the planning commission and one or more public hearings before the city council. The planning commission and city council may combine their meetings into one public meeting.

(2) Notice of the Initial Planning Commission Hearing. At least 20 calendar days before the date of the first planning commission hearing regarding an application subject to a Type IV process, the director shall mail public notice of the hearing to parties who have requested such notice and to other individuals, firms or agencies as deemed appropriate. If the Type IV procedure is related to a specific property, public notice shall be mailed as specified in CBDC 17.130.120(1), (2) and (4) to property owners within 300 feet of the application site. At least 10 days before the date of the hearing, the city shall cause notice of the hearing to be posted at City Hall and on the city website.

(3) Staff Report. At least seven calendar days before the date of the first planning commission or joint planning commission/council hearing, the city shall issue a written staff report regarding the application. The staff report shall set out the relevant facts and applicable standards for the application and a summary of how the application complies with those standards. The city shall mail a copy of the staff report to the review authority and to other parties who request it and post an electronic copy of the staff report on the city website. Copies of the staff report also shall be available at the public hearing.

(4) Public Hearings. Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the review authority, except to the extent waived by the review authority. A public hearing shall be recorded on audio or audiovisual tape.

(a) At the conclusion of a planning commission or joint planning commission/council hearing on an application subject to a Type IV process, the planning commission or, in the case of a joint planning commission/council meeting, the council shall announce one of the following actions, which may not be appealed:

(i) That the hearing is continued. If the hearing is continued to a place, date and time certain, then additional notice of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed or published. If the hearing is not continued to a place, date and time certain, then notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing; or

(ii) That the planning commission recommends against or in favor of approval of the application(s) with or without certain changes, or that the planning commission makes no recommendation regarding the application(s), together with a brief summary of the basis for the recommendation.

(iii) That, in the case of a joint planning commission/council hearing, the council may take action as noted in subsection (4)(c) of this section.

(b) At least 14 calendar days before the date of the first hearing before the city council, the city shall mail public notice of the hearing to parties who have requested such notice and to other individuals, firms or agencies as deemed appropriate. At least 10 days before the date of the hearing, the city shall cause notice of the hearing to be posted at City Hall and on the city website.

(c) At the conclusion of its initial hearing noted in subsection (4)(a) or (b) of this section, the city council may continue the hearing, take an action forwarding the application for further review consistent with the CBDC, or take an action to terminate or postpone further consideration of the application. If the hearing is continued to a place, date and time certain, then additional notice of the continued hearing is not required to be mailed or posted. If the hearing is not continued to a place, date and time certain, then notice of the continued hearing shall be given as though it was the initial hearing.

(5) Decision. Within 14 calendar days after the date the record closes regarding a given application(s), the director shall submit to the city a written decision regarding a Type IV application requested by a property owner specific to a particular property.

(6) Notice of Decision. The city shall issue a notice of decision regarding the application(s) within seven calendar days of the date of the decision. The city shall mail the notice of decision as provided in CBDC 17.130.120(3) to property owners within a 300-foot radius of the application site.

(7) Appeal and Post-Decision Review. An application subject to a Type IV process is not subject to appeal or post-decision review before the city. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.120 Notices.

(1) Contents of a Notice of Application Subject to Type II Review. The notice of Type II application shall contain at least the following information:

(a) The file number;

(b) The name(s) and address(es) of the applicant and owner;

(c) The legal description of the site;

(d) The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

(e) A description of the proposal and a listing of the approval criteria by applicable code section number;

(f) A statement that the application can be reviewed at City Hall during working hours, and that copies can be obtained for a fee equal to the city’s cost for providing the copies;

(g) The name and contact information of the city representative to contact regarding the application;

(h) An invitation to comment, in writing, on the proposal and the place, date and time that comments are due;

(i) A statement outlining the appeals process.

(2) Contents of a Notice of a Public Hearing for an Application Subject to a Type III Process. Mailed notice of a public hearing shall contain the following information:

(a) The information required by subsection (1) of this section;

(b) The date, time and place of the hearing;

(c) A statement that the planning commission will conduct the hearing in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the planning commission;

(d) A statement that the staff report will be available at least seven days prior to the hearing and how the report may be viewed; and

(e) A statement that interested parties may testify orally or in writing at the public hearing.

(3) Contents of a Notice of a Decision. Notice of a decision subject to a Type I, Type II or Type III process shall contain at least the following information:

(a) A copy or summary of the written decision;

(b) The appeal closing date;

(c) A description of how to file an appeal of the decision, including applicable fees;

(d) A statement that the public record in the case is available for review and the place, days and times for review; and

(e) The name and telephone number of the city staff person to contact for information about the case or to review the case file.

(4) Distribution of Notices by Mail.

(a) The city shall mail notice of application subject to Type II review to:

(i) The applicant and the applicant’s representative;

(A) The property owner of record; shall be the person(s) listed in the records of the Coos County assessor; and

(B) Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not affect the decision if the notice was sent. A sworn certificate of mailing executed by the person who did the mailing shall be conclusive evidence that notice was mailed to parties listed or referenced in the certificate;

(ii) Agencies with jurisdiction; and

(iii) Other persons with standing who request such notice in writing.

(b) The city shall mail notice of a hearing regarding an application subject to a Type III process to:

(i) The applicant and the applicant’s representative;

(A) The property owner of record; shall be the person(s) listed in the records of the Coos County assessor; and

(B) Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not affect the decision if the notice was sent. A sworn certificate of mailing executed by the person who did the mailing shall be conclusive evidence that notice was mailed to parties listed or referenced in the certificate.

(ii) Agencies with jurisdiction.

(iii) Other persons with standing who request such notice in writing. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.130 Appeal.

(1) Deadline for Appeal. An appeal together with the requisite fee and information must be received by the city within 15 calendar days of the date of the final order being issued. Any appeal heard by the city’s planning commission or city council must be heard within the 120-day appeal period pursuant to CBDC 17.130.050(7).

(2) Standing.

(a) A final decision regarding an application subject to a Type I process may be appealed only by the applicant or applicant’s representative.

(b) A final decision regarding an application subject to a Type II process may be appealed by the applicant or applicant’s representative or by any person, agency or firm with an interest in the matter.

(c) A final decision regarding an application subject to a Type III process may be appealed by the applicant or applicant’s representative or by any person, agency or firm who offered oral or written testimony before the planning commission or hearings officer closed the public record in the case.

(d) Appeal of a Type IV Decision. For an appeal regarding a decision subject to a Type IV process, the applicant, the applicant’s representative, any person, agency or firm on either side who offered oral or written testimony may appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). The party must file a notice of intent to appeal with the Land Use Board of Appeals, with the required fees, within 21 days after the land use decision becomes final as described by OAR 661-010-0010(3) and 661-010-0015(1)(b). The scope of the review (the record) consists of the materials submitted to, and not rejected by, the decision makers in the course of the local proceedings.

(3) Appeal Contents. An appeal shall include the appropriate fee and the following information:

(a) A form provided for that purpose by the city;

(b) The case number as designated by the city;

(c) The name of the applicant;

(d) The name, address and signature of each appellant;

(e) The reasons why each aspect is in error as a matter of fact or law; and

(f) The evidence relied on to prove the error.

(4) Scope of Review.

(a) An appeal of a Type I or Type II decision shall be conducted de novo. “De novo” means a hearing by the appeal authority can be held as if the action had not been previously heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence and other material from the record of the previous consideration shall be included in the record of the review. Except as otherwise specified in this code, or required by state law, the appeal authority may hear the entire matter de novo; or it may admit additional testimony and other evidence without holding a de novo hearing if it is satisfied that additional testimony or other evidence could not reasonably have been presented at the prior hearing. The appeal authority shall consider all of the following in making such a decision:

(i) Prejudice to the parties.

(ii) Convenience or availability of evidence at the time of the initial hearing.

(iii) Surprise to opposing parties.

(iv) The competency, relevancy and materiality of the proposed testimony or other evidence.

(v) Such other factors as may be determined by the reviewing body to be appropriate.

(b) Type III Decision. The reviewing body shall state the scope of review on appeal to be restricted to the record made on the decision being appealed and limit the appeal to issues the reviewing body determines necessary for a proper resolution of the matter.

(5) Appeal Authority.

(a) Appeal of a Type I Decision. Within seven calendar days after a timely, complete appeal is filed regarding a decision subject to a Type I process, the city shall send to the planning commission a copy of the appeal and the case file together with any new evidence submitted with the appeal. Within 21 calendar days after a timely, complete appeal is filed, the planning commission shall send to the city a final decision for distribution to the applicant and applicant’s representative.

(b) Appeal of a Type II Decision. For an appeal regarding a decision subject to a Type II process, the city shall schedule a public hearing to be held by the planning commission not more than 35 days from the date a complete appeal was timely filed. Notice and a staff report shall be provided, a public hearing shall be conducted, and a decision shall be made and noticed regarding the appeal as for applications subject to a Type III process in CBDC 17.130.100.

(c) Appeal of a Type III Decision. For an appeal regarding a decision subject to a Type III process, the city shall schedule a public hearing to be held by the city council not more than 35 days from the date a complete appeal was timely filed. Notice and a staff report shall be provided, a public hearing shall be conducted, and a decision shall be made and noticed regarding the appeal as for applications subject to a Type III process in CBDC 17.130.100.

(6) Review on the Record.

(a) The record on appeal of a Type III decision shall be limited to:

(i) A factual report prepared by the director.

(ii) All exhibits, materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations and motions submitted by any party and received or considered in reaching the decision under review.

(iii) The written transcript or electronic recording of the hearing and a detailed summary of the evidence.

(b) The appeal authority shall make its decision based upon the record after first granting the right of argument on the record, but not the introduction of additional evidence, to any party who has filed a notice of appeal. The appeal authority shall decide if the correct procedure was followed and, if so, was the correct or appropriate decision made based on the applicable policies.

(7) Review Body Decision.

(a) Upon review, the appeal authority shall by final order affirm, reverse or modify in whole or part a determination or requirement of the decision that is under review.

(i) When the appeal authority modifies or renders a decision that reverses a decision, the final order shall set forth its findings and state the reasons for taking the action.

(ii) When the appeal authority modifies or renders a decision, the final order shall set forth its findings and state the reasons for taking the action.

(iii) When the appeal authority remands the matter back to the lower review body for further consideration as it deems necessary, it shall include a statement explaining the error to have materially affected the outcome of the original decision and the action necessary to rectify such.

(b) Action by the appeal authority shall be decided by a majority vote of its members present at the meeting at which review was made and shall be taken either at that or any subsequent meeting. Pursuant to ORS 227.178, the city shall issue the final decision within 120 calendar days from the date the application was deemed technically complete unless the applicant agrees to extend the 120-calendar-day timeline or unless state law provides otherwise. In no case shall the review body render its decision later than 60 calendar days after the filing of the request for review. The city shall file the final decision within five working days after it is rendered. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.140 Expiration and extension of decisions.

(1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by the Coos Bay Development Code or the decision in question, decisions made pursuant to this chapter expire four years after the effective date of the decision unless, within that time, the applicant or a successor in interest files an application for an extension of the decision or the permit is inaugurated as defined in Chapter 17.150 CBDC. Approval of a preliminary subdivision or partition shall expire within five years from the date of approval.

(2) An application for extension of a decision is subject to a Type I process. An applicant for an extension shall submit the requisite fee, a completed application review form provided for that purpose by the city, and text describing how the application complies with the approval criteria for an extension, and basic facts and other substantial evidence to support the text.

(3) The director may approve two one-year extensions of a decision if he or she finds that the relevant facts and the law have not changed substantially since the original approval, or that the application can comply with the law in effect on the date the application for the extension was filed by complying with applicable additional and/or modified conditions of approval, and those additional conditions and/or modifications are adopted. At the director’s discretion, any extension application may be referred to the planning commission for action. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.130.145 Modifications to Type II and Type III permits.

Modifications to previously issued permits may be issued subject to the following criteria:

(1) Major modifications to Type II permits shall require compliance with the requirements of CBDC 17.130.090.

(2) Minor modifications to Type II permits shall require compliance with the requirements of CBDC 17.130.080.

(3) Major modifications to Type III permits shall require planning commission review and approval pursuant to the requirements of CBDC 17.130.100.

(4) Minor modifications to Type III permits may be approved by the director. The director, at his/her discretion, may refer the minor modification to the planning commission.

(5) The director shall determine whether a proposed project modification is of a minor or major nature. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019].


17.130.150 Revocation of Type II and Type III permits.

(1) Revocation of Type II and Type III permits may be initiated by the director with a 60-day notification by mail to a property owner that the permit requirements are not being satisfied. Notification to surrounding property owners will be provided pursuant to CBDC 17.130.120(1)(a) through (d) and (g) through (i). Notification will include a statement that the revocation determination can be reviewed at City Hall during working hours and that copies can be obtained for a fee equal to the city’s cost for providing the copies.

(2) Revocation or Amendment by the Director. The director may revoke or amend a Type II permit if s/he finds that:

(a) The Type II use or development is not consistent with its authorization or other applicable standards of this title; and

(b) The applicant has failed to remedy the alleged violation within 60 calendar days after the director mails notice of the alleged violation to the operator and/or owner of a Type II use or development.

(3) Revocation of Type II and Type III permits are subject to CBDC 17.130.130, Appeal.

(4) Revocation by the Planning Commission. The planning commission may revoke or amend a Type III permit if they find that:

(a) The Type III use or development is not consistent with its authorization or other applicable standards of this title; and

(b) The applicant has failed to remedy the alleged violation within 60 calendar days after the director mails notice of the alleged violation to the operator and/or owner of a Type III use or development. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019].


17.130.160 Post-decision review.

(1) Generally. Post-decision review may change decisions and conditions of approval without necessarily subjecting the change to the same procedures as the original decision. Changes may be warranted by ambiguities or conflicts in a decision and by new or more detailed information, permits or laws. Post-decision review cannot substantially change the nature of the development approved pursuant to a given decision and can only be conducted regarding a decision that approves or conditionally approves an application. An application that is denied is not eligible for post-decision review.

(2) Eligibility and Contents. An applicant or successor in interest may, at any time, file an application for post-decision review of a Type I, II or III decision, describing the nature of and the basis for the proposed change to the decision, including the applicable facts and law, together with the fee prescribed for that application by the city council.

(3) Relationship to an Appeal. An application for post-decision review does not extend the deadline for filing an appeal of the decision being reviewed and does not stay appeal proceedings.

(4) Preliminary Processes.

(a) Pre-application review is optional.

(b) An application for post-decision review is subject to technical completeness review, CBDC 17.130.050; provided, the review authority shall not require an application for post-decision review to contain information that is not relevant and necessary to address the requested change or the facts and law on which it is based. As part of the technical completeness review, the director shall:

(i) Determine whether the proposed change can be reviewed as a post-decision review or shall be subject to a new application on the merits of the request;

(ii) Classify an application for post-decision review as a Type I, II or III process based on the circumstances of the original decision and the guidelines in subsection (5) of this section.

(c) Notify the applicant in writing of the determination and classification.

(i) The classification of the application is subject to appeal as part of the decision on the merits of the post-decision review.

(ii) A decision denying post-decision review and requiring a new application may be appealed to the planning commission.

(5) Post-Decision Review Guidelines.

(a) An application for post-decision review of a Type I decision shall be subject to a Type I process.

(b) An application for post-decision review of a Type II decision shall be subject to a Type I process if the director finds the requested change:

(i) Is consistent with the applicable law or variations permitted by law, including permits to which the development is subject; and

(ii) Does not involve an issue of broad public interest, based on the record of the decision.

(c) An application for post-decision review of a Type II decision shall be subject to a Type II process if it does not qualify for a Type I process.

(d) An application for post-decision review of a Type III decision shall be subject to a Type I review process if the director finds the requested change:

(i) Unambiguously reduces the adverse impacts of the development authorized by the decision;

(ii) Is consistent with the applicable law or variations permitted by law, including permits to which the development is subject; and

(iii) Does not involve an issue of broad public interest, based on the record of the decision.

(e) An application for post-decision review of a Type III decision shall be subject to a Type II review process if director finds the requested change:

(i) Is needed to address a minor change in the facts or the law, including permits to which the development is subject;

(ii) Involves limited discretion; and

(iii) Does not involve an issue of broad public interest, based on the record of the decision.

(f) An application for post-decision review of a Type III decision shall be subject to a Type III review process if it is not subject to Type I or II review.

(g) Modifications to a decision other than by a timely appeal or post-decision review shall be by new application. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.130.150].


Chapter 17.140 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER AND CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION AUTHORITY

Sections:

17.140.010    General penalty – Continuing violations.

17.140.020    Liability of officers.

17.140.030    Enforcement.

17.140.040    Violations.

17.140.050    Method of enforcement.


17.140.010 General penalty – Continuing violations.

(1) Whenever a city ordinance prohibits an act or declares it to be unlawful, or provides that the failure to do an act is unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of the provision is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00.

(2) Whenever a state statute and a city ordinance provide penalties for the same offense, the penalty imposed for the city violation shall not exceed the state penalty.

(3) Every day a violation of a provision of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.150.010].


17.140.020 Liability of officers.

No provision of a city ordinance designating the duties of an officer or employee shall be construed to make the officer or employee liable for a fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform the duty. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.150.020].


17.140.030 Enforcement.

The severity of enforcement of this chapter shall generally correspond to the degree of risk of harm to the public health, safety and welfare. In the absence of an immediate hazard that is threatening to health or public safety, the following abatement procedures will apply:

(1) On determination that a code violation exists, the city shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the violation, directing the person responsible to abate the violation.

(2) At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail to the person responsible at the person’s last known address.

(3) The notice to abate shall contain:

(a) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the violation exists and direction to abate the violation within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(b) A description of the violation.

(c) A statement that, unless the violation is removed, the city may abate the violation and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible.

(d) A statement that failure to abate a violation may warrant imposition of a fine.

(e) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(f) If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

(g) Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

(h) An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

(i) If notice is returned as undeliverable or the delivery was refused, then notice can be provided via publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days before abatement action is taken. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.150.030].


17.140.040 Violations.

The location, erection, construction, alteration, occupancy, or use of any building, structure, sign, or land, including subdividing or partitioning, contrary to the provisions of this title or to any permit issued hereunder is an unlawful public violation. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.150.040].


17.140.050 Method of enforcement.

(1) The city, in addition to other remedies, including those provided in Chapter 8.10 CBMC, Public Nuisances, and Chapter 1.15 CBMC, General Penalty, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, abate, or remove the unlawful location, erection, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration, occupancy or use.

(2) The owner of the land, building, or premises where a violation has been committed or the lessee or tenant of a building where such a violation has been committed or exists, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part in, or who assists in any such violation or who maintains any land, building, or premises in which such violations exist, shall be guilty of a violation of this title and shall be subject upon conviction to a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day under which the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.150.050].


Chapter 17.150 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.150.010    Purpose.

17.150.020    Definitions.


17.150.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to define terms used in the CBDC and other terms that may arise interpreting the CBDC.

(1) Applicability. The definitions in this chapter apply to actions and interpretations of the CBDC.

(2) General Provisions. Terms not identified herein shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context they are used pursuant to the current edition of the Websters New International Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged. Where the singular variation of a term is used it also includes the plural.

(3) Conflicting Definitions. Where a term is listed in this chapter but defined by another section of this title, the term is not redefined in this chapter for purposes of that other code or statute. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section shall apply to terms in this title. In addition to definitions provided below, there are chapter-specific or section-specific definitions in this title.

(4) All definitions related to the city’s flood management regulations can be found in CBDC 17.318.060. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019].


17.150.020 Definitions.

The following definitions are organized alphabetically.

A.

Abutting – Adjoining with a common boundary line; except that where two or more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners, they shall not be considered as abutting unless the common property line between the two parcels measures not less than eight feet in a single direction.

Access, accessway – The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use, as required by this title.

Accessory building/structure – A detached, subordinate building located on the same lot with the main building (except as provided by Chapter 17.314 CBDC), occupied by or devoted to an accessory use. If an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner as by a wall or roof, or as determined by the building official, the building shall be considered part of the main building.

Accessory dwelling unit – An interior, attached or detached residential structure that is used in connection with or that is accessory to a single-family dwelling.

Accessory use – A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the building or land and located on the same lot (except as provided by Chapter 17.314 CBDC). In no case shall the accessory use dominate in area, extent, or purpose the principal lawful use of the building or land.

Addition (to an existing building) – Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is considered to be new construction.

Adjacent – Near, close; for example, an industrial district across the street or highway from a commercial district shall be considered as “adjacent.”

Adjoin – The same as “abutting.”

Administrative service – Consulting, record-keeping, clerical, or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles, and excludes commercial use type “professional and administrative service.” Typical use types are associated with governmental offices.

Affordable housing – Decent, safe, quality housing that costs no more than 30 percent of a household’s gross monthly income for rent/mortgage and utility payments.

Agricultural sales – Sale of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides, and similar goods from the premises. Typical uses include hay, feed, and grain stores.

Agricultural service – Establishments or places of business providing agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include tree service firms or landscape services.

Agricultural uses – The use of the land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and wineries, apiaries, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for storing produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be incidental to that of normal agricultural activities; and provided further, that the above uses shall not include slaughterhouses and meat packing or commercial feeding of animals.

Alley – A narrow street through a block providing only secondary access to abutting property at the rear or side property lines.

Amusement park or center – A group of amusement devices for children and/or adults and their accessory uses. Such a park or center may include miniature golf areas, bumper cars, batting cages, arcades, bumper boats, go-carts and other such activities.

Animal husbandry – The commercial raising and breeding of livestock or other nondomestic animals or insects.

Animal sales and service – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in animal-related sales and services. The following are animal sales and services use types:

Animal sales and service: auction – Auctioning of livestock on a wholesale or retail basis with incidental storage of animals produced off property not exceeding a 48-hour period. Typical uses include animal auctions or livestock auction yards.

Animal sales and service: grooming – Grooming of dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops.

Animal sales and service: kennel – Boarding, raising, caring, and training services for dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include animal day care, boarding kennels (overnight) or dog training centers.

Animal sales and service: pet shop – Establishment for the retail sale of household pets and pet supplies.

Animal sales and services: veterinary (large animals) – Veterinary services for large animals. Typical uses include animal hospitals or veterinary hospitals.

Animal sales and service: veterinary (small animals) – Veterinary services for small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, or animal hospitals.

Animal waste processing – The processing of animal waste and by-products, including, but not limited to, animal manure, animal bedding waste, and similar by-products of an animal-raising agricultural operation, for use as a commercial fertilizer or soil amendment and including composting for commercial purposes.

Apartment – A room or suite of rooms within an apartment house or apartment hotel, used as a dwelling unit for one family with facilities that function or are intended to function for living, sleeping, and cooking.

Applicant – Any person or his or her authorized agent or representative who has applied for a permit and who has a valid, existing legal interest in the property proposed to be developed.

Appropriate area, minimum – The smallest total area of property allowed in a particular zone.

Architectural feature – Features shall include, but not be limited to, a cornice, eave, belt course, sill, chimney, uncovered/unenclosed porch, platform landing, deck, or stairway.

Area of special flood hazard – The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent chance or greater of flooding in any given year as shown on flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or except as otherwise determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Arterial Street. See “Street, major arterial” and “Street, minor arterial.”

Assessment – An estimation or determination of the significance, importance, or value of land, buildings, or a proposed development activity.

Automotive equipment – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in motorized vehicle-related sales or services. The following are automotive and equipment use types:

(a) Cleaning. Washing and polishing of automobiles. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes.

(b) Fleet Storage. Fleet storage of vehicles used regularly in business operation but not for the long-term storage of vehicles, nor for vehicles available for sale. Typical uses include taxi fleets, mobile catering truck storage, or auto storage garages.

(c) Parking. Parking of private motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately owned off-street parking area with or without a fee. Typical uses include commercial parking lots or garages.

(d) Repairs, Heavy Equipment. Repair of trucks, construction and logging equipment, as well as the sale, installation, or servicing of automotive equipment and parts, together with body repairs, painting, and steam cleaning. Typical uses include truck transmission shops, body shops, or motor freight maintenance groups.

(e) Repairs, Light Equipment. Repair of automobiles and the sale, installation, and servicing of automobile equipment and parts, but excluding body repairs and painting. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto or motorcycle repair garages, or auto glass shops.

(f) Sales/Rentals, Heavy Equipment. Sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of heavy construction equipment, trucks, and aircraft together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include aircraft dealers, farm, logging, and heavy construction equipment dealers, or tractor trailers.

(g) Sales/Rentals, Light Equipment. Sale, retail, or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of autos, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers with generally less than a 10,000-pound gross cargo weight together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include automobile dealers, car rental agencies, or recreational vehicle sales and rental agencies, and small boat sales.

(h) Storage, Nonoperating Vehicles. Storage of nonoperating motor vehicles. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-away or impound yards.

Awning/marquee – Any movable roof-like structure cantilevered or attached to and entirely supported from a building, so constructed and erected as to permit its being readily and easily moved within a few minutes time to close an opening or rolled or folded back to a position flat against the building or a cantilevered projection thereof, or which is detachable.

B.

Bakery – An establishment where products such as breads, cakes, pies, pastries, etc., are baked or produced and sold on premises for wholesale and/or retail sale.

Bar and/or cocktail lounge – Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises. A Class H retailer’s license is required for serving liquor by the bottle or by the drink.

Base flood – The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year” flood.

Basement – The portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and so constructed that the vertical distance from grade to the floor is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.

Billboard – A surface whereon advertising matter is set in view conspicuously and the advertising thereon does not apply to the premises or any use of the premises whereon it is displayed or posted.

Block – A group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well-defined and fixed boundaries.

Boarding house – A dwelling where meals or lodging and meals are provided for compensation to at least one person and no more than 16 persons by prearrangement for definite periods of at least one week’s duration. A boarding house is to be distinguished from a hotel.

Bollard – A post permanently affixed into the ground or pavement, at least two feet and no more than four feet in height after installation, whose purpose is to segregate automotive traffic from certain areas.

Border lots – Residential lots abutting the urban growth area boundary which may be larger in size than most urban lots to allow for a smoother transition to larger rural lots lying outside the boundary.

Breezeway – A covered walkway connecting the main building on a property with other main buildings or accessory buildings. The structure may not be more than 12 feet high at the ridge. More than 50 percent of the total area of the structure may not be enclosed with any material other than that necessary for roof supports.

Buffer area – A landscaped or natural area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another, or intended to reduce the impact of noise levels generated on one property from the surrounding properties and intended to enhance the level of safety and promote the aesthetic qualities of the area.

Buildable area – The space remaining after demonstrating compliance with the minimum open space and yard setback requirements of this title.

Buildable land – Land not constrained by critical areas and public rights-of-way or infrastructure.

Building – A structure constructed for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

Building coverage – The usable floor area under the horizontal projection of any roof or floor above, excluding eave overhang.

Building height – Height measured from the lowest finished grade level to the highest point on the roof ridge.

Building line – The point at the outermost face of any vertical support, exterior wall line, or foundation.

Building, nonconforming – A legally existing building that fails to comply with this title (for height, number of stories, size, area, yards, location, or use) applicable to the district in which the building is located.

Building permit – The document or certificate issued by the city of Coos Bay that sanctions adherence to all applicable building and development regulations and gives permission to the applicant to proceed with the actions for which the permit was requested.

Building/property maintenance service – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.

Building setback line – A line parallel to the front lot line and passing through the most forward point or plane of the building closest to the front lot line.

Building site – A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a certain use or occupied by a building or group of buildings that are united by a common interest or use, and the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.

Bus shelter – A building for the purpose of providing shelter from weather while waiting for mass public transportation. The shelter shall be construction consistent with the city’s established design which frame shall be a three-by-three-by-12-inch A500 steel tube finished with two-component high solids polyurethane rust inhibitive primer, plus two-component high solids finish. The walls are one-quarter-inch clear tempered safety glass with simulated metal muntins. Roof is standing seam sheet metal with sheet steel ceiling soffit (both are finished to match frame).

C.

Camper – A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and/or vacation use.

Camping trailer – A structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreational, and/or vacation uses.

Canopy – A roof-like structure made of any material that projects from the wall of a building and overhangs a sidewalk.

Car wash – A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing automobiles utilizing mechanical devices.

Carport – A building designed to cover, but not enclose, automobile parking spaces.

Cemetery – A place for the burial or interment of dead persons or household pets.

Certified cultural resource – Any structure, natural feature, site or area or archaeological site listed on the National Register of Historic Places, or which receives federal matching grants in aid for restoration or receives special assessment status for an historic property under Oregon law.

Certified factory-built home.

(a) A residential trailer, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed before January 1, 1962. Residential trailers shall only be allowed in the city of Coos Bay upon submittal of evidence to the building official indicating substantial compliance with the standards required for an insignia of compliance.

(b) A mobile house or mobile home, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

(c) A manufactured home, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards regulations in effect at the time of construction.

Certified factory-built home park – An individual lot or parcel under single ownership with two or more certified factory-built home sites. It shall include all buildings as part of the facilities.

Child care facility – Establishments authorized by state licensure or certification to provide supervisory or day care services for 13 or more children, excluding uses classified as educational facilities or medical facilities, and where communal kitchen/dining facilities may be provided. Typical uses include day care centers, day care facilities, or drop-in centers.

Child care facility (fewer than 13) – Establishments authorized by state licensure or certification to provide supervisory or day care services for fewer than 13 children, excluding uses classified as educational facilities or medical facilities, and where communal kitchen/dining facilities may be provided. Typical uses include day care centers, day care facilities, or drop-in centers.

Civic use types – The performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance.

Clinic – A facility for the treatment of human ailments operated by a group of physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or other licensed practitioners for the treatment and examination of outpatients.

Club – Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational, fraternal, civic, religious, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business.

Commercial recreational vehicle park – Land designed, maintained, or used for the purpose of supplying temporary accommodation for recreational vehicles, trailers, or any other mobile living unit.

Commercial use types – The distribution and sale or rental of goods, and the provision of services other than those classified as “civic use types.”

Commission – The planning commission of the city.

Common area – The total area not designed for rental or sale to tenants and that is available for common use by all tenants or groups of tenants and their guests, including such areas as parking lots and their appurtenances, lobbies, malls, sidewalks, landscaped areas, public restrooms, truck and service facilities, etc.

Communication services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information-relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as “minor utilities and services.” Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, or telegraph service offices.

Community recreation – Recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses typically associated with parks, playfields, golf courses, or community recreation buildings. (This shall mean the same as “recreation facility, low-intensity” and “recreation facility, high-intensity.”)

Compatible use – A use that is capable of existing in harmony with other uses situated in its immediate vicinity.

Comprehensive plan – The goals, objectives and policies, documents and maps adopted by motion by the council to guide the physical development of the city; to coordinate city programs, services and controls; and to promote the general welfare.

Concomitant rezone – A site- or area-specific rezone which uses an agreement to impose conditions on, or limitations on, uses and/or standards. It may also require performance by the applicant(s) which is/are directly related to mitigation of probable on- and off-site impacts to adjacent uses, public services and the environment. The agreement may be in the form of a covenant running with the land.

Concrete slab – A broad, flat, somewhat thick concrete surface extending under a manufactured home or built in place to the extent of the structure which rests upon it which meets applicable IBC standards.

Conditional use – A use allowed in one or more zones as defined by this title but which, because of characteristics peculiar to such use, or because of size, technological processes or equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities, requires a special permit in order to provide a particular degree of control to make such uses consistent with and compatible to other existing or permissible uses in the same zone.

Condominium – Subject to ORS statutes in effect at the time of authorization, the private ownership of single units in a multiple-unit structure with common or single ownership of land and facilities.

Construction – The building of, or substantial improvement to, any structure or the clearing, filling, or excavation of any land. It shall also mean any alterations in the size or use of any existing structure or the appearance of any land. When appropriate to the context, “construction” refers to the act of construction or the result of construction.

Construction sales and service – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or wholesale sale from the premises of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures other than solely retail sale of paint, fixtures, and hardware; but excludes those classified as one of the “automotive and heavy equipment” use types. The following are construction sales and service use types:

(a) Light. Service and/or sales with no outside storage of material, equipment, or display. Typical uses include electrical contractors, cabinet makers, finish contractors.

(b) Heavy. Service and/or sales requiring the outside storage of building materials and equipment. Typical uses include building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, excavation, septic, and demolition services.

Contiguous – Adjoining properties under the same ownership with a common boundary of two or more points. Properties shall not be considered contiguous if divided by a public dedicated road or alleyway.

Convenience sales and personal services – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed small personal items or services. These include various general retail sales and personal services of an appropriate size and scale to meet the above criterion. Typical uses include neighborhood grocery, drug stores, laundromat/dry cleaners, or barbershops.

Convenience store – A retail establishment that is usually open for extended daily hours of business, normally located as a single entity or in a strip-building configuration along major roadways, is typically a self-service facility not dependent upon comparison shopping, and by its manner of display and merchandising.

Conversion – The change of a structure or building use or purpose or change of land use.

Council or city council – The city council of the city of Coos Bay.

Court – An open, unoccupied space, on the same lot with, and bounded on three or more sides by, a building(s).

Critical facility – A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

Cul-de-sac – A local street having only one means of vehicular access to another street and terminating at its other end in a circular-shaped turnaround. This definition of “cul-de-sac” shall in no way be interpreted to include a dead-end street.

Cultural resources – Any structure, natural feature, site or area listed in the State of Oregon Inventory of Historic Sites and Buildings or any archaeological site.

Curb cut – The level of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the mean elevation of the finished lot grade immediately adjacent to a building shall be considered the curb level.

D.

De novo – Latin, “anew.” A de novo hearing is a completely new hearing. De novo review implies no deference to a previous hearing ruling.

Dedication – The deliberate appropriation of land by the owner for any general and public uses, personally reserving no other rights than those rights compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or short plat showing the dedication thereon; and the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing.

Density – The number of permitted dwelling units allowed on each acre of land or fraction thereof.

Low density – Maximum nine dwelling units per net acre.

Medium density – eight units per net acre minimum to 16 units per net area maximum.

High density – maximum of 25 dwelling units per net acre.

Density, net – The number of dwelling units or persons per net acre covering only the land devoted to building lots.

Design storm – A prescribed hyetograph and total precipitation amount (for a specific duration recurrence frequency) used to estimate runoff for a hypothetical storm of interest or concern for the purposes of analyzing existing drainage, designing new drainage facilities or assessing other impacts of a proposed project on the flow of surface water. (A hyetograph is a graph of percentages of total precipitation for a series of time steps representing the total time during which the precipitation occurs.)

Detention facility – An above- or below-ground facility, such as a pond or tank, that temporarily stores stormwater runoff and subsequently releases it at a slower rate than it is collected by the drainage facility system. There is little or no infiltration of stored stormwater.

Developer – Any person, firm, or corporation undertaking the subdividing and/or development of any parcel of land; also known as the “applicant.”

Development – The placement, erection, or removal of any fill, solid material, or structure on land, in or under the water, discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any liquid or solid waste; or the grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials, including mineral resources; the construction, reconstruction, removal, demolition or alteration of the size of any structure; or the removal or harvesting of vegetation. Development shall not be defined or interpreted to include activities related to or undertaken in conjunction with the cultivation, use, or subdivision of land for agricultural purposes or any improvement made in the interior of any structure.

Dining establishments – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale of prepared food for on-premises consumption. Dining establishment uses include:

(a) Fast Order Food. An establishment whose primary business is the sale of food which is:

(i) Primarily intended for immediate consumption;

(ii) Available upon a short waiting time; and

(iii) Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold, including drive-in fast food establishments.

(b) Sit-Down. An establishment whose primary business is the sale of food which is prepared, served, and consumed on the premises, and does not use a drive-up window.

Director – The person designated or his/her designee with overall responsibility to implement the CBDC.

Discrete lots – A lot or parcel lawfully created shall remain a discrete lot or parcel, unless the lot or parcel lines are vacated or the lot or parcel is further divided, as provided by law (ORS 92.017).

District, zoning – Any portion of the city within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and certain other uses of land and buildings are prohibited as set forth in this title and within which certain yards and other open spaces are required, certain lot areas are established, and a combination of such aforesaid conditions are applied.

Dormitory – A building or part of a building operated by an institution and containing a room or rooms forming one or more habitable units, which are used or intended to be used by residents of the institution for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.

Double-faced sign – A sign with advertising on two surfaces, generally back-to-back.

Drainage – The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and includes the means necessary for water supply preservation, prevention, or alleviation of flooding.

Drainage basin – A geographic and hydrologic subunit of a watershed.

Drinking establishments – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale of beverages for on-premises consumption.

Drive-in or drive-through facility – An establishment that, by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles.

Driveway – That space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the movement of vehicles from one site to another or from a site to a public street.

Dryland moorage – Boat moorage space provided on dry land, such that boats are mechanically lowered to and raised from the water.

Dwelling – A building or any portion of it which has cooking and toilet facilities and is designed exclusively for private residential occupancy by one family only. It does not include hotels, motels, boarding houses, recreational vehicles, park models, tents, yurts, pods or other similar accommodations authorized by the International Building Code for permanent dwellings.

Dwelling, attached – A dwelling having any portion of a wall in common with adjoining dwellings.

Dwelling, detached – A dwelling that is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.

Dwelling, duplex – A detached building, designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other, and shall not include a manufactured home.

Dwelling, Manufactured Home. See definition of “Manufactured home.”

Dwelling, multiple-family – A building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence by three or more families and containing more than two dwelling units.

Dwelling, single-family – A building designed or used for residence purposes by not more than one family and containing one dwelling unit only.

Dwelling unit – One or more rooms which have cooking and toilet facilities and are designed for occupancy for one family only.

E.

Easement – A right which one person has to use the land of another for a specific purpose.

Educational service – A facility customarily associated with public or private primary and secondary schools, nursery schools, vocational schools, colleges, or universities. Does not include personal instructional services listed under “Personal services, general.”

Elevated building – For National Flood Insurance Program purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

Elevation – A flat scale drawing or scaled photographs of the exterior of the front, rear, or side of a building or structure.

Emergency shelter – A facility whose primary purpose is to provide housing for individuals and families in the event of an emergency or an emergency hazardous situation.

Eminent domain – The authority of the city of Coos Bay or other government agency to take, or to authorize the taking of, private property for public use with just compensation to the owner.

Employees – All persons, including proprietors, working on the premises during the largest shift at peak season.

Energy-efficient structure – A structure designed and built to comply with the annual thermal performance standards established by the Northwest Power Planning Council as the Model Conservation Standards.

Enlargement – An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any other structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.

Environment – The physical, social and economic conditions that exist within the area which will be affected by a proposed project.

Environmentally sensitive lands – Lands shown on the city zoning map as an overlay to demonstrate areas which may contain wetlands, steep slopes, or other similar environmentally critical features which may limit or prevent construction.

Erected – Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage, paving, and the like shall be considered within the definition of “erected.”

Erosion – The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, and/or gravity.

F.

Facade – The front of a building, particularly that part of a building facing a street or courtyard.

Family – An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit in which board and lodging may also be provided for not more than three additional persons, excluding servants; or a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling.

Family residential – The residential occupancy of living units by families and excludes tourist habitation and group care. Typical uses include single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings.

Farmer’s market/fish market – The commercial premises for the retail sale of produce, meat and poultry, seafood and other products.

Fence – Any artificially constructed barrier or any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

Fence, sight-obscuring – A fence arranged in such a way as to obstruct vision.

Fill – Placement of Earth material, including soil and rocks, or any other approved substance or material over original earth material.

Financial institutions/establishments – Includes, but not limited to, banks and trust companies, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, and other similar uses.

Finished grade – The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet from the wall. When the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. If walls are parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way.

Flea market – An occasional sales activity held within a building, structure, or open area where groups of individual sellers offer goods, new and used, for sale to the public, but not to include private garage sales.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) – As noted in CBDC 17.318.060.

Floodway – As noted in CBDC 17.318.060.

Floor – The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., the top of a slab in concrete slab construction or the top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used primarily for the parking of vehicles and where openings are installed to allow the free passage of water.

Floor area – The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of all buildings on the lot, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. Floor area shall include the area of basements when used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes.

Food and beverage retail sales – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and beverages for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries or delicatessens.

Food packing and processing – Businesses engaged in the packing or processing of agricultural crops, animals, seafood, and their by-products which entails cutting, sorting, boxing, crating, canning, rendering, tanning, and so forth.

Foster care home – A home licensed and regulated by the state and classified by the state as a foster home, providing care and guidance for not more than five unrelated juveniles, adults or both.

Freestanding sign – A sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole supported on the ground and not attached to any building.

Frontage – That portion of a parcel of property which abuts a dedicated public street or highway, or private road or driveway approved by the city.

Frontage, corner lot – All the property on two sides of a street between two intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on two sides between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. This definition also includes ingress-egress easements when used as the only means of access.

Fuel sales – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale, from the premises, of petroleum products with the incidental sale of tires, batteries, and replacement items, lubricating services, and minor repair services, but does not include body work or repair. Typical uses include automobile service stations, filling stations, or truck stops.

Fuel storage facility – An area that is used or planned to be used for the storage of petroleum. The facilities may be aboveground or underground storage tanks.

Funeral and interment services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of human dead. The following are interment services use types:

(a) Cemetery. Places primarily for the burial of human remains; may include crematory and interring services. Typical uses include mausoleums, columbariums, and crematoriums.

(b) Cremating/Interring. Crematory services involving the purification and reduction of the human body by fire and/or the keeping of human bodies other than in cemeteries. Typical uses include crematories, crematoriums, columbariums, and mausoleums.

(c) Undertaking. Undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals.

G.

Gallery – A business establishment devoted to the exhibition, display and/or sale of collections of such items as art, crafts and memorabilia.

Garage – A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, or storing motor vehicles internally and enclosed within the building.

Garage, detached – An accessory building intended and primarily used for the storage of motor vehicles, which is separate from and secondary to the main structure of the occupants.

Greenhouse – An enclosed building, permanent or portable, that is used for the growth of plants.

Ground floor area – The square footage area of a building within its largest outside dimensions, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, patios, swimming pools, parking areas, driveways, garages, exterior stairways, secondary stairways, and drive-through teller lanes or walk-up windows of financial institutions only. Ground floor area is the total building area used in determining the percentage of lot coverage.

Groundwater – The portion of water contained in interconnected pores or fractures in a saturated zone or stratum located beneath the surface of the earth or below a surface water body.

Group care facility – A facility licensed by the state to provide, on a 24-hour basis, training, care, custody, correction or control, or any combination of those functions, to one or more persons who may be children, the aged, disabled, underprivileged, indigent, handicapped or other special class of persons, either by governmental unit or agency or by a person or organization devoted to such functions. This term shall not include schools, hospitals, prisons or other social service facilities.

Group residential – The residential occupancy of living units by groups of more than five persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and where communal kitchen/dining facilities are provided. Typical uses include occupancy of fraternity and sorority houses, retirement homes, boarding houses, cooperatives, but excludes group residential care facilities.

Group residential care facility – Any private or public institution requiring state licensure and/or any nonprofit facility performing the same functions which provide services including, but not limited to, the care, boarding, housing or training of more than five physically, mentally, or socially handicapped or delinquent persons or dependent persons by any person who is not the parent or guardian of, and who is not related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption to, these persons.

Guesthouse – A detached accessory building without cooking facilities designed for and used to house nonpaying transient visitors or guests of the occupants of the main dwelling on the lot.

Gutter – A constructed waterway, usually along a street curb, installed to collect and conduct street surface water.

H.

Habitable floor – Any floor usable for living purposes, including working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreating uses, or any combination of these uses. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor.

Half-story – An area under a roof finished for living accommodations or business purposes located wholly or partly within the roof frame and having a floor area at least one-half as large as the story below. Space with less than five feet clear headroom shall not be considered as floor area.

Hazardous waste treatment – The physical, chemical, or biological processing of dangerous waste to make wastes nondangerous or less dangerous, safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume.

Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility, off-site – Treatment and storage facilities that treat and store waste from generators on properties other than those on which the off-site facilities are located.

Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility, on-site – Treatment and storage facilities that treat and store waste from generators on properties on the same geographically contiguous or bordering property.

Health care facility – An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices of physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners; medical and dental laboratories; outpatient care facilities; blood banks; and oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.

Health club – Gymnasiums (except those associated with educational institutions), private clubs (athletic, health, or recreational), reducing salons, and weight control establishments.

Hearings officer – The person(s) appointed by the director to hear and decide land use cases in lieu of Coos Bay planning commission review.

Historic property – A building, structure, object, area or site that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of Coos Bay, the region or the nation.

Home occupation – An occupation, profession, or craft secondary to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes, is carried on by a member of the family residing within the residence, and requires no structural alterations or changes in the dwelling unit.

Homeless shelter – Any place or premises operated by a nonprofit organization wherein residence is provided to persons who need emergency shelter on a daily or weekly basis. Individual bath and cooking/eating facilities may or may not be provided.

Homeowners’ association – A nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which the following take place: (a) Each person owning or purchasing a lot in a planned unit or other described land area is automatically a member by such ownership or purchase; (b) Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization’s activities, such as maintaining a common property; and (c) Construction and maintenance responsibilities for any undivided property are identified and assigned.

Horticulture – Businesses primarily devoted to cultivation and/or storage of horticultural and floricultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs, and trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. Typical uses include plant nurseries and garden centers.

Hospital – An establishment which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving medical, obstetrical, or surgical care and nursing service on a continuous basis.

I.

Illuminated sign – Any sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights, or from a remote position.

Immediate vicinity – With regard to the built or manmade environment, this refers to all development that is within 500 linear feet of any proposed development, measured in a straight line from the property line that is closest to any existing development.

Impervious surfaces – Those surfaces that do not absorb water and consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt on a lot.

Improvement plans – The technical drawings of the design and proposed construction of such items as streets, water and sewer systems, and drainage detention systems.

Improvements – Any manmade features located on, above, or under real property.

Inauguration – Inauguration of use shall be either of the following: (a) securing of a building permit for approved construction projects and construction has commenced; or (b) for subdivisions, recordation of the final, city-approved map at the county recorder’s office. For the permit to remain valid, construction under the building permit must successfully complete the first inspection within six months of issuance of the building permit. A foundation permit shall be treated as equivalent to a building permit, but grading, demolition, electrical, mechanical or plumbing permits shall not be considered or treated as building permits.

Incompatible use – A use that is incapable of existing in harmony with the natural environment or with other uses situated in its immediate vicinity.

Indirect illumination – A source of illumination directed toward a sign so that the beam of light falls upon the exterior surface of the sign.

Indoor amusement – Establishments engaged in providing entertainment indoors for a fee or admission charge, including such activities as theaters, bowling, pool, billiards, or arcades, that feature three or more coin or token operated devices, such as pinball and video games.

Indoor storage – The keeping of any goods, materials, merchandise, or supplies as an accessory use to any retail, office, or service use.

Industrial park – A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more separate industrial buildings. An industrial park is planned, designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and orientation, and open space.

Industry, heavy – A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in the storage of or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.

Industry, light – A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including process, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.

Infill – The development of land uses upon vacant or under-utilized sites.

Infiltration – The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.

J.

K.

L.

Land clearing – The exposure of earth by the removal of vegetative cover of any kind.

Land-disturbing activity – Any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land-disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, demolition, construction, clearing, grading, filling and excavation.

Land division – A partition or subdivision.

Land use decision – A final decision or determination made by the city (or other agency with jurisdiction) that concerns the adoption, amendment, or application of the comprehensive plan or any provision of the CBDC where the decision requires the interpretation or exercise of policy or legal judgment. All decisions requiring quasi-judicial review by the city are land use decisions. Decisions subject to administrative review are considered limited land use decisions, pursuant with ORS 197.015.

Landscape plan – A detailed sketch to scale illustrating the type, size, location and number of plants and other landscape elements to be placed in a development.

Landscaping – Not only trees, grass, bushes, shrubs, flowers, and garden areas, but also the arrangement of fountains, patios, decks, street furniture, and ornamental concrete or stonework areas and artificial turf or carpeting, but excluding artificial plants, shrubs, bushes, flowers, and materials in movable containers.

Laundromat – An establishment providing washing and drying machines on the premises for rental use to the general public for family laundering purposes.

Laundry services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as “personal services, general.” Typical uses include laundry agencies, diaper service, or linen supply services.

Lawn – Grass or similar materials maintained as a ground cover of less than six inches in height. For purposes of this title, lawn is not considered native vegetation regardless of the species used.

Library service and cultural exhibit – The preservation and/or exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of art, or library collections of books, manuscripts, and so forth for study and reading, but excludes private galleries whose primary purpose is the display and sale of art objects.

Limited manufacturing – Establishments engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing (only the use of hand tools or light mechanical equipment) primarily for direct sale to consumers of those goods produced on site or other similar goods with no outside open storage permitted. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops, woodworking, custom jewelry manufacturers, small furniture shops, or instruction studios for similar arts and crafts.

Loading space – An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary maneuvering and parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.

Lodge, club, fraternal or civic assembly – Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or recreational purpose for members, but not primarily for profit nor for rendering a service which is customarily carried on as a business. Typical uses include meeting places for civic clubs, lodges, or fraternal or veteran organizations. The following are assembly types:

(a) Small. Fewer than 16 persons on a regular basis.

(b) Large. Sixteen or more persons on a regular basis.

Lodging house – A building other than a hotel where lodging is provided for five or more persons for compensation pursuant to previous arrangements, but not open to the public, and meals and drinks are not served.

Lot – A single unit of land legally created by a partition or a subdivision or a unit of continuous land under a single ownership capable of being used under the regulations of this title, lawfully created as such in accordance with the subdivision laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. “Lot” shall also mean the individual leaseholds within an approved manufactured home park.

Lot area – The computed area contained within the horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot; said area to be exclusive of street or alley rights-of-way.

Lot, building – Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings.

Lot, corner – A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets other than an alley with a boundary line bordering on each of the streets as shown on the Lot, Corner Exhibit below.


[IMAGE]


Lot, Corner Exhibit

Lot coverage – That percentage of the total lot area covered by structures, including decks and all other projections, except eaves (up to three feet), and all other impervious surfaces.

Lot depth – The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and opposite lot line, usually the rear lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the depth shall be the length of the street side lot line.

Lot, flag – A lot the developable portion of which is located behind another lot that has normal street frontage. A flag lot includes a strip of land that goes out to the public right-of-way street for public access. As shown on the Lot, Flag Exhibit below, there are two distinct parts to a flag lot: the flag which comprises the actual building site located behind another lot, and the pole which provides access from the street to the flag. A flag lot generally results from the division of a large lot that does not have sufficient width for division into two lots that would both have normal frontage onto the street. Creation of a flag lot is subject to additional standards in this code.


[IMAGE]


Lot, Flag Exhibit

Lot, interior – A lot or parcel of land other than a corner or a through lot.

Lot, irregular – A lot which is shaped so that application of setback requirements is difficult; examples include a lot with a shape which is not close to rectangular, or a lot with no readily identifiable rear lot line.

Lot line – The property line along the edge of a lot. The Lot Line Exhibit below identifies front and side and rear property lines.


[IMAGE]


Lot Line Exhibit

Lot line, front – In the case of an interior lot, the lot line separating a lot from the street other than an alley, and in the case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line along a street other than an alley.

Lot line, rear – A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line; and in the case of an irregular, triangular, or other shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.

Lot line, side – Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.

Lot line, street side – Any side lot line that abuts a public street right-of-way or public or private access easement.

Lot of record – A lot as shown on the records of the county assessor or county auditor at the time of the passage of this title; provided, however, this shall not include lots that may appear on the records of the county assessor which were created contrary to the provisions of laws and regulations in effect prior to the passage of this title. Any lots created after the adoption of this title shall comply with the standards contained herein.

Lot, through – An interior lot having a frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys. Such a lot has one front yard fronting on the primary public street.

Lot width – The average (mean) horizontal distance measured between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line.

Lounge – A building, or portion of a building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink and consumed on premises.

Lowest floor – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title.

M.

Maintain – To cause or allow to continue in existence. When the context indicates, the word means to preserve and care for a structure; improve or condition an area to such an extent that it remains attractive, safe, presentable, and carries out the purpose for which it was installed, constructed, or required.

Major Remodeling. See “Substantial improvement.”

Manufactured home – A structure, transportable in one or more sections, as defined by ORS 446.003, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.

Manufacturing – Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical production, processing, assembling, packaging, or treatment of materials or substances into new products usually by power-driven machines and materials-handling equipment. Products of these establishments are primarily for wholesale markets or transfer to other industrial users but may include direct sale to consumers.

Map – A final diagram, drawing, or other writing concerning a land partition.

Marijuana processing – As defined under ORS 475B.015(25)(a) – Cannabis.

Marina – A facility that provides moorage, launching, storage, supplies, and a variety of services for recreational, commercial, fishing, and other vessels. Moorage facilities with five or fewer berths are excluded from this category.

Marketplace retail sales – Commercial premises of at least 5,000 square feet which are planned and developed as a market and which may have multiple occupancy by business firms having common access or open-air access from a public right-of-way. Example businesses located in the marketplace include farmer’s market and fish market.

Marquee – A permanent or temporary roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property.

Medical services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention, diagnosis, and treatment or rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses, and other health personnel as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services but excludes those classified as any civic use or group residential (group care) use type. Typical uses include medical offices, dental laboratories, health maintenance organizations, or detoxification centers.

Mining and processing – Places or plants primarily devoted to surface or subsurface mining of metallic and nonmetallic minerals, oil, or gas and/or the on-site processing and production of mineral products. Typical uses are borrow pits, oil and gas drilling, concrete batch plants, sand, gravel and aggregate processing plants, or coal processing plants.

Mitigation – Taking one or more of the following actions listed in order of priority:

(a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain development action or parts of that action.

(b) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the development action and its implementation.

(c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment.

(d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the development action by monitoring and taking appropriate corrective measures.

(e) Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable substitute resources or environments.

Mitigation plan – A plan that outlines the activities that will be undertaken to alleviate project impacts to sensitive areas.

Mixed use – A combination of typically separated uses within a single development. A planned unit development is an example of mixed-use zoning. “Mixed use” in an urban context refers to usually a single building or buildings adjacent to one another in one project area with more than one type of activity taking place within its confines. An example of a mixed-use development might have commercial uses on the ground floor, office above them, and residential units above the office. Other combinations of uses may also occur in this type of setting.

Mobile Home. See “Certified factory-built home.”

Modular home/prefabricated home – A residential structure, consisting of many components, which meets the requirements of the International Building Code and is constructed in a factory, transported to the building site, and then partially constructed at the site. The construction requirements are to be the same as for a site-built home.

Motor home – A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreational, and/or vacation use constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.

Mural – Any pictorial or graphic decoration, other than a sign, which is applied directly to a structure and is neither used for, nor intended to achieve the purposes of, advertising by the use of lettering or script to draw attention to or to direct the observer to a particular business or business location, nor to draw attention to specific products, goods, or services by the use of a brand name, trademark, copyright, or any other device restricted in use without permission of the owner.

N.

National Register of Historic Places – A list of properties that have been formally judged to have historic significance and which have been accepted by the keeper of the National Register. The state of Oregon and the city of Coos Bay also maintain separate designations for inclusion. The city’s list is contained within the comprehensive plan.

Natural grade – The elevation of the ground level in its natural and original state, before manmade alterations such as grading, filling, excavation, and construction. See the Natural Grade Figure below.


[IMAGE]


Natural Grade Figure

Neighborhood – An identifiable geographic area of relatively small size; a collection of units and other land uses that provide a relationship between dwellings, school, religious facilities, minor retail and/or other local facilities.

New construction – Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this title.

Night club – An establishment in which live music, dancing, or entertainment is conducted.

Non-water-dependent – In general, non-water-dependent uses are those that do not require direct access to or location near waterways, and therefore could be located away from said waters.

Nonconforming lot – A lot that does not comply with currently applicable city regulations.

Nonconforming structure – An existing structure that was created in conformance with the development regulations then in effect but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, does not conform to the current regulations imposed by this title or amendments thereto such as setbacks, lot coverage, density, screening, height or parking area requirements created prior to the current regulations of this title.

Nonconforming use – A land use that was allowed by right when established or that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone.

O.

Occupancy – The physical placement of a structure on land, or the utilization of land on a temporary or permanent basis. This includes existing structures built prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title that do not have authorization by virtue of a valid permit issued.

Off-street parking – The minimum off-street, on-site parking of vehicles that shall be provided under the terms of this title.

Office – A building or portion of a building wherein services and activities are conducted in an administrative setting generally focusing on professional, business, government or financial services.

Open space – Land perpetually set aside and maintained for the conservation/preservation of natural features or scenic amenities, for the buffering of a use within or adjacent to the development, for solar and wind access, or for bicycle/pedestrian access ways. These lands shall remain undeveloped except for natural or landscaped vegetation and do not include thoroughfares, parking areas, or improvements other than recreational facilities.

Ordinance – A law set forth by governmental authority; a development regulation adopted by the legislative branch of the locality.

Overlay zone – A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements beyond that required by the underlying zones.

Owner – The owner of record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or person purchasing a piece of property under contract. For the purposes of this title, in terms of violations and binding agreements between the county and the owner, “owner” shall also mean a leaseholder, tenant, or other person in possession or control of the premises or property at the time of agreement, violations of agreement, or the provisions of this title. For the purpose of processing an application for a land use approval or permit under this title, where such application or permit must be filed by an owner, the term “owner” also includes a governmental entity contemplating acquisition of a parcel for a use which would require such permit or approval.

P.

Parcel – A single unit of land that is created by a partition of land (ORS 92.010).

Park, public – An area that may be improved for the purpose of providing public access in a manner consistent with the preservation of its recreational, educational, cultural, historical, or aesthetic qualities.

Parking lot or area and/or garage – An off-street facility used for the storage or parking of four or more motor vehicles to provide an accessory service to a commercial, industrial, public or residential use.

Parking lot or area and/or garage, private – A parking area for the exclusive use of the owners of the lot on which the parking area is located or whomever else they permit to use the parking area.

Parking lot or area and/or garage, public –A parking area available to the public, with or without payment of a fee.

Parking service – Parking services involving public garages and lots.

Parking space – A rectangular space designed and designated to provide parking for automobiles and bicycles in compliance with Chapter 17.330 CBDC. A parking space will provide access and maneuvering space sufficient to permit an automobile to be parked without the necessity of moving other vehicles; said rectangle to be located off the street right-of-way.

Parking structure – A standalone structure used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles. The footprint of a parking structure will be included in the calculation of lot coverage.

Parkrow or planter strip – A landscape area for street trees and other plantings within the public right-of-way, usually in the form of a continuous planter area between the street and sidewalk.

Partition, land – To divide land into two or three parcels of land within a 12-month period, but does not include:

(a) A division of land resulting from a lien foreclosure, foreclosure of a recorded contract for the sale of real property or the creation of cemetery lots; or

(b) An adjustment of a property line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional unit of land is not created and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with any applicable zoning ordinance.

Partition, major – A partition which necessitates the creation of a road or street.

Partition, minor – A partition that does not necessitate the creation of a road or street.

Permit – A license, certificate, approval, or other entitlement for use granted by a public agency.

Permit modification, major – As determined by the director, a modification that includes a significant departure for the originally approved permit for land development or land use.

Permit modification, minor – As determined by the director, a modification that includes minor changes not affecting the use, design or intent of the originally approved permit for land development or land use.

Personal services, general – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services of a nonprofessional nature, but excludes services classified as “spectator sports and entertainment,” or “participant sports and recreation.” Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, or reducing salons, laundromats, or dance instruction.

Planned unit development (PUD) – A tract of land planned and developed as an integrated unit under single ownership or control which in this context may be vested in partnerships, corporations, syndicates, or trusts. The PUD shall encompass a comprehensive development plan of a parcel of land, which has been approved by the review authority, and may use innovative and unique development concepts, including but not limited to clustering and mixing of land uses to create useful open space and to preserve site features.

Plant nursery – An enterprise, establishment, or portion thereof that conducts the retailing or wholesaling of plants grown on the site, as well as accessory items (but not farm implements) directly related to their care and maintenance. The accessory items normally sold include items such as clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides, hanging baskets, rakes, and shovels.

Plat – A map, diagram, drawing, replat, or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision.

Plaza – An open public space associated with commercial development.

Plot – A parcel of ground upon which a building and its accessory buildings have been or may be erected.

Porch – Covered porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas attached to a building and having dimensions of not less than six feet in depth and eight feet in width.

Porch, enclosed – A porch that contains wall(s) that are more than 42 inches in height measured from finished floor level for 50 percent or more of the porch perimeter.

Porch, unenclosed – All walls contained in an unenclosed porch are less than 42 inches in height, but an unenclosed porch may be covered.

Preliminary plat – A neat and approximate drawing of either a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of rights-of-way and easements, streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and tracts in the subdivision or short subdivision, and other elements of a subdivision which shall furnish a basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of the preliminary plat.

Preschool facility – An educational center or establishment, including a kindergarten, that provides primarily instruction, supplemented by daytime care, for four or more children between the ages of two and five years, and which operates on a regular basis.

Primary building or structure – A structure or combination of structures of principal use, importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure may be determined by comparing the size, placement, design, appearance, function, and the orientation of the structures on a site, among other relevant factors.

Private clubs – Organizations that are privately owned and operated by their members and not operated for profit, and which maintain recreational, dining, and/or athletic facilities for the exclusive use of the members and their guests and uses accessory or incidental thereto.

Private drive – A private drive is a road in private ownership, not dedicated to the public, which serves three or fewer dwelling units.

Private parking – Parking facilities for the noncommercial use of the occupant and guests of the occupant, which includes garages and carports meeting the dimensional requirements of off-street parking requirements of this title.

Private road – That easement or parcel created to provide the access from a city road to short platted lots; the maintenance of this is to be the responsibility of the lot owners.

Professional and administrative service – The conduct of business in any of the following related categories: advertising, architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, planning, law, medicine, music, art, interior design, dentistry, accounting, insurance, real estate, finance and securities investments, and any similar type business.

Professional office – The office of a person engaged in any occupation, vocation, or calling, not purely commercial, mechanical, or agricultural, in which a professed knowledge or skill in some department of science or learning is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising or guiding them in serving their interest or welfare through the practice of an art founded thereon.

Prohibited use – Any use that is specifically enumerated or interpreted as not allowable in any specific district.

Projecting sign – A sign other than a wall-mounted sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.

Property line adjustment – The relocation of a single common property line between two or more existing adjacent parcels not resulting in an increase in the number of lots pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 17.367 CBDC. See an example in the Property Line Adjustment Figure below.


[IMAGE]


Property Line Adjustment Figure

Public assembly, place of – Any area, building or structure where large numbers of individuals meet or collect to participate or to observe programs of participation. Places of public assembly shall include theaters, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums, houses of worship, or comparable facilities.

Public building – Buildings which are owned, operated, and maintained by a public agency such as City Hall, police and fire stations, educational institutions, zoos, museums, and the like.

Public improvement – Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility, and energy services.

Public safety service – Life safety services together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations, police stations, and ambulance services.

Public use – The use of any land, water, or building by a public agency for the general public, or by the public itself.

Public utility – Any person, firm, corporation, governmental department, or board, duly authorized to furnish under government regulations to the public electricity, gas, communications, transportation, or water.

Q.

R.

Reader board sign – A sign with letters and/or advertising which can be readily changed manually or electronically.

Recreational area – Lands perpetually set aside and maintained for use by all residents of a development. These areas shall be improved and shall be of a specified size.

Recreational Facility, Low Density and High Density. See “Community recreation.”

Recreational space – An area that shall be improved and maintained for its intended use. Exterior as well as interior areas can constitute recreation space. Examples of usable recreation space include swimming pools, community buildings, interior gyms, picnic areas, tennis courts, community gardens, improved playgrounds, paths and passive seating areas.

Recreational vehicle – A vehicle that is:

(a) Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light-duty truck;

(d) Designed for human occupancy; and

(e) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Refuse service – Any place used for disposal of used material. Typical uses include sanitary landfills, dumps, or refuse disposal sites.

Religious assembly – A religious organization involving public assembly typically occurring in but not limited to synagogues, temples, or churches. The following are religious assembly use types:

(a) Small. Fewer than 16 persons on a regular basis.

(b) Large. Sixteen or more persons on a regular basis.

Repair service, consumer – Establishments primarily engaged in repair services to individuals and households rather than firms but excluding “automotive and equipment” use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, apparel repair firms, or musical instrument repair firms.

Residential structure – A structure that contains one or more dwelling units.

Residential treatment facility – A facility that provides both a residence (for varying periods of time) and a care component. Among such facilities are group care homes, emergency or homeless shelters (including victims of violence), recovery homes, and nursing homes, rest and convalescent homes, and orphanages.

Residential use – Use of land or structure thereon, or portion thereof, as a dwelling place for one or more families or households, but not including occupancy of a transient nature, such as in hotels, motels, or timesharing condominium uses.

Retail food establishment – Any fixed or mobile place or facility at or in which food or beverages are offered or prepared for retail sale or for service. The definition includes restaurants, fast food restaurants, carry out restaurants and drive-in restaurants. A cafeteria is a restaurant for purposes of this title.

Retail sales, general – The sale or rental of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use, but excludes those classified as “agricultural sales,” “animal sales and service,” “automotive and equipment,” “business equipment sales and service,” “construction sales and service,” “food and beverage retail sales,” and “fuel sales.” Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, hardware stores, or florists.

Retail trade – Establishments primarily engaged in providing finished products to individual consumers. Retail trade establishments may include, but are not limited to, apparel, books, groceries, camera shops, convenience stores and automobile service stations.

Retirement home – A place of residence for several families or individuals in apartment-like quarters, which may feature services such as limited nursing facilities, minimum maintenance living accommodations and recreation programs and facilities.

Right-of-way – A street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement, whether physically accessible or not, that has been permanently established or dedicated for the passage of persons or vehicles. Title to this land remains with the public or private agency until the need no longer exists.

Riparian vegetation – Dense, narrow band of vegetation along lakes, streams, rivers, and sloughs. Typical plant species include willow, black cottonwood, red alder, Oregon ash, and western wax myrtle.

Roofline – The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.

Rooming house – A building wherein furnished rooms without cooking facilities are rented for compensation to three or more nontransient persons not included in the family unit of the owner or tenant of the premises.

Row houses – A series of single-family dwelling units that are erected in a row on adjoining lots, each being separated from an adjoining unit by two separate but abutting walls along the dividing lot line.

S.

Scrap operation – Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling, or other processing of used, source-separated, or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original form. Scrap operation uses include:

(a) Light. Businesses only engaged in the recycling of household items, such as glass, tin, cardboard, paper, or beverage cans.

(b) Heavy. Except as may be permitted as scrap operation, light, these businesses can include automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, paper salvage yards, or solid waste collection or recycling service, including fleet storage, fleet repair, collection, transportation, disposal or resource recovery of solid wastes.

Screening – A device or materials used to conceal adjacent land or development. Screening may include walls, berms, or vegetation that must be of sufficient density to block the view of adjacent land or development from either side of the screen. The screen, if vegetative, shall be planted and maintained to completely block the view of adjacent land or development after 12 months. The screen shall be maintained or constructed at such a density as to block the view to adjacent properties.

Service station – A building or structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of fuels (stored only as prescribed by existing legal regulations), lubricants, air, water, other operating commodities for motor vehicles or boats, and food and beverages as an accessory to automobile related uses. The cross-section areas of service station canopy support where they meet the ground shall be measured as coverage for the purposes of determining maximum lot coverage, and also shall be used for measurement of setback requirements.

Setback – The minimum allowable horizontal distance required between a structure and a property lot line.


[IMAGE]


Shopping center – A group of architecturally unified commercial establishments built on a site that is planned, developed, owned, and managed as an operating unit related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves.

Sidewalk – That portion of a transition strip improved for pedestrian traffic in accordance with standards fixed by the review authority.

Sign – Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, or device which is placed, erected, constructed, posted, or affixed in any manner directly on the ground or to any post, fence, building, land or structure for out-of-doors advertising, but not including devices, structures or representations installed by any governmental authority.

Sign area – The size of a sign in square feet of the largest face, measured within any type of perimeter, border, or defined edges or within a background of color if different than the wall upon which it is placed enclosing the outer limits of any sign, excluding essential sign structures, foundations, or supports. The area of the sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a standard geometric figure, i.e., rectangle, parallelogram, or triangle, of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign. The area of three-dimensional or spherical signs shall be measured by using the largest cross-section in a flat projection.

Single-faced sign – A sign with advertising on only one surface.

Site – The lot(s), parcel(s) and tract(s) included in a proposed subdivision or short subdivision and contiguous lots, parcels or tracts in which the owner of the site has a greater than possessory interest.

Site plan – A plan prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions all proposed and existing buildings, landscaping, open space, structures and features on abutting properties, and parking proposed for a specific parcel of land.

Slope – The deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent. See Slope Figure below.


[IMAGE]


Slope Figure

Soil – The surface layer of the earth, supporting plant life.

Soil removal – Removal of any kind of soil or earth matter, including top soil, sand, gravel, clay, rock or similar materials or combination thereof, except common household gardening.

Solar access – The availability of direct sunlight to solar energy systems.

Solar energy system – Any structural element, device, or combination of devices or elements which rely upon direct sunlight as an energy source, including, but not limited to, any substance or device which collects, stores, or distributes sunlight for use in the following: (a) the heating or cooling of a structure or building; (b) the heating or pumping of water; (c) industrial, commercial, or agricultural processes; or (d) the generation of electricity. Use of this term includes passive, active and hybrid systems. Attached solar energy systems shall be considered as a part of the structure or building to which they are attached. Detached solar energy systems shall be considered accessory uses.

Spectator sports and entertainment – Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators as well as those involving social or fraternal gatherings. The following are spectator sports and entertainment use types:

Spectator sports and entertainment: indoor – Those uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include theaters or meeting halls.

Spectator sports and entertainment: outdoor – Those uses conducted outdoors. Typical uses include stadiums or drive-in theaters.

Standard factory-built home – A residential housing unit which is built at a location different from the intended site of occupancy, but which meets city building, plumbing, heating, and ventilation codes. These units shall be subject to the same regulations as conventionally built units.

Start of construction (for flood damage prevention only) – Includes major remodeling, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

Stepback – Building stepbacks are stepped or progressive recessions in a building’s face as the building rises higher. Stepbacks are designed to reduce building mass to allow views around the building from above and/or from a distance, to allow more light down to the adjacent rights-of-way, and to improve the aesthetic experience of the building from adjacent rights-of-way.

Stormwater – That portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, channels or pipes into a defined surface water channel, or a constructed infiltration facility.

Story – That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above grade for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point, such basement or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.

Street – All roads, streets, highways, freeways, easements, and public rights-of-way used for or designed for vehicular access or use, including private roads but not including private driveways.

Street, collector – A street penetrating neighborhoods, collecting traffic from local streets in the neighborhood and channeling it into the arterial system.

Street, dead-end – A local street with only one outlet, without possibility of extension, and a maximum length of 400 feet. A vehicle turnaround may be required.

Street, improved – A street with a paved roadway that has a structural cross-section that meets the minimum street improvement standards of the city of Coos Bay.

Street line – The dividing line between any street, road or other thoroughfare and the adjacent lots.

Street, local – A street which is primarily to provide direct access to abutting property and for local traffic movement.

Street, major arterial – All state highways and major routes leading into and through the city.

Street, minor arterial – A street of considerable continuity which is used primarily for through traffic and travel between large areas.

Street, open – A street which provides access for property development. An open street must be:

(a) One for which the city accepts responsibility of grading and drainage maintenance;

(b) Paved to city standards with curbs, storm drainage, etc.; or

(c) An all-weather roadway and, in most cases, graveled or strip-paved. (“All-weather” means that a standard automobile can negotiate the road without difficulty year-round.)

Street, private – A thoroughfare that is privately built and maintained which affords a primary means of vehicular access.

Structural alteration – Any material or dimensional changes in the structural elements of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, and roofs.

Structure – A building or any piece of work joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something located on the ground. Under the National Flood Insurance Program, “structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

Subdivision, land – Either an act of subdividing land into four or more lots or a tract of land subdivided. To divide an area into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such a year.

Substantial damage – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial improvement – Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(a) Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(b) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

(c) The term does not, however, include either:

(i) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(ii) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

In any one-year period, if improvements to the structure total more than 50 percent of the value of the structure, the structure will be required to be brought up to current floodplain management standards. The one-year period will be a rolling period and start at the completion, or date of finalization, of the oldest improvement within the last 365-day period. At the end of each improvement, the structure must be deemed habitable as defined by the Oregon Building Code.

Surface water – Waters that flow over the land surface and frequently interact with groundwater.

Swale – A shallow drainage conveyance with relatively gentle side slopes, generally with flow depths less than one foot.

T.

Tavern – A building where beer and/or wine is served to the public, which holds a Class A or B license from the Oregon State Liquor Control Board.

Telecommunications facilities – A land use that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals, including antennas, microwave dishes or horns, structures or towers to support receiving and/or transmitting devices, accessory development and structures, and the land on which they all are situated.

Temporary building or structure – A building or structure not having or requiring permanent attachment to the ground or to other structures which have no required permanent attachment to the ground.

Temporary use – A short-term, seasonal, reoccurring, or intermittent use or activity involving minimal capital investment that does not result in the permanent alteration of the site or construction of new buildings; the term of the use is at the discretion of the director.

Topography – The drawing accurately on a map lines that represent particular and consistent elevation levels on the land area depicted on said drawing; also, the actual physical surface’s relief characteristics.

Tourist habitation – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of lodging services on a temporary basis (30 days or less) with incidental food, drink, and other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests. The following are tourist habitation use types:

(a) Bed and Breakfast. Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board in an existing dwelling with no more than eight bedrooms.

(b) Bed and Breakfast House. A hotel in what was built as a single-family dwelling and which offers up to six bedrooms for transient guests. This definition is for historic reference for vacation rentals authorized prior to October 15, 2020.

(c) Campground. Campground services involving transient habitation areas for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks.

(d) Lodging. Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board. Typical uses include hotels, motels and pay for stay arrangements in city residences (examples: Airbnb, Vrbo).

(e) Waterfront Heritage Bed and Breakfast. Lodging facilities in the WH zone in a dwelling with no more than eight bedrooms involving the provision of room and board.

(f) Waterfront Inn. Overnight lodging facilities in the WH zone with all units water-oriented. A restaurant and conference facilities may be included.

(g) Hostel. Any establishment having beds rented or kept for rent on a daily basis to travelers for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for rental or use of facilities and which are operated, managed, or maintained under the sponsorship of a nonprofit organization which holds a valid exemption from federal income taxes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.

(h) Hotel/Motel. A building or portion thereof designed and used for transient lodging in a nonresidential zone, lodged with or without meals and which may include additional facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and recreational facilities.

(i) Vacation Rental. A residential structure being rented for compensation for less than 30 days without concurrent occupation by the owner/operator.

Townhouse – A single-family dwelling unit in a group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides.

Tract – One or more contiguous lots or parcels under the same ownership.

Trailer – A separate vehicle, not driven or propelled by its own power, but drawn by some independent power; to include any portable or movable structure or vehicle including trailers designed for living quarters, offices, storage, or for moving or hauling freight, equipment, animals, or merchandise of any kind, including boats, boat trailers, jet skis, half-tracks, snowmobiles, and the like, not included in other definitions.

Transportation service – Transportation offered to the public involving group assembly rather than door-to-door service; may also include the fleet storage of vehicles or cars. Typical uses include bus terminals, railroad depots, or airports.

Travel trailer – A vehicle with or without motor power primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and in which the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein may be operated without connection to outside utilities, being of such size or weight as not to require a special highway movement permit. The term shall include truck campers.

Turnaround – A vehicle maneuvering area at the end of a dead-end street or driveway (e.g., hammerhead, cul-de-sac, or other configuration) that allows for vehicles to turn around.

U.

Unbuildable area – All areas outside of building envelopes and within open space.

Units per acre – The number of dwelling units allowed on one acre. For example, a maximum of four units/acre would mean that no more than four dwelling units on one acre are allowed in a particular zone.

Unstable slopes – Those sloping areas of land which have in the past exhibited, are currently exhibiting, or will likely in the future exhibit movement of earth.

Use – The purpose that land or structures now serve or for which it is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended.

Use, cease of – Use shall be considered as ceased when the site and/or building is no longer used or available for occupancy by the specific use for 24 months. A building or site vacant while being continuously marketed, repaired, or otherwise similarly unavailable for use is not considered to be a cessation of use. A building or site that is occupied by a different use shall be considered as a cessation of the former use.

Use, principal – The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.

Use, start of – Use shall be considered as begun when the applicant has physically moved into the site or is in the process of physically moving into the site in preparation of beginning occupation and/or operation. Actual operation and/or business open to the public need not occur to consider a use as begun.

Use, temporary – A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time. Temporary uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.

Utilities easements – Rights-of-way that may be used by public utilities, including, but not limited to, electricity, water, natural gas, sewer, telephone, and television cable for the construction, operation, maintenance, alteration, and repair of their respective facilities.

Utility and service – Public utilities which have a local impact on surrounding properties and are necessary to provide essential services. Typical uses are electrical and gas distribution substations, sewer pump stations, water reservoirs, and radio, microwave, and telephone transmitters.

Utility substation – A subsidiary or branch facility utilizing aboveground structures, which is necessary to provide or facilitate distribution, transmission, or metering of water, gas, sewage, radio signals and/or electric energy and telecommunication signals. Such facilities have a local impact on surrounding properties and may consist of, but are not limited to, the following: (a) water, gas, telecommunication and electrical distribution or metering sites; (b) water or sewage pumping stations; (c) water towers and reservoirs; (d) public wells and any accessory treatment facilities; (e) transmission towers and accessory equipment to provide radio and data communications service, radio paging, or cellular communications service; (f) telecommunication facilities.

V.

Variance – A modification of the terms of this title to a particular piece of property which, because of special circumstances, is deprived of privileges enjoyed by other properties of the same zone and which modification remedies the disparity in privileges.

Vehicle sign – Advertising copy painted or permanently affixed to lawfully parked and operable vehicles or trailers.

Video sales and rental – Commercial establishments engaged in the sale and rental of video equipment, tapes and accessories for home entertainment.

Vision clearance area – Areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is required for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance with a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines for a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines or intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection.

Visitor information service – A service providing visitor information about the city, the region and the state.

Visual obstruction – Any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, device, wall, or structure exceeding three and one-half feet in height above the elevation of the top of the curb, and so located on a street or alley intersection as to dangerously limit the visibility of persons in motor vehicles on said streets or alleys. This does not include trees kept trimmed of branches to a minimum height of at least six feet.

W.

Warehouse – A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.

Water-dependent – A use or activity which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for waterborne transportation, recreation, energy production, or source of water. Under the National Flood Insurance Program, “water-dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations.

Water-oriented use – A use located on properties east of Front Street, including the WH-3 subdistrict, in the waterfront heritage zoning district, which is enhanced by a view of, or access to, the waterfront.

Water-related – Uses which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent land or waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public loss of quality in the goods or services offered. Except as necessary for water-dependent or water-related uses or facilities, residences, parking lots, spoil and dump sites, roads and highways, restaurants, businesses, factories, and trailer parks are not generally considered dependent on or related to water location needs.

Watercraft sales/rentals – Sales, rental and incidental repairs of watercraft, such as, but not limited to, jet skis, canoes, motorboats, and sailboats. Motorized watercraft and sailboats, where motorized watercraft and sailboats are displayed in the water.

Waterfront – The mean high-water line.

Wetlands – Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.

Wholesale, storage, and distributing – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the wholesaling, storage, distribution, and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. The following are wholesale, storage, and distribution use types:

(a) Mini-Warehouse. Storage or warehousing service within a building(s) primarily for individuals to store personal effects and by businesses to store materials for operation of an industrial or commercial enterprise located elsewhere. Incidental uses in a mini-warehouse may include the repair and maintenance of stored materials by the tenant but in no case may storage space in a mini-warehouse facility function as an independent retail, wholesale, business, or service use. Spaces shall not be used for workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or similar uses and human occupancy of the spaces shall be limited to that required to transport, arrange, and maintain stored materials.

(b) Light. Wholesale, storage, and warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, or moving and storage firms.

(c) Heavy. Open-air storage, distribution, and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone yards, wood chip storage, or lumber storage.

X.

Y.

Yard – Open space on a lot which is unobstructed by a structure and measured between the property line and the nearest point at the outermost face of any vertical support, exterior wall line, or foundation of a building. May also be an area defined by required setbacks.

Yard, front – A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line to the nearest point of the building.

Yard, rear – A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear yard line to the nearest point of the building.

Yard, side – An open space between the front yard and rear yards measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line or street side lot line to the nearest point of a building.

Z.

Zero lot line development – A single-family housing unit which has no yard requirements on one or more of the lot lines, in conformance with the International Building Code.

Zone – Area within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and certain others are prohibited; yards and other open spaces are required; lot areas, building height limits, and other requirements are established.

Zone or zoning district – The same as “district” or “zone.” [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 513 § 7 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 490 § 1, 2018; Ord. 486 § 1, 2017; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.150.010].


Chapter 17.210 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS

Sections:

17.210.010    Classification of districts.

17.210.020    Zoning map.

17.210.030    District boundaries.


17.210.010 Classification of districts.

For the purposes of this title, the city is divided into zoning districts designated as follows:

	Comprehensive Plan Designation	Corresponding Zoning District	Code Chapter

	Residential	Low Density Residential (LDR-6, LDR-8.5)	CBDC 17.220

	 	Medium Density Residential (MDR-16)	CBDC 17.225

	Commercial	Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts (C and MX)	CBDC 17.230

	Industrial	Industrial-Commercial (I-C)	CBDC 17.235

	 	Waterfront Heritage (WH)	CBDC 17.240

	 	Waterfront Industrial (W-I)	CBDC 17.245

	 	Hollering Place (HP)	CBDC 17.250

	Urban Public	Urban Public (UP)	CBDC 17.255

	Medical Park District	Medical Park District (MP)	CBDC 17.260

	Urban Public	Watershed (WS)	CBDC 17.270

[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.210.020 Zoning map.

(1) The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are shown on the map entitled, “Zoning Map of the City of Coos Bay,” dated with the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and signed by the mayor, and hereafter referred to as the “zoning map.”

(2) The signed copy of the city’s zoning map shall be maintained on file with the city, and is made a part of this title.

(3) Revised Maps. The city council may, from time to time, direct the director to replace the official zoning maps, or portions thereof, with a map or maps, or portions thereof, which include all lawful changes of zone to date. Zoning maps, or portions thereof, filed as replacements, shall be adopted by ordinance. Any revisions or replacements of said maps, when duly entered, signed, and filed with the city as authorized by this chapter, are part of this title. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.210.030 District boundaries.

(1) Unless otherwise specified, district boundaries are lot lines or such lines extended.

(2) Any land or property not specifically identified with a zoning designation shall be considered to be zoned as the most restrictive zone classification designated on adjoining and/or abutting properties, until such time as it is determined otherwise by a rezone action.

(3) The director shall have the authority to interpret zoning classification consistent with subsections (1) and (2) of this section and shall file any and all written interpretations with the city clerk’s office. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.215 PLAN AMENDMENTS AND ZONE CHANGES

(Recodified as Chapter 17.360 by Ord. 503)


Chapter 17.220 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (LDR-6, LDR-8.5) AND OVERLAY ZONE LDR-6

Sections:

17.220.010    Purpose.

17.220.020    Land uses.

17.220.030    Development standards and criteria.


17.220.010 Purpose.

The LDR district designation has been established to be consistent with the Coos Bay Comprehensive Plan Land Use Plan 2000 and identify appropriate land uses and standards for single family neighborhood land uses. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.220.020 Land uses.

P = Permitted use; C = Conditional use; X = Prohibited. Property uses noted in Table 17.220.020.

Type 1 – No noticing requirements.

Type 2 – Noticing requirements 150 feet from property.

Type 3 – Noticing requirements 300 feet from the property.

Property uses are noted in Table 17.220.020.

Table 17.220.020  

	Use	LDR-6	LDR-6 Overlay	LDR-8.5

	Residential Uses

	Single-family detached dwelling units, including manufactured homes which are subject to special siting standards	P/Type 1

	Duplexes	P/Type 1

	Accessory living units (subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.312 CBDC)	P/Type 2

	Group care facilities (more than five)	C/Type 3

	Foster care homes (five or fewer)	P/Type 1

	Planned unit development	C/Type 3

	Zero lot line development	C	P	X

	Accessory Buildings and Uses

	Private garages and carports	P/Type 1

	Accessory use or building on a separate lot or parcel, with compliance with Chapter 17.314 CBDC	P/Type 1

	Greenhouses, gardens, and orchards for private, noncommercial propagation and culture of plants, fruits, and vegetables	P/Type 1

	Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the private use of the occupants. Swimming pools other than children’s temporary wading pools shall not be located in front yards, and shall be set back at least three feet from all property lines.	P/Type 1

	Covered patio, freestanding or attached	P/Type 1

	Solar energy systems and structures solely designed to support solar energy systems	P/Type 1

	Nonresidential Uses

	Art galleries and museums	C/SPR/Type 3

	Vacation rental or bed and breakfast	P, Type 2 if less than 4,000 s.f. C/SPR/Type 3 if greater than 4,000 s.f.

	Bus shelters (subject to a Type II site plan review)	P/Type 2

	Child care facility (13 or less children)	P/Type 1

	Child care facility (14 or more children)	C/SPR/Type 3 if greater than 4,000 s.f. and/or 20 or more parking spaces

	Religious assembly – small (less than 16)	P

	Religious assembly – large (over 16)	C/SPR/Type 3

	Community recreation 4,000 s.f. or greater and/or 20 or more parking spaces	C/SPR/Type 3

	Lodge, club, fraternal or civic assembly 4,000 s.f. or greater and/or more than 20 parking spaces	C/SPR/Type 3	X

	Lodge, club, fraternal or civic assembly less than 4,000 s.f. and 20 parking spaces	C/Type 3	X

	Home occupations	P/Type 1

	Occupied recreational vehicles	X

	Public utilities 4,000 s.f. or greater and/or 20 or more parking spaces	C/SPR/Type 3

	Public utilities less than 4,000 s.f. and/or 20 parking spaces	C/Type 3

	Public schools/educational service 4,000 s.f. or greater and/or 20 or more parking spaces	C/SPR/Type 3

	Public schools/educational service less than 4,000 s.f. and/or 20 parking spaces	C/Type 3

	Public buildings and uses not otherwise listed as permitted in CBDC	C/SPR/Type 3

	Telecommunications facilities	C/SPR/Type 3

	All manufacturing and commercial uses or services, except permitted home occupations and day/adult care facilities	X

[Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 480 § 3, 2016; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.220.030].


17.220.030 Development standards and criteria.

Development standards in the LDR districts are noted in Table 17.220.030.

Table 17.220.030  

	 	LDR-6	LDR-6 overlay zone	LDR-8.5

	Maximum dwelling units per acre (gross area of the site minus required right-of-way)	9	16	6

	Minimum lot size	5,000 s.f.	3,500 s.f.	6,000 s.f.

	Maximum lot size	7,500 s.f.	NA	15,000 s.f.

	Minimum lot width	40'	40'	40'

	Minimum lot depth	80'	80'	90'

	Lots for drainage facilities, parks, open space, wetlands and buffers, utilities	No minimum or maximum.

	Building height	35' from lowest finished grade to highest point on the roof ridge. 

	Lot coverage	65%

	Landscaping	20% of net lot area.

	Front yard setback to enclosed or semi-enclosed living area (including porches)	10' from property line. 

	Garage or carport setback	20' from property line. The setback may be reduced to 10' from a street or 5' from an alley if the entrance to the garage or carport is perpendicular to the street frontage and all of the required parking can be accommodated on private property.

	Minimum side yard – interior lot 	5'	As per the International Building Code	5'

	Minimum rear yard	10% lot depth	10% lot depth

	Minimum side yard – street side corner lot	20% of lot width but no less than 7' nor more than 20'.

	Setback to Coos Bay Estuary 	As specified in the Coos Bay Estuary plan. 

	Setbacks for accessory buildings no greater than 120 s.f. or 8' in height at its highest point above site grade	Rear or side yards – as per the International Building Code. Front yard – building may be no closer than 20' from the front property line nor cause visual obstruction at driveways or intersections.

	Parking	See Chapter 17.330 CBDC. 

[Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019].


Chapter 17.225 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (MDR)

Sections:

17.225.010    Purpose.

17.225.020    Location.

17.225.030    Permitted and conditional uses.

17.225.040    Density and dimensional requirements.

17.225.050    Requirements of single-family attached housing.

17.225.060    Requirements of multifamily attached housing – Apartments.

17.225.070    Requirements of factory-built home parks.


17.225.010 Purpose.

The medium density residential (MDR) district is intended to provide for residential development opportunities with a minimum density of eight units per net acre and a maximum density of 16 units per net acre. The district is further intended to facilitate use of public transit, reduce the burdens of automobile related problems, and encourage efficient use of commercial services and public open space. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.225.020 Location.

The city council, with the recommendation of the planning commission, generally, shall assign MDR zoning districts in close proximity to collector or arterial roadways, current or proposed transit routes, near employment centers, and with good access to local public schools and parks. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.225.030 Permitted and conditional uses.

Permitted Uses. The city permits use on buildable lands as described in Table 17.225.030, Permitted and Conditional Uses, subject to compliance with the adopted level-of-service standards of the Coos Bay capital improvement plan. P = Permitted use; C = Conditional use; X = Prohibited use.

(1) Conditional uses allowed in an MDR district are described in Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses. 

Table 17.225.030 – Permitted and Conditional Uses  

	Use	MDR-16

	Residential

	Existing lawful residential use	P

	Single-family residence per lot of record	P

	Single-family dwelling combined with a multiple-family dwelling on the same lot	C

	Certified factory-built homes or home parks	C

	Accessory living units (which are subject to special siting standards through a Type II land use process)	P

	Foster care homes (five or fewer) 	P

	Multiple-family dwellings, including but not limited to attached single-family dwellings, such as townhouses, duplexes, triplexes; and detached multifamily dwellings such as apartments	P

	Group residential care facility and treatment facility	C

	Multiple-family dwelling, greater than 35 feet in height and three stories	C

	Planned unit development	C

	Accessory buildings and uses normal and incidental to the building and uses permitted in this chapter	P

	Nonresidential Permitted Uses

	Home occupation	P

	Child care facility (fewer than 13)	P

	Tourist habitation (bed and breakfast)	C

	Laundry facility (outward appearance must retain a residential character)	P

	Bus shelters (subject to a Type II site plan review)	P

	Recreational vehicle, maximum percent of the total number of mobile home spaces, provided all sites complying with applicable sections of the CBDC	P

	Nonresidential Conditional Uses

	Administrative service	C

	Child care facility (13 or more)	C

	Convenience sales and personal service	C

	Educational service	C

	Home occupation – retail sales on the premises	C

	Library service and cultural exhibit	C

	Lodge, club, fraternal, or civic assembly	C

	Public parks and recreational facilities	C

	Public safety service	C

	Recreational vehicle	C

	Religious assembly	C

	Utility and service – no outside storage of equipment	C

	Zero lot line development	C

	All manufacturing and commercial uses or services not listed 	X

[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.225.040 Density and dimensional requirements.

(1) All developments within the MDR zoning district shall comply with the density and dimensional requirements of Table 17.225.040.

Table 17.225.040 – MDR Density and Dimensional Requirements  

	Standard	Multifamily	Single-Family

	Attached	Detached

	Net density	8 – 16	8 – 16	8 – 16

	Minimum lot width	40 feet	40 feet	40 feet

	Minimum lot depth	60 feet	60 feet	60 feet

	Minimum area	5,000 sf	5,000 sf	5,000 sf

	Maximum lot coverage	85%	65%	65%

	Maximum height	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet

	Setbacks	 	 	 

	Minimum front setback	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Minimum garage setback from public right-of-way	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet

	Minimum side setback	0 feet attached, 5 feet to abutting property line	0 feet attached, 5 feet nonattached	5 feet

	Minimum street side setback	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Minimum rear setback	5 feet	5 feet	5 feet

(2) Screening. New lots used for medium density residential purposes created adjacent to low density residential (LDR) districts shall employ a screening technique at the perimeter of the project. New perimeter MDR lots abutting LDR districts, not including public rights-of-way or dedicated public open space, shall be no less than 80 percent of the lot area of the minimum lot size of the abutting LDR district. Setbacks from the property lines of abutting LDR land shall be no less than 80 percent of the setback requirement of the abutting LDR district. For example, if the abutting property is zoned LDR-8.5, a 7,000-square-foot minimum lot size, and the MDR lots abutting the LDR district may not be less than 5,600 square feet.

(3) Product Types. The city desires to foster an opportunity for the creation of a variety of MDR housing products so as to promote housing affordability, architectural variety and unique neighborhood character. An MDR project proposal which consists of five gross acres or more, including abutting lands under common ownership, may not include more than 75 percent of one housing type, i.e., multifamily, single-family attached or single-family detached. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.225.050 Requirements of single-family attached housing.

A single-family attached proposal shall meet the requirements of this section. Where a conflict exists between general and specific standards the director shall apply the more specific standard.

(1) Notations on the plat and/or covenants running with the land, approved by the city attorney, shall guarantee that required side setbacks shall be kept perpetually free of obstructions.

(2) Prohibit single-family attached housing in housing clusters of greater than six units.

(3) No portion of a unit may occupy space above or below any other unit, except underground shared parking.

(4) Landscaping. Single-family attached development projects may satisfy the minimum landscaping requirement by:

(a) Providing 200 square feet of enclosed private outdoor living area per bedroom for each individual dwelling unit, to be located in the rear or side yard of each individual lot; or

(b) Providing 200 square feet of common indoor or outdoor recreation area per bedroom for each individual dwelling unit. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.225.060 Requirements of multifamily attached housing – Apartments.

A multifamily attached proposal shall meet the requirements of this section. Where a conflict exists between general and specific standards the director shall apply the more specific standard.

(1) Multifamily attached housing shall not be permitted in clusters of greater than 10 dwelling units.

(2) Building permits for attached developments may only be approved where fully consistent with the approved land division.

(3) Notations on the plat and/    or covenants running with the land, approved by the city attorney, shall guarantee that required side setbacks shall be kept perpetually free of obstructions. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.225.070 Requirements of factory-built  home parks.

All extensions or improvements made to existing residential certified factory-built home parks made after the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title shall comply with the provisions of this title.

(1) Site Plan. Except for a bus shelter, land use review is required prior to the establishment of, or change within, any certified factory-built home park.

(2) Minimum park area: one acre.

(3) Unit density: not more than eight but no less than five dwelling units per acre.

(4) Access and Roads.

(a) Dedicate and improve vehicular and pedestrian access to the park from the improved street.

(b) Pave roads within a park according to the following minimum standards:

(i) Twenty-two feet where no on-street parking is allowed.

(ii) Twenty-eight feet where on-street parking is allowed on one side of the street.

(iii) Thirty-six feet where parking is permitted on both sides of the street.

(iv) All private streets and ways within the park shall be built as approved by the public works department.

(v) An additional five feet from each edge of the pavement or two feet from the edge of the sidewalk shall be designated as right-of-way from which setbacks are to be measured.

(vi) When on-street parking is provided, it may substitute for the guest and second parking requirements if approved by the planning commission.

(5) Services.

(a) Sewer. Every residential certified factory-built home park shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. Each space shall be provided with a connection to the sewer.

(b) Water. Every residential certified factory-built home park shall be connected to a supply of potable water for domestic use. Each space shall be provided with a connection to the water supply.

(c) Utilities. All utilities, including telephone, television, and electricity, shall be installed underground throughout the park and shall be provided at each space.

(d) Fire Protection. No space shall be occupied that is not located within 500 feet of a fire hydrant, following the street right-of-way. Existing spaces now located or occupied at a distance greater than 500 feet from an approved hydrant may continue until such time as the park is expanded in size or number of spaces.

At the time of such expansion, the owner or operator of the park shall have installed one or more hydrants at locations such that no occupied space remains at a greater distance than 500 feet, following the street right-of-way, from any hydrant. The Coos Bay fire department shall be authorized by the owner to inspect the hydrants in accordance with current standard procedures and to require periodic tests when deemed necessary. No parking shall be permitted within 10 feet of fire hydrants.

(e) Lighting. All roads within the park shall be lighted at night to provide a minimum of 0.35 foot-candles of illumination.

(6) Open Space and Recreational Area.

(a) Minimum Area. Open space shall constitute six percent of the total gross area of the park. Improved recreational areas shall have a minimum area of 8,000 square feet or 100 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater.

(b) Plan. The site plan shall contain the following:

(i) Boundaries of the proposed areas.

(ii) Written explanation of the purposes of the areas and a description of any improvements to be made.

(iii) Description of the manner in which the area will be perpetuated, maintained, and administered.

(c) Guarantee. The preservation and continued maintenance of property and/or structures commonly owned and/or held for common use shall be guaranteed by a covenant running with the land specifying the description of the area, its designated purpose(s), and maintenance assurances. Copies of these legal documents shall be filed with the community development department before occupancy of any dwelling.

(7) Landscaping. All exposed ground surface in all parts of the park shall be protected and maintained with landscaping to include plant material, paving, gravel, and/or other solid material that will prevent soil erosion, mud, and dust within the park. The ground surface in the park shall be graded and furnished with drainage facilities to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient, and sanitary manner.

(8) Fences and Walls. A visual barrier shall be provided and maintained such as a solid fence, a concrete wall, or an approved buffer of trees or shrubs between the mobile home park and abutting properties. The barrier shall have a minimum height of six feet, except the area defined as the entrance of the park where the wall may be three feet for vision clearance.

(9) Off-Street Parking and Loading. The provisions of Chapter 17.330 CBDC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, shall apply.

(10) Special Certified Factory-Built Home Siting Requirements.

(a) Certified Factory-Built Homes and Parks.

(i) Only certified factory-built homes shall be allowed in the MDR-16 district.

(ii) Residential certified factory-built home parks and units shall be required to meet all state requirements for mobile home parks.

(b) Yards. Building separation in a mobile home park for each mobile home and its accessory structures shall be in accordance with the following:

(i) A mobile home shall not be located closer than 15 feet from any other mobile home, closer than 10 feet from a park building within the mobile home park, or closer than five feet from a park property boundary line or street right-of-way.

(ii) To prevent the spread of fire from one mobile home to another (unless otherwise approved by the inspecting authority), the yard shall conform to the requirements of the International Building Code.

(c) Building Height. No dwelling or accessory building shall be erected or installed with a height in excess of 17 feet.

(d) Skirting. Mobile homes shall be skirted to provide an appearance of permanency.

(e) Storage Facilities. Each space shall have a minimum of 50 square feet of totally enclosed storage space.

(f) Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings and other similar permanent structures may be installed or erected in conjunction with a space and shall require a building permit. These structures shall be deemed to be a part of the certified factory-built.

(11) Yards. There are no yard requirements for the use, bus shelter, other than those imposed by building codes.

(12) Park Improvements.

(a) Construction Plans and Specifications. As part of the site plan application, the applicant shall submit to the community development department construction plans, profile and cross-section drawings, and specifications for the required utilities and streets, accompanied by a plan check fee. These plans will be reviewed and the applicant will be notified in writing of compliance with city requirements or of any necessary modifications. The final drawings and specifications shall be permanently filed with the department. A copy of the water system plans shall be submitted to public works by the applicant.

(b) Contract for Improvements. Within 48 months of site plan and review of the improvement plans and specifications, but prior to the issuance of any development permits, the applicant shall be required to enter into an agreement to construct and/or improve facilities to serve the development. At the time the improvement agreement is executed, the applicant will submit the inspection fee and also post a performance bond, cash, or security deposit guaranteeing the completion of the contractual provisions. All contracted improvements shall be completed within 24 months after the bond or surety is posted. If the applicant is unable to complete the improvements within two years with good cause, a one-year extension may be granted by the public works department. Further extensions must be approved by the planning commission.

(c) Bond and/or Surety, Cash or Security Deposit Provisions. The assurances for completion of improvements shall be filed with the city in the nonnegotiable amount established by resolution of the city council. The bond or deposit shall:

(i) Name the city as obligee.

(ii) Be in a form approved by the city attorney.

(iii) Be conditioned upon the final approval and acceptance of the development.

(iv) Provide full warranty for the improvements for a minimum of two years from the date of final acceptance by the city.

(v) Be forfeited to the city if the applicant does not complete the requirements within the agreed-upon time limit, or if the applicant has created a hazard causing imminent danger to the public health and safety within or adjacent to the development which the developer fails to correct.

(vi) Cover any costs, attorney’s fees, and liquidation damages resulting from delay or failure to meet the deadline.

(d) Construction. Construction of improvements may begin in accordance with the agreement. During this phase of development, the applicant shall be required to prepare record drawings of all improvements. Special attention shall be given to underground utilities.

(e) Acceptance of Improvements. Upon completion of the improvements, the applicant shall submit record drawings to the public works department of the street and sanitary/storm sewer plan profiles. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.230 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS (C AND MX)

Sections:

17.230.010    Purpose.

17.230.020    Uses.

17.230.030    Development standards.


17.230.010 Purpose.

(1) Commercial (C) District. These commercial areas are intended to provide for the regular shopping and service needs for the community and adjacent service areas. Typical allowed uses include convenience food markets, beauty and barber shops, bakeries and service industries. These areas are held to a high standard of site plan review due to the close proximity of residential zones. Development activity shall meet, as applicable, the design guidelines contained in this code.

(2) The mixed-use (MX) district requires mixed-use developments to provide the community with a mix of mutually supporting retail, service, office and medium- or high-density residential uses. The zone is designed to promote cohesive site planning and design that integrates and interconnects two or more land uses into a development that is mutually supportive. It can provide incentives to develop a higher density, active, urban environment than generally would be found in a suburban community. This type of development is further expected to:

(a) Achieve the goals and objectives of the city’s comprehensive plan and capital facilities plans;

(b) Enhance livability, environmental quality and economic vitality;

(c) Maximize efficient use of public facilities and services;

(d) Create a safe, attractive and convenient environment for a variety of uses including living, working, recreating and traveling.

(3) Applicability.

(a) General. The provisions of this section shall be applied to parcels or groups of contiguous parcels designated mixed-use on the city’s official zoning map.

(b) Interpretation. If the requirements of the mixed-use district conflict with other regulations, the more stringent shall apply.

(4) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “Mixed-use development” shall mean a group of structures planned as a single entity and containing within and/or among them a variety of complementary and/or mutually supporting uses (such as housing, offices, retail, public service or entertainment).

(b) “Net acre” means an acre of the developable portion of the site, which is derived from the total (gross) acreage of the site minus the area required to be, or voluntarily, set aside, as critical and environmentally sensitive lands and the corresponding buffers, public rights-of-way, road easements and any similar public facilities. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.230.020 Uses.

The uses set out in Table 17.230.020 are examples of uses allowable in the commercial and mixed-use districts. Where a specific use is not listed in the table, the director shall determine the most appropriate similar use in the table. P = Permitted use; C = Conditional use; X = Prohibited use.

Table 17.230.020 – Uses  

	Use	C	MX

	Residential

	Residential uses above the ground floor or story and up to 30% of ground floor or story	P	P

	Existing single-family residential uses may be rebuilt if discontinued for a period of not less than 24 months	P	P

	Tourist habitation/bed and breakfast/home occupations	P	P

	Medium density residential	C	P

	Retail Sales – Food

	Markets in excess of 15,000 square feet gross floor area	P	C

	Markets – Under 15,000 square feet of gross floor area	P	P

	Bakery – Primarily retail outlet (greater than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area)	P	P

	Bakery – Primarily retail outlet (less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area)	P	C

	Retail Sales – General

	General retailer (over 25,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	P

	General retailer (under 25,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	C

	Single purpose/specialty retailers (less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	P

	Single purpose/specialty retailers (greater than 10,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	C

	Yard and garden supplies, including nurseries	P	X

	Adult entertainment	C	X

	Retail Sales – Restaurants, Drinking Establishments

	Restaurants and drinking establishments	P	P

	Drive-through, drive-in or drive-up facilities subject to the requirements of CBDC 17.335.070	P	P

	Retail Sales and Services – Automotive and Related Automotive and Equipment

	Sales/rentals, light equipment – Sale, retail, or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of autos, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers with generally less than a 10,000-pound gross cargo weight together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include automobile dealers, car rental agencies, or recreational vehicle sales and rental agencies, and small boat sales.	C	X

	Sales/rentals, heavy equipment – Sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of heavy construction equipment, trucks, and aircraft, together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include aircraft dealers, farm, logging, and heavy construction equipment dealers, or tractor trailers.	C	X

	Repairs, light equipment – Repair of automobiles and the sale, installation, and servicing of automobile equipment and parts but excluding body repairs and painting. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto or motorcycle repair garages, or auto glass shops.	P	P

	Repairs, heavy equipment – Repair of trucks, construction and logging equipment, as well as the sale, installation, or servicing of automotive equipment and parts, together with body repairs, painting, and steam cleaning. Typical uses include truck transmission shops, body shops, or motor freight maintenance groups.	X	X

	Manufactured home sales	C	X

	Cleaning – Washing and polishing of automobiles. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes.	P	C

	Fleet storage – Fleet storage of vehicles used regularly in business operation but not for the long-term storage of vehicles, nor for vehicles available for sale. Typical uses include taxi fleets, mobile catering truck storage, or auto storage garages.	P	X

	Commercial off-street parking facilities	P	C

	Storage, nonoperating vehicles – Storage of nonoperating motor vehicles. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-away or impound yards.	P	X

	Transportation terminals	 	 

	– Freight	C	X

	– People	P	P

	Retail Sales – Building Materials and Farm Equipment

	Lumber and other building materials stores and yards, with only incidental cutting and planing of products sold	P	X

	Heating and plumbing equipment, including incidental fabrication (operated entirely within an enclosed building)	P	C

	Hardware, home repair and supply stores (over 100,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	X

	Hardware, home repair and supply stores (10,000 to 100,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	C

	Hardware, home repair and supply stores (under 10,000 square feet gross floor area)	P	P

	Farm equipment and implement dealer	P	X

	Hay, grain, and feed stores	P	X

	Retail Sales – Products (Finished product retailers with primary fabrication or assembly on site and within an entirely enclosed building.)

	Uses of less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area	P	P

	Uses of 10,000 square feet gross floor area or greater	P	P

	Services – Personal

	Convenience sales and personal services – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed small personal items or services. These include various general retail sales and personal services of an appropriate size and scale to meet the above criterion. Typical uses include neighborhood grocery, drug stores, laundromat/dry cleaners, or barbershops.	P	P

	Personal services, general – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services of a nonprofessional nature, but excludes services classified as “spectator sports and entertainment,” or “participant sports and recreation,” or “group care.” Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, or reducing salons, laundromats, or dance instruction.	P	P

	Funeral and interment services: undertaking – Undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals	P	P

	Marijuana retail sales subject to the requirements of CBDC 17.335.080	P	P

	Services – General

	Business support service – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services of a clerical, employment, protective, or minor processing nature to firms rather than individuals and where the storage of goods other than samples is prohibited. Typical uses include secretarial services, telephone answering services, blueprint services, or printing and duplicating firms.	P	P

	Professional and administrative services – Offices or private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provision of professional, executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, legal offices, or architectural firms.	P	P

	Building/property maintenance service – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.	P	P

	Moving and storage (mini-storage)	C	X

	Financial, insurance, and real estate services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial, insurance, real estate, or securities brokerage services. Typical uses include banks, insurance agencies, or real estate firms.	P	P

	Event facilities (less than 10,000 square feet)	P	C

	Event facilities (greater than 10,000 square feet)	P	P

	RV storage	P	C

	Services – Tourist Habitation

	Lodging – Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board. Typical uses include hotels or motels.	P	P

	Campground – Campground services involving transient habitation areas for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks.	C	X

	Services – Medical and Health

	Hospitals	X	X

	Medical services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, or rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses, and other health personnel as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services	P	P

	Ambulance services	P	P

	Sanitaria, convalescent and rest homes	P	P

	Orthopedic equipment and supplies, rental, sales and services	P	P

	Services – Animal Sales and Services

	Auction – Auctioning of livestock on a wholesale or retail basis with incidental storage of animals produced off property not exceeding a 48-hour period. Typical uses include animal auctions or livestock auction yards.	X	X

	Animal sales and service: grooming – Grooming of dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops.	P	P

	Animal sales and service: kennel – Boarding, raising, caring, and training services for dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include boarding kennels or dog training centers.	C	X

	Animal sales and service: pet shop – Establishment for the retail sale of household pets and pet supplies	P	P

	Animal sales and service: veterinary (small animals) – Veterinary services for small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, or animal hospitals.	C	C

	Veterinary (large animals) – Veterinary services for large animals. Typical uses include animal hospitals or veterinary hospitals.	C	X

	Animal waste processing – The processing of animal waste and by-products, including, but not limited to, animal manure, animal bedding waste, and similar by-products of an animal-raising agricultural operation, for use as a commercial fertilizer or soil amendment and including composting for commercial purposes	X	X

	Aquaculture – Raising, feeding, planting, harvesting fish and shellfish, and associated facilities as necessary for such use, including commercial harvest of naturally occurring clam beds	X	X

	Services – Amusement

	Community recreation – Recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses typically associated with parks, playfields, golf courses, or community recreation buildings	C	C

	Theaters, indoor	P	P

	Drive-in theaters, stadium and arena facilities	C	C

	Participant sports and recreation: indoor – Those uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, skating rinks (ice and/or roller), billiard/pool parlors, video arcades, swimming pools, physical fitness centers, or racquetball centers.	P	C

	Participant sports and recreation: outdoor – Those uses conducted in open facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or swimming pools.	P	C

	Zoos, circuses, carnivals, or amusement rides, excluding temporary civic events endorsed by the city council	C	X

	Services – Educational

	Nursery schools, preschools	P	C

	Day care facilities	P	P

	Libraries	P	P

	Vocational schools	P	C

	Artistic studios and schools including but not limited to dance, music and martial arts (less than 10,000 square feet)	P	P

	Artistic studios and schools including but not limited to dance, music and martial arts (greater than 10,000 square feet)	P	C

	Public parks, parkways, recreation facilities, trails and related facilities	P	C

	Public/private educational institutions	P	C

	Services – Membership Organizations

	Business, professional and religious (not including churches)	P	P

	Civic, social, fraternal, charitable, labor and political (less than 5,000 square feet)	P	P

	Civic, social, fraternal, charitable, labor and political (greater than 5,000 square feet)	P	P

	Churches	C	C

	Distribution Facilities (In conjunction with a permitted use, all activities, except vehicle storage, located entirely within an enclosed building.)

	Distribution facilities	C	X

	Public Services and Facilities

	Buildings entirely dedicated to public services, such as city hall, police and fire substations	P	P

	Sewer, water and utility transmission lines	P	C

	Wireless communications facilities	P	P

	Museums, historic and cultural exhibits and the like	P	P

	U.S. post offices	P	P

	Public transit facilities including park and ride facilities	P	P

	Bus shelters (subject to a Type II site plan review)	P	P

	Accessory Uses and Activities

	On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, subject to state siting criteria	X	X

	Drive-through or drive-up facilities	C	C

	Open Air Activities

	Open air display of plants and produce in conjunction with a permitted use	P	P

	Open air storage of materials	C	C

	Open air work activities such as restaurants, portable walk-up vendors (not including drive-through facilities) such as espresso carts, flower stands and food stands, plant nurseries and other uses generally conducted outside in conjunction with a permitted commercial use, unless otherwise prohibited by this title	P	P

	Open air storage of company vehicles, such as cars and light duty trucks, in conjunction with a permitted use	P	C

	Other Uses

	Temporary uses	P	P

	Solid waste handling and disposal sites	X	X

	Agricultural uses	X	X

	All uses or services not listed, unless determined to be similar to a listed use	X	X

[Ord. 513 § 7 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.230.030 Development standards.

(1) New lots and structures and additions to structures subject to this section shall comply with the applicable standards for lots and building height, and setbacks in Table 17.230.030. Site plan review is required for all new development and modifications to existing permitted development unless expressly exempted by this title.

(2) Landscaping.

(a) In commercial and mixed-use zoning districts, not less than 15 percent of the total lot area shall be landscaped. Pedestrian plazas, sidewalks over the minimum width and other pedestrian amenities may be used to meet the required landscaping at a one-to-one ratio.

(b) All heating and air equipment shall be appropriately screened from public view. This does not apply to roof-mounted equipment.

(c) All storage and trash areas must be enclosed and screened from public view.

(3) Development Standards.

(a) Residential/Commercial. All residential or mixed residential/commercial areas shall provide a minimum of eight residential units per net acre and a maximum of 24 residential units per net acre.

(b) Lot Standards.

(i) All development applications in the MX zone shall comply with the applicable standards for lot area dimensions, building height, and setbacks in Table 17.230.030.

(ii) Single-family structures that are used for accessory commercial uses shall use the single-family attached/detached development standards.

(iii) The maximum building height shall exclude unique architectural features such as steeples, chimneys, flagpoles, electronic aerials, and cupolas.

(iv) There shall be no setback restrictions in the commercial zone other than those imposed by the building code, except where the property abuts low density residential (LDR-6) zone district, unless otherwise noted.

Table 17.230.030 – Lot Standards 

	Standard	Commercial	Mixed	Single/Multifamily

	Attached	Detached

	Minimum lot width	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet	30 feet

	Minimum lot depth	60 feet	60 feet	60 feet	60 feet

	Minimum lot area	5,000 

square feet	5,000 

square feet	5,000

square feet	3,000 square feet

	Maximum lot area	N/A	N/A	N/A	15,000 square feet

	Maximum lot coverage	85%	85%	75%	65%

	Maximum height	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet

	Minimum front setback	0 feet	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Min. garage setback from public street	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet

	Minimum garage setback from alley	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet

	Minimum side setback	0 feet or 10 feet abutting single-family zones	0 feet or 10 feet abutting single-family zones	0 feet attached, 

5 feet nonattached	5 feet

	Minimum street side setback	0 feet	0 feet	10 feet	10 feet

	Minimum rear setback	0 feet or 10 feet abutting single-family zones	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet

(c) Site Planning Design Guidelines.

(i) Commercial and Mixed-Use Development.

(A) Blank walls facing public streets are discouraged. Features providing visual interest such as windows (genuine, false, or display), artwork, varied building materials, relief panels, trim, balconies, ledges or other techniques shall be employed to enhance building facades facing public streets.

(B) Rooflines shall be a minimum of 4:12 for pitched roofs. Lower pitched roofs or parapet rooflines shall provide additional architectural detailing including but not limited to: cornice, cap, relief panels, bay windows, shade projections, rain protection, eaves, dormers, ledges or overhangs as approved by the director.

(C) Rain protection shall be located at the primary entrance that is effectively designed to provide a minimum of 50 square feet of rain protection. This protection may use a single or combination of techniques such as awning, eave, alcove, airlock, recessed entry or porte-cochere.

(D) Finished surfaces on building elevations shall emphasize use of architectural grade natural building products such as wood, masonry, metal, glass, stucco, fiber cement, cultured stone or other stone materials. Use of plywood, vinyl, plastic composites, fiberglass or similar are prohibited unless otherwise permitted by the director.

(E) A diverse use of color is encouraged to display individuality within the community. Finished surfaces suitable for painting shall incorporate a color palette of at least two colors consisting of a base color and an accent (trim color). Repetitive or predictable alternate color schemes are discouraged.

(F) Hardscaping (i.e., curb-to-facade sidewalks with pedestrian amenities) may be substituted in lieu of landscaping requirements subject to review and approval of the review authority.

(4) Special Limitations on Uses. All uses in the MX district(s) shall meet all of the following conditions:

(a) Odor, noise, emissions, vibration, heat and glare (except for exterior lighting) shall be controlled within the confines of the building or structure.

(b) No movement of heavy equipment on and off the site shall occur, except for truck deliveries.

(c) No outdoor testing of products or processes shall take place on the site.

(d) No highly combustible, explosive, or hazardous materials or waste shall be permitted on site. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.235 INDUSTRIAL-COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (I-C)

Sections:

17.235.010    Purpose.

17.235.020    Permitted uses.

17.235.030    Dimensional requirements.

17.235.040    Industrial-commercial development standards.


17.235.010 Purpose.

It is the city’s intent that industrial uses be encouraged in accordance with the comprehensive plan and that potential industrial areas be retained as an essential element for a vital economic base for the population of Coos Bay. The intent of this district is to provide suitable areas for a variety of industrial and commercial uses, including manufacturing, wholesale trade and distribution activities. The industrial-commercial district is intended to contain uses that will not generate excessive noise, pollution, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation and other violation characteristics. Conditional uses are those which may have some violation characteristics that may be mitigated and where such uses may be appropriately sited in Coos Bay. Industrial-commercial districts are only intended to be located in areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets and highways. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.235.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses in the industrial-commercial (I-C) zone are permitted (P), conditional (C) or prohibited (X) as indicated in Table 17.235.020.

Table 17.235.020 – I-C Uses  

	Use	I-C

	Residential

	Residential uses above the ground floor or story and up to 30 percent of ground floor or story when secondary to commercial uses. Including residences for a caretaker or night watchman.	P

	Existing single-family residential uses may be rebuilt if discontinued for a period of not less than 24 months	P

	Tourist habitation/bed and breakfast and home occupations 	P

	Medium density residential	C

	Institutionalized residential-living facilities, such as personal-care homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes, group homes, continuing care retirement facilities and similar uses	C

	Homeless shelter	P

	Retail Sales – Food and Beverages

	Markets in excess of 15,000 square feet gross floor area	P

	Markets – under 15,000 square feet of gross floor area	P

	Bakery – primarily retail outlet (greater than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area)	P

	Bakery – primarily retail outlet (less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area)	P

	Retail Sales – General

	General retailer	P

	Yard and garden supplies, including nurseries	P

	Adult entertainment	P

	Retail Sales – Restaurants, Drinking Establishments

	Eating and drinking establishments	P

	Wineries, breweries and distilleries	P

	Retail Sales and Services – Automotive and Equipment

	Sales/rentals, light equipment – Sale, retail, or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of autos, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers with generally less than a 10,000-pound gross cargo weight, together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include automobile dealers, car rental agencies, or recreational vehicle sales and rental agencies, and small boat sales.	P

	Sales/rentals, heavy equipment – Sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of heavy construction equipment, trucks, and aircraft, together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include aircraft dealers, farm, logging, and heavy construction equipment dealers, or tractor trailers.	P

	Repairs, light equipment – Repair of automobiles and the sale, installation, and servicing of automobile equipment and parts but excluding body repairs and painting. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto or motorcycle repair garages, or auto glass shops.	P

	Repairs, heavy equipment – Repair of trucks, construction and logging equipment, as well as the sale, installation, or servicing of automotive equipment and parts, together with body repairs, painting, and steam cleaning. Typical uses include truck transmission shops, body shops, or motor freight maintenance groups.	P

	Manufactured home sales	P

	Cleaning – Washing and polishing of automobiles. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes.	P

	Fleet Storage – Fleet storage of vehicles used regularly in business operation but not for the long-term storage of vehicles, nor for vehicles available for sale. Typical uses include taxi fleets, mobile catering truck storage, or auto storage garages.	P

	Commercial off-street parking facilities	P

	Storage, nonoperating vehicles – Storage of nonoperating motor vehicles. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-away or impound yards.	P

	Tire retreading and recapping	P

	Junkyards, wrecked motor vehicle compounds and used auto or other vehicle parts yards	C

	Welding and machine shops	P

	Transportation Terminals

	Freight	P

	People	P

	Distribution facilities	P

	Bulk gasoline storage and fuel oil distributors	C

	Retail Sales – Building Materials and Farm Equipment

	Lumber and other building materials stores and yards, with only incidental cutting and planing of products sold	P

	Heating and plumbing equipment, including incidental fabrication (operated entirely within an enclosed building)	P

	Hardware, home repair and supply stores (over 100,000 square feet gross floor area) 	P

	Hardware, home repair and supply stores (10,000 to 100,000 square feet gross floor area)	P

	Hardware, home repair and supply stores (under 10,000 square feet gross floor area)	P

	Farm equipment and implement dealer	P

	Hay, grain, and feed stores 	P

	Lumber yards, saw mills	C

	Retail Sales – Products (finished product retailers with primary fabrication or assembly on site and within an entirely enclosed building)

	Uses of less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area	P

	Services – Personal

	Convenience sales and personal services – Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed small personal items or services. These include various general retail sales and personal services of an appropriate size and scale to meet the above criterion. Typical uses include neighborhood grocery, drug stores, laundromat/dry cleaners, or barbershops.	P

	Personal services, general – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services of a nonprofessional nature, but excludes services classified as “spectator sports and entertainment,” or “participant sports and recreation,” or “group care.” Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, or reducing salons, laundromats, or dance instruction.	P

	Funeral and Interment Services

	Undertaking – Undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals	P

	Cemetery – Places primarily for the burial of human remains; may include crematory and interring services. Typical uses include mausoleums, columbariums, and crematoriums.	P

	Cremating/interring – Crematory services involving the purification and reduction of the human body by fire and/or the keeping of human bodies other than in cemeteries. Typical uses include crematories, crematoriums, columbariums, and mausoleums.	P

	Services – General

	Business support service – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services of a clerical, employment, protective, or minor processing nature to firms rather than individuals and where the storage of goods other than samples is prohibited. Typical uses include secretarial services, telephone answering services, blueprint services, or printing and duplicating firms.	P

	Professional and administrative services – Offices or private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provision of professional, executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, legal offices, or architectural firms.	P

	Building/property maintenance service – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.	P

	Moving and storage (mini-storage)	P

	Financial, insurance, and real estate services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial, insurance, real estate, or securities brokerage services. Typical uses include banks, insurance agencies, or real estate firms.	P

	Event facilities (commercial recreation facilities enclosed and unenclosed and auditoriums and civic centers)	P

	Art galleries, libraries and museums	P

	RV storage	P

	Services – Tourist Habitation

	Lodging – Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board. Typical uses include hotels or motels.	P

	Campground – Campground services involving transient habitation areas for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks.	P

	Services – Medical and Health

	Hospitals	P

	Medical services – Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, or rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses, and other health personnel as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services	P

	Ambulance services	P

	Sanitaria, convalescent and rest homes	P

	Orthopedic equipment and supplies, rental, sales and services	P

	Research and scientific laboratories	P

	Services – Animal Sales and Services

	Auction – Auctioning of livestock on a wholesale or retail basis with incidental storage of animals produced off-property not exceeding a 48-hour period. Typical uses include animal auctions or livestock auction yards.	C

	Animal sales and service: grooming – Grooming of dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops.	P

	Animal sales and service: kennel – Boarding, raising, caring, and training services for dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include boarding kennels or dog training centers.	P

	Animal sales and service: pet shop – Establishment for the retail sale of household pets and pet supplies	P

	Animal sales and service: veterinary (small animals) – Veterinary services for small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, or animal hospitals.	P

	Veterinary (large animals) – Veterinary services for large animals. Typical uses include animal hospitals or veterinary hospitals.	P

	Animal waste processing – The processing of animal waste and by-products including, but not limited to, animal manure, animal bedding waste, and similar by-products of an animal-raising agricultural operation, for use as a commercial fertilizer or soil amendment and including composting for commercial purposes	X

	Aquaculture – Raising, feeding, planting, harvesting fish and shellfish, and associated facilities as necessary for such use, including commercial harvest of naturally occurring clam beds	X

	Exterminators and pest control businesses	P

	Services – Amusement

	Community recreation – Recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses typically associated with parks, playfields, golf courses, or community recreation buildings	C

	Theaters, indoor	P

	Drive-in theaters, stadium and arena facilities	C

	Participant sports and recreation: indoor – Those uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, skating rinks (ice and/or roller), billiard/pool parlors, video arcades, swimming pools, physical fitness centers, or racquetball centers.	P

	Participant sports and recreation: outdoor – Those uses conducted in open facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or swimming pools.	P

	Zoos, circuses, carnivals, or amusement rides, excluding temporary civic events endorsed by the city council	C

	Services – Educational

	Nursery schools, preschools	P

	Day care facilities	P

	Libraries	P

	Public/private educational institutions including colleges, universities and vocational schools	P

	Artistic studios and schools including but not limited to dance, music and martial arts (less than 10,000 square feet)	P

	Public parks, parkways, recreation facilities, trails and related facilities	P

	Services – Membership Organizations

	Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of assembly for membership groups	P

	Civic, social, fraternal, charitable, labor and political (less than 5,000 square feet) 	P

	Civic, social, fraternal, charitable, labor and political (greater than 5,000 square feet)	P

	Religious assembly	P

	Public Services and Facilities

	Buildings entirely dedicated to public services, such as City Hall, police and fire substations	P

	Sewer, water and utility transmission lines	P

	Wireless communications facilities	P

	Museums, historic and cultural exhibits and the like	P

	U.S. post offices	P

	Public transit facilities, including park and ride facilities	P

	Bus shelters (subject to a Type II site plan review)	P

	Utilities and communication facilities, such as telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, electric substations and public television stations	P

	Radio, television and cellular phone towers and antennas	P

	Transportation, communication and utility facilities, not otherwise specifically permitted	P

	Accessory Uses and Activities

	On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, subject to state siting criteria	C

	Drive-through or drive-up facilities subject to the requirements of CBDC 17.335.070	P

	Accessory uses and structures which are incidental to one or more permitted principal uses in this zone	P

	Open Air Activities

	Open air display of plants and produce in conjunction with a permitted use	P

	Open air storage of materials	P

	Open air work activities such as restaurants, portable walk-up vendors (not including drive-through facilities) such as espresso carts, flower stands and food stands, plant nurseries and other uses generally conducted outside in conjunction with a permitted commercial use, unless otherwise prohibited by this title	P

	Open air storage of company vehicles, such as cars and light duty trucks, in conjunction with a permitted use	P

	Storage buildings and storage yards, for nonhazardous raw materials and finished products	P

	Sand, gravel, topsoil, clay, dirt, precious metals, gems or other natural resources; and paper	P

	Manufacturing

	Manufacturing, fabrication, assembling and packaging activities, including accessory storage, for the following products and/or materials: cloth, fiber, fur and hair; electrical and communication equipment; cosmetics, drugs and pharmaceuticals; food, beverage, dairy and tobacco products; and medical, dental, optical precision and surgical instruments and equipment	P

	Manufacturing, fabrication, assembling, processing, canning, packaging, compounding, storage and treatment activities for the following activities and/or materials: brick, concrete, cement, clay, mortar, plaster and tile; chemicals and floor coverings; extraction or removal of sand, gravel, topsoil, clay, dirt, precious metals, gems or other natural resources; and paper	P

	Marijuana-related businesses subject to the requirements of CBDC 17.335.080	P

	Cold storage plants, frozen food lockers and ice manufacture	P

	Asphalt plants	X

	Fertilizer manufacture	X

	Explosives manufacture and storage	X

	Acid manufacture	X

	Rubber manufacture	X

	Other Uses

	Dry-cleaning plants	P

	Solid waste handling and disposal sites	C

	Temporary uses which may be approved by the director	P

	Warehouses, wholesale and storage establishments, mail order houses and distribution facilities	P

	Agricultural uses indoors	P

	Agricultural uses outdoors	C

	Conical burners and incinerators, including biomedical waste	X

	Land fill	X

	Paper and pulp mills	X

	Recycling plants, including any processing facilities	X

	All uses or services not listed, unless determined to be similar to a listed use	X

[Ord. 513 § 7 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 486 § 2, 2017; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.235.030 Dimensional requirements.

Table 17.235.030 establishes dimensional requirements for industrial-commercial districts:

Table 17.235.030 – I-C Dimensional Requirements 

	Standard	I-C

	Minimum lot size	No requirements

	Minimum lot frontage	No requirements

	Minimum lot width	No requirements

	Front and street side yard building setback	10 feet side yard setback if abutting residential zone

	Side and rear yard building setback	10 feet if abutting residential zone

	Minimum distance between principal buildings	No requirement other than those imposed by the building code

	Maximum building coverage	No requirement other than those imposed by the building code

	Maximum height	No requirement other than those imposed by the building code

[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.235.040 Industrial-commercial development standards.

Developments in the I-C zoning district shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards:

(1) Shared access points with abutting or adjacent development shall be provided whenever practicable.

(2) New land divisions creating lots of less than one acre are not permitted unless consistent with a site plan approved under the standards of this title.

(3) Site plan review is required for all new development and modifications to existing permitted development unless expressly exempted by this title.

(4) Service Roads, Spur Tracks, Hard Stands, Outside Storage Area. No service road, hard stand or outside storage area, or similar use shall be permitted within required setbacks adjoining residential districts.

(5) Fences and Walls. Sight-obscuring fencing or walls, visible from the public right-of-way, shall be screened with dense sight-obscuring plant materials.

(6) Site Landscaping and Design Plan. Development within this zoning district shall be subject to site plan review prior to the issuance of a building permit; which review may be conducted concurrent with the processing of building permits. In addition to the site plan application requirements, the following requirements shall apply:

(a) Blank walls are discouraged next to residential zones. If a blank wall is adjacent to residential zones the applicant shall provide and maintain a vegetative buffer of at least 11 feet high that creates a varied appearance to the blank wall. Other features such as false or display windows, artwork, and varied building materials are acceptable.

(b) Building facades facing public streets shall have 50 percent of the total surface area of the wall transparent.

(c) Parking areas adjacent to rights-of-way shall be physically separated from the rights-of-way by landscaping or other features to a height of three feet. A combination of walls, berms and landscape materials is highly recommended. Sidewalks may be placed within this landscaping if the street is defined as a collector or arterial with a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or above, in order to separate the pedestrian from heavy or high-speed traffic on adjacent roads.

(d) Primary building entrances shall be physically oriented to the street or to a pedestrian walkway.

(e) If a development is located within 250 feet of an existing or proposed transit stop, the applicant shall provide a transit stop and shelter directly adjacent or as close as possible to the main building entrance as the transit authority requires.

(f) All off-street parking areas shall be planted with a minimum of one deciduous tree for every six parking spaces. Trees shall be of such species and spacing that a canopy effect shall result. Trees must be dispersed throughout the parking lot.

(g) Required setback areas adjacent to streets and those abutting a residential district shall be continuously maintained in lawn or live ground cover. Allowed uses in these areas are bikeways, pedestrian paths and water quality facilities.

(h) A minimum of 20 percent of the site shall be landscaped. Vegetated stormwater treatment facilities and pedestrian plazas may be used to satisfy the requirement. To qualify as a pedestrian plaza the following conditions must be met:

(i) Minimum Size. A minimum of 10 feet depth and width with a minimum size of 650 square feet.

(ii) Paving. A minimum of 80 percent of the area shall be paved in a decorative paver or textured, colored concrete. Asphalt is prohibited as a paver in pedestrian plazas.

(i) Structures and open spaces should be clustered on site to maximize the campus and open space qualities within the development.

(j) When security fencing is required, it shall be a combination of solid wall, wrought iron, dense hedges or other similar treatment. Long expanses of fences or walls shall be interspersed with trees or hedges to break up the appearance of the wall at least every 50 feet for a distance of at least five feet.

(7) Pedestrian Access Plan. An on-site pedestrian circulation system must be provided, which connects the street to the public entrances of the structure(s) on site.

(a) The circulation system shall be hard-surfaced and be at least five feet wide.

(b) Where the system crosses driveways, parking, and/or loading areas, the system must be clearly identifiable through the use of elevation changes, speed bumps, varied paving materials or other similar methods approved by the reviewing authority and in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

(c) The on-site pedestrian circulation system and parking areas must be lighted to a level which provides adequate lighting so that parking areas can be used safely when natural light is not present.

(d) The pedestrian system must connect the site to adjacent streets and transit stops. The pedestrian system must also connect on-site public open space or parks, commercial, office and institutional developments to adjacent like uses and developments for all buildings set back 45 feet or farther from the street lot line, when existing development does not preclude such connection. Development patterns must not preclude eventual site-to-site connections, even if an adjoining site is not planned for development at the time of the applicant’s development.

(8) Performance Standards.

(a) No land or structure shall be used or occupied within this district unless the activity complies with the following minimum performance standards:

(i) Maximum permissible noise levels shall not exceed permitted levels measured at the appropriate measuring points established by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. If there is doubt that the proposed use will violate these standards or if a valid complaint has been registered about the level of noise, the owner or agent may be required to show written compliance with state regulations.

(ii) Vibration. Vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles, trains, and aircraft, which is discernible without instruments at the property line of the use concerned, is prohibited.

(iii) Smoke and Particulate Matter. Air emissions must be within legal limits as approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(iv) Odors. The emission of noxious gases or matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property line of the use creating such odors is prohibited.

(v) Heat and Glare. Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat and glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Exterior lighting shall be designed to shield surrounding streets and land uses from violation and glare.

(b) Administration. As a condition for the granting of a building permit and/or site plan approval, at the request of the responsible official, the applicant shall furnish information sufficient to determine the degree of compliance with the standards in this section. Such request may include submission of continuous records of operation for periodic checks to assure maintenance of standards, and special surveys.

(9) Light and Glare Standards.

(a) Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat and glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.

(b) Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed away from lots in adjacent uses.

(c) Interior lighting in parking structures shall be shielded to minimize nighttime glare affecting lots in adjacent uses.

(d) When nonconforming exterior lighting is replaced, new lighting shall conform to the requirements of this section.

(10) Outdoor Storage Standards.

(a) All storage areas (including but not limited to areas used to store raw materials, finished and partially finished products and wastes) shall be screened from adjoining properties or public rights-of-way. Storage areas which adjoin residential districts or in areas where differences in elevation defeat the purpose of this requirement shall be screened with a fence which shall be placed on top of a berm in order to effectively screen the use.

(b) Screening shall be placed on all sides of storage areas other than where a building wall would act as a screen.

(c) Outdoor storage is prohibited as follows:

(i) In floodways;

(ii) On slopes greater than 15 percent;

(iii) In parking stalls;

(iv) In areas where outdoor storage or display causes traffic or pedestrian circulation problems as determined by the responsible official or where a minimum five-foot-wide walkway does not remain clear and free of obstructions;

(v) Any materials that attract animals, birds or vermin; and

(vi) In fire lanes.

(d) The applicant shall demonstrate that both outdoor storage and the screening for outdoor storage are in the appropriate locations on the site to minimize impacts, given the operational practices of the facility.

(11) Vibration. Site-generated ground vibrations shall not be perceptible by a person of ordinary sensitivity, without instruments, at any point of any property line of the property on which a use or structure is located. Vibrations from temporary construction activities and vehicles that leave the property (such as trucks, trains, airplanes and helicopters) are excluded.

(12) Electromagnetic Interference. Electric fields and magnetic fields shall not be created that adversely affect the normal operation of equipment or instruments or normal radio, telephone, or television reception from off the premises where the activity is conducted. This section does not apply to telecommunication facilities which are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission under the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 or its successor. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.240 WATERFRONT HERITAGE DISTRICT (WH)

Sections:

17.240.010    Intent.

17.240.020    WH zoning subdistricts.

17.240.030    Permitted uses.

17.240.040    Conditional uses.

17.240.050    Uses expressly prohibited.

17.240.060    Preexisting uses.

17.240.070    Property development requirements.

17.240.080    Architectural design.


17.240.010 Intent.

The WH district is created to achieve the following objectives:

(1) To diversify the local economy.

(2) To preserve the city’s historical waterfront and guide private and public development in a direction that strengthens a relationship to that setting.

(3) To guide the construction of private and public improvements to evoke historic architectural styles which existed in the Coos Bay area between the 1870s and the 1920s.

(4) To provide for a mix of uses and improvements that include:

(a) Existing waterfront industrial uses;

(b) New water-oriented, water-related and non-water-related service businesses;

(c) Amenities and attractions which encourage public access to and enjoyment of the waterfront;

(d) Urban residential opportunities; and

(e) Non-water-dependent industrial uses.

(5) To provide an opportunity to reclaim the city’s waterfront heritage and express pride in our past and present by redevelopment which evokes, but does not necessarily duplicate, the appearance of the early days of Euro-American settlement.

(6) To promote physical, cultural and commercial links among Front Street, the boardwalk and the downtown core area. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.020 WH zoning subdistricts.

The WH district shall be made up of three zoning subdistricts defined as follows:

(1) WH-1, Core Area. The area bounded by Alder Avenue to the south, U.S. 101 (North Bayshore) to the west, Date Avenue to the north and the Coos Bay waterway to the east.

(2) WH-2, Transition Area. The area bounded by Commercial Avenue to the south, U.S. 101 (North Bayshore) to the west, Fir Avenue to the north, and the Coos Bay waterway to the east, except that area defined as WH-1.

(3) WH-3, Central Dock Area. The area bounded by Fir Avenue on the south, U.S. 101 (North Bayshore) to the west, Ivy Avenue to the north and the Coos Bay waterway to the east. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.030 Permitted uses.

The following are permitted uses in the WH district:

(1) For those areas lying east of Front Street, including the WH-3 subdistrict, all commercial, industrial, and civic uses which are water-dependent or water-related are permitted as allowed by the Coos Bay estuary management plan.

(2) Uses which are not water-dependent or water-related are permitted as set forth in Table 17.240.080. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.040 Conditional uses.

The following uses are permitted in the WH district if authorized in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses:

(1) Civic Use Types. Bus shelter (administrative conditional use, see Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses).

(2) Commercial Use Types.

(a) Business equipment sales and service.

(b) Repair service, consumer.

(c) Tourist habitation – waterfront inn, WH-2 and WH-3 subdistricts only.

(3) Industrial Use Types. Manufacturing, WH-3 subdistrict only.

(4) Horticulture use types. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.050 Uses expressly prohibited.

The following uses are expressly prohibited in the WH district:

(1) Civic Use Types.

(a) Educational service.

(2) Commercial Use Types.

(a) Automobile and Equipment.

(i) Cleaning.

(ii) Fleet storage.

(iii) Repairs, light and heavy equipment.

(iv) Sales/rental, light and heavy equipment, except boats.

(v) Storage, nonoperating vehicles.

(b) Agricultural sales/services.

(c) Building/property maintenance service.

(d) Fuel sales, other than marine.

(e) Transportation services, except rail and marine. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.060 Preexisting uses.

Notwithstanding Chapter 17.328 CBDC, Nonconforming Uses, uses legally established on May 1, 2001, the date the WH district was established, which would not otherwise be permitted in the WH district, are deemed to be preexisting uses and are allowed to continue on the same lot(s) or parcel(s), subject to the provisions of this section.

(1) Changes and/or Expansion.

(a) Any preexisting use which is changed to a permitted use shall not afterwards be changed back to the preexisting use.

(b) A preexisting use may be expanded and/or altered on the same lot. Expansion and/or alteration of improvements housing a preexisting use may occur on the same lot(s) or parcel(s), provided improvements connected with such expansion and/or alteration conform to the property development requirements of CBDC 17.240.070, Property development requirements, which includes design review standards. However, additional or different uses, not permitted by the WH district, are not allowed.

(2) Discontinuation. If a preexisting non-water-dependent or water-related use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, the use shall not be reestablished. Further uses on the premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Restoration. An improvement housing a preexisting use which is damaged by fire, natural disaster, or other casualty may be restored to its previous condition and the preexisting use resumed, provided such restoration is commenced within a period of 180 days after the event constituting the casualty. This limitation may be waived or extended by the director by filing a request not more than 160 days after the event constituting the casualty upon a showing of good cause by the owner. A decision by the director may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 17.130 CBDC, Procedures.

(4) Maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit normal repair, maintenance, and nonstructural alterations, nor the alteration, strengthening, or restoration of any improvement housing a preexisting use to safe condition as required by law. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.070 Property development requirements.

The following property development requirements shall apply to all land and improvements in the WH district:

(1) For property adjacent to the waterfront, primary ground level uses that are not water-dependent or water-related and are permitted or conditionally permitted in the WH zone are allowed, provided the following standards are met:

(a) Commercial or civic uses are water-oriented and provide goods and services to the general public.

(b) Except for non-water-dependent industrial uses in the WH-3 subdistrict:

(i) A structure on the land abutting the waterfront provides a view of the water from the interior of the building.

(ii) At least one pedestrian access point to the waterfront is encouraged for each structure.

(iii) Row houses are exempt from the standards in this subsection in the WH-2 and WH-3 zoning subdistricts.

(2) All development shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, “development” is defined as any new structure or an extension or increase in floor area or height of an existing structure, or change to the style, signage, color, window (size/pattern/material), siding or detailing on the exterior of any existing building.

(a) Existing water-dependent/water-related uses established on May 1, 2001, the date this provision is adopted, are exempt from the architectural design review.

(b) The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any building or portion of a building when the building official or fire marshal determines that such an emergency action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition.

(c) Ordinary maintenance or repair of the exterior of a structure that does not involve a change in design or external appearance is exempt from design review. Similar or like materials must be used for the maintenance or repair.

(d) The color of paint or stain to be applied to the exterior of the building is a ministerial decision to be made by the director or designee. The proposed colors must be from, or similar to, the historical color palette, located in the community development department.

In a 12-month period, if less than 10 percent of the paintable wall area is to be covered with the building’s existing paint color or stain, approval of the color is not necessary.

(3) Lot Standards.

(a) Minimum Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.

(b) Minimum Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet.

(4) Building Coverage. No minimum requirement.

(5) Building Height.

(a) WH-1 and WH-2 Zoning Subdistricts. All buildings or structures shall be no more than three stories, or 35 feet in height, whichever is lower.

(b) WH-3 Zoning Subdistrict. No building or structure shall be greater than four stories, or 60 feet in height, whichever is lower.

(6) Yards. Except for a bus shelter, the setback from a property line abutting Front Street shall be not more than two feet from the edge of the public right-of-way except that up to 25 percent of the facade may be set back a maximum distance of 10 feet. There are no side yard or waterfront setback requirements.

Structures on other streets in the WH district have no setback requirements other than those imposed under state or local building codes.

(7) Fences and Walls. Where fences or walls are used to reduce noise, provide security, create privacy, or for any other purpose, a pedestrian scale along the street shall be maintained. Techniques used to maintain a pedestrian scale may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Small setbacks, indentations, stepped fence heights, or other means of breaking up the fence or wall surface and heights;

(b) Different textures, colors, or materials (including landscape materials) to break up the wall surface; or

(c) Special lighting, canopies, awnings, horizontal trellises and other pedestrian-oriented features that break up the size of the blank wall surface.

(8) Parking.

(a) WH-1 and WH-2 Zoning Subdistricts. Off-street parking is not required except in WH-2 for the conditionally permitted use, tourist habitation – waterfront inn. All off-street parking, if provided, shall be on the interiors of lots or behind buildings, to the maximum extent practicable and in accordance with Chapter 17.330 CBDC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Off-street parking should be as unobtrusive as possible and screened in such a manner so that it is not visible from adjacent streets or public pedestrian walkways.

(b) WH-3 Zoning Subdistrict. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.330 CBDC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.

(9) Screening. Mechanical equipment, outdoor storage areas, utility vaults, trash receptacles and satellite dishes or other mobile communications equipment shall be screened in a manner so that they are not visible from adjacent streets, public pedestrian walkways, or the water. Satellite dishes and mobile communications cell sites should be ground- or wall-mounted unless technically infeasible. The dish/antenna should be screened and located in such a manner so as to reduce visibility from adjacent roadways and pedestrian ways.

(10) Utility Lines. Utility lines, including, but not limited to, those used for electricity, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground for new construction or major remodeling. The director may waive the requirements if topographical, soil or other conditions make such underground installation or screening of aboveground equipment impracticable.

(11) All uses within the WH district which are served by Alder, Birch, Cedar, Date and Fir Streets are encouraged to use these streets for vehicular ingress and egress. Curb openings onto Front Street and North Bayshore Drive are discouraged.

(12) Repealed by Ord. 511.

(13) All development shall provide adequately sized trash receptacles, screened from public view.

(14) Decks and Docks.

(a) WH-1 Zoning Subdistrict. Owners of improvements along the Coos Bay waterfront between Alder Street and Date Street shall be encouraged to participate with the city and adjacent property owners in the development of a dock street to provide public access to the waterfront and water-oriented uses for pedestrians, emergency and service vehicles, and other community-oriented uses. Design specifications shall be in accordance with CBDC 17.240.080, Architectural design.

(b) WH-2 and WH-3 Zoning Subdistricts. Public access to the waterfront shall be encouraged.

(15) Landowners shall sign a waiver of remonstrance against the creation of any local improvement districts if the improvements are part of a project adopted by the urban renewal agency.

(16) Trip Analysis. For the purposes of this section, a “trip analysis” is a study or report that specifies the ADT (average daily traffic) for a use.

(a) Prior to approval of any use, or the expansion of a use, in the area comprised of subdistrict WH-3 and the portion of subdistricts WH-1 and WH-2 lying east of Front Street, it is necessary to ensure that the cumulative ADT generated in this area only, by existing uses and the proposed use, does not exceed a total 8,000 ADT.

(b) The applicant must complete a trip analysis demonstrating the change in the current ADT due to the proposal and compute the cumulative ADT using one of the following methods:

(i) Retain a professional engineer with expertise in traffic or transportation engineering;

(ii) Trip generation figures for similar uses based on the latest edition of the publication “Trip Generation” by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE Manual); or

(iii) Compute the average daily trips using a minimum of three sites with the same type and size of activity as proposed.

(c) The director may require a particular computation method upon determining that the development may have a substantial impact on the average daily trips to ensure the most reliable projections of impacts will be obtained.

(d) A copy of the analysis and cumulative figures shall be sent to the Oregon Department of Transportation, Region 3, which will have 10 days to respond to the city in writing before approval may be granted.

(e) The 8,000-ADT limitation for the area shall be removed or modified only in accordance with OAR 660-012-0060.

(17) For non-water-dependent manufacturing in the WH-3 subdistrict, development must be oriented on the site to minimize adverse impacts and to protect the privacy of adjacent uses to the maximum extent possible.

(a) Manufacturing operations must be conducted in completely enclosed buildings;

(b) The city may require landscaping, walls or other buffering to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and aesthetic impacts to adjacent properties;

(c) Mechanical equipment, lights, emissions, shipping/receiving area, and other components of an industrial use that are outside enclosed buildings shall be located away from other nonindustrial uses to the maximum extent possible; elements listed in subsection (17)(b) of this section may also be subject to this requirement;

(d) Uses which are likely to create significant adverse impacts beyond the industrial site property boundaries with respect to noise, light/glare, dust, or vibrations shall minimize the impacts to the maximum extent possible. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether or not the adverse impacts of a use are likely to be “significant”:

(i) Maximum permissible noise levels shall not exceed permitted levels measured at the appropriate measuring points established by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. If there is doubt that the proposed use will violate these standards, or if a valid complaint has been registered about the level of noise, the owner or agent may be required to show written compliance with state regulations.

(ii) Vibration. Vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles, trains, and aircraft, which is discernible without instruments at the property line of the use concerned, is prohibited.

(iii) Smoke and Particulate Matter. Air emissions must be within legal limits as approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(iv) Odors. The emission of noxious gases or matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property line of the use creating such odors is prohibited.

(v) Heat and Glare. Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat and glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Exterior lighting shall be designed to shield surrounding streets and land uses from glare. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.240.080 Architectural design.

(1) Intent. The intent of the architectural design review goals and standards is to ensure that proposals for construction of new structures and for major remodeling of existing structures evoke the appearance of the prevailing architectural styles of the buildings in the WH district as they might have existed if constructed between the 1870s to the 1920s. For the purposes of this section, these styles are referred to as the “designated historic styles.” “Historical Buildings of Empire and Front Street,” a notebook of photographs from the historical time period, is available for review at the community development department.

(2) Architectural Design Review Goals and Standards. In order to be approved, a design proposal must comply with both the architectural design review goals and standards.

(a) Architectural design review goals are the conceptual framework establishing the underlying objectives to be achieved by new development and modifications to existing development in the district. Architectural design review standards are the approval criteria developed to implement these architectural design review goals and used to review new development and modifications to existing development. Adherence to the architectural design review standards ensures the conservation and enhancement of the special characteristics of each district.

(b) Architectural design review standards are mandatory approval criteria used in the design review process. A design review application will be approved if the review body finds the applicant has shown the proposal complies with the architectural design review standards; provided, however, one or more of the guidelines may be waived as part of the design review process if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposal satisfies the architectural design review goals for the district.

(c) The factors which will be used in the evaluation process include architectural style of the proposal, compatibility with scenic values and architectural resources in the district, design quality, structural placement, dimensions, height, bulk, lot coverage by structures, exterior appearance of the building, open areas, and landscaping.

(3) Architectural Design Review Goals.

(a) Building Design – Massing. “Massing” is defined as a composition of two-dimensional shapes or three-dimensional volumes which gives the impression of weight, density and bulk. If the following architectural design review goals are met in the architectural design of development, acceptable massing may be accomplished:

(i) Design should result in buildings with a perceived size that maintains a human scale that is comfortable and attractive for pedestrians.

(ii) Design should result in a quality street environment that is attractive to pedestrians and development.

(iii) Buildings of special historic significance and merit should be preserved. Maintain or restore as many of the proportions, dimensions and architectural details of historical significance, which were original or added to the building during the designated historic period.

(iv) New or remodeled structures abutting or directly across from buildings that have been identified as historic should be designed so as to preserve, and not detract from, the historic context and merit of the building.

(v) Buildings should have consistent visual identity from all sides visible to the general public.

(b) Building Design – Articulation. “Articulation” is defined as the emphasis given to architectural elements (such as windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or rhythm, dividing large buildings into smaller identifiable pieces. If the following architectural design review goals are met in the architectural design of development, acceptable articulation may be accomplished:

(i) The pattern and proportion of doors and windows should be similar to existing historic buildings in the WH district, and/or evoke the designated historic styles.

(ii) Finish materials, details and colors should evoke the designated historic styles.

(iii) Signage. Design for signs should emulate signage that existed during the designated historic period.

(4) Architectural Design Review Standards. The purpose of these architectural design review standards, along with the notebook “Historical Buildings of Empire and Front Street,” is to serve as a resource for designing development that will satisfy the architectural design review goals for the WH district. Design proposals may be approved if the following architectural design review standards are met in the architectural design of development:

(a) Building Design – Massing.

(i) Use articulation on either new or existing building facades to reduce the bulk of buildings. Methods include, but are not limited to, the following:

(A) Modulation;

(B) Broken rooflines; or

(C) Building elements such as balconies, chimneys, porches or other entry details, and landscaping.

(ii) Use architectural features such as cornices or other details that lower the apparent height of the building.

(iii) Place display windows at the street level around the exterior of larger commercial buildings.

The pattern and proportion of windows, doors and other glazed areas is important in determining the building’s architectural character. Rooflines can reinforce the architectural character of a street. Architectural features like cornices can relate to adjacent buildings, lowering the apparent, conflicting height of the building.


[IMAGE]


(iv) The front elevation of large structures should be divided into smaller areas or planes. When the front elevation of a structure is more than 750 square feet in area, the front elevation should be divided into distinct areas by:

(A) Creating a bay window or other building extension of at least one foot or more from the main structure;

(B) Creating a roof pediment that is the full width of the structure; or

(C) Setting part of the facade back one or more feet from the rest of the facade.

(v) For existing buildings of historic significance (in the WH district, these buildings are the Marshfield Sun at 1049 North Front Street, the Coos Bay Iron Works at 896 North Front Street and the Cahill Building, formerly Ferguson Transfer, 318 North Front Street):

(A) Restore or retain as many historic features as possible;

(B) Maintain or restore original proportions, dimensions and architectural elements;

(C) Select paint and material colors which are historically accurate, coordinate the entire facade, and do not conflict with adjacent buildings; and

(D) Consult available historical resources such as the Coos Historical Society, private historians or photographic archives.

(vi) At locations abutting or adjacent to buildings of historical significance:

(A) Use a roofline that emulates the historic building;

(B) Use doors, windows, materials and details similar to the historic building; and

(C) Break up the building facade using articulation which reflects the scale and proportions of the historic building.

(vii) Continue exterior materials, architectural detailing, and color scheme around all sides of the building. Buildings must present an equivalent level of quality of materials, detailing and fenestration on all sides visible to the general public.

(viii) Reserve bright colors for trim or accents unless it is common to the architectural style.

(ix) Use of reflective exterior materials where glare would shine into nearby buildings is prohibited.

(b) Building Design – Articulation – Finish Materials.

(i) Buildings should use wood or simulated wood products as their exterior finish material on elevations exposed to view from locations accessible by the public. Horizontal wood or simulated wood siding and wood shingles should be applied with exposure of each course not exceeding eight inches in width. Vertical siding should be rough-sawn “board on board” typical to the designated historical styles.

(ii) Plain plywood or grooved plywood panels should not be used as exterior finish materials on elevations exposed to view from locations accessible by the public.

(iii) Concrete or concrete block should not be exposed to view as exterior finish materials except for foundation walls not extending more than one foot above the finished grade level adjacent to the wall.

(iv) Wavy corrugated metal siding (rather than bold rib, box rib or v-beam) may be used as the finish material on exterior walls only if combined with other materials and details in such a way as to create a design that reflects the designated historic styles.

(v) The design, detailing and trimming of the rooflines, porches, windows, doors and other architectural features should be in a manner that is in keeping with the designated historic styles.

(vi) Glass should be clear or ornamental stained glass. Translucent glazing should be used only for restrooms.

(vii) Roofing materials exposed to view should be wood shingles, composition roofing, or corrugated metal roofing in a subdued color that is in keeping with the historic styles noted.

(viii) Decorative features such as cupolas, cresting, chimneys, barge (rake), and soffit/fascia trim are encouraged if keeping with the architectural style.

(ix) Light fixtures should be integrated with architectural elements.

(A) Decorative light fixtures that are in keeping with the historic styles are encouraged.

(B) Exterior light fixtures must not compete with city-furnished sidewalk period lights. Building lights should be metal halide or incandescent and are to be directed away from pedestrians and street traffic so as to avoid glare.

(5) Signage. Signs will be reviewed by the design assistance team (DAT) based on the standards set forth below. A sign permit is also required which will be reviewed by staff pursuant to the provisions in Chapter 17.333 CBDC, Signs. If the provisions conflict, the stricter shall apply.

(a) Design for signs should emulate signage that existed during the designated historic period, and be consistent with the character of the storefront, the building on which they are situated and the area as a whole. Review for consistency includes, but is not limited to, evaluation of size, shape, position, materials and illumination in relationship to the facade and abutting and adjacent structures.

(b) Signs on a business front are limited to a building sign on each building face (identifying the building name), a sign for each business entry (vehicular or pedestrian), and interior painting of street-front windows.

(c) Signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above a pedestrian walkway and 15 feet above a public street or alley, driveway, or parking lot. Signs shall not be closer than two feet to any curbline. A projecting sign shall not project more than eight feet beyond the property line.

(d) All signs shall:

(i) Be of an appropriate size and design;

(ii) Be sited sympathetically on the building;

(iii) Not obscure or remove detailing on the building;

(iv) Be designed as part of the building and not treated as an unrelated addition; and

(v) Be related to the style and character of the building and general area.

(e) Allowed Sign Types.

(i) “Wall/fascia sign” means a sign placed on the vertical surface of a wall or fascia where the wall or fascia is suitable for sign attachment. A wall/fascia sign must not extend across two storefronts or across separate buildings.
[IMAGE]


(ii) “Projecting or hanging sign” means a sign where the message area is displayed perpendicular to the building fascia.
[IMAGE]


(iii) “Awning sign” means a structure made of fabric or similar material with a painted metal frame which is attached to a building and projects over a public walkway. An awning shall have no soffits, plastic components or internal lighting. Plastic awning fabrics are prohibited. Advertising material attached to an awning is an awning sign.


[IMAGE]


(iv) “Marquee sign” means either a fascia sign, projecting sign or awning sign which contains movable letters or devices. A marquee sign shall not contain any plastic parts and shall not be internally illuminated.

(v) Interior Painted Window Signs. These signs are regulated. However, interior painted window signs with holiday themes are allowed up to 45 days without approval of a sign permit.

(vi) Miscellaneous. Sign types not otherwise listed which comply with the requirements of this subsection may be allowed upon approval by the historical design review committee.

(vii) Neon Sign. Any sign where neon or other gas contained in tubing is illuminated by the application of electric current is prohibited, except property abutting North Bayshore Dr. (U.S. Highway 101) where signage would be allowed if placed within 10 feet of the west property line. 

(viii) Sandwich Board. Portable signs that are not permanently affixed to the ground or a structure are prohibited.

(ix) Off-premises signs are prohibited.

 

Table 17.240.080 – Waterfront Heritage District – Uses  

	Use	WH-1 Core Area	WH-2 Transition Area	WH-3 Central Dock Area

	Ground Level	Upper Level	Ground Level	Upper Level	Ground Level	Upper Level

	Residential Uses

	Condominium	 	P	 	P	P	P

	Dwelling	 	P	 	P	 	P

	Dwelling, duplex	 	P	 	P	 	P

	Dwelling, multifamily	 	P	 	P	 	P

	Row houses	 	 	P	P	P	P

	Civic Uses

	Administrative service	 	P	P	P	P	P

	Community recreation	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Library service and cultural exhibit	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Lodge, club, fraternal or civic assembly – small and large	 	P	 	P	 	P

	Public safety service	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Visitor information center	P	 	P	 	P	P

	Commercial Uses

	Business support service	 	P	P	P	P	P

	Child care facility (fewer than 13), accessory to permitted use	 	P	P	P	P	P

	Clinic	 	P	 	P	 	P

	Convenience sales and personal services	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Dining establishments – fast order food and sit-down	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Drive-in or drive-through facility compliant with the requirements of CBDC 17.335.070	P	X	P	X	P	X

	Farmer’s market/fish market	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Financial, insurance and real estate services	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Food and beverage retail sales	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Fuel sales – marine	P	 	P	 	P	 

	Galleries	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Manufacturing, limited, which provides public viewing of on-site production and retail sales of finished products	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Market place retail sales	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Parking services – prohibited east of Front St. except in WH-3	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Participant sports and recreation – indoor and outdoor	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Personal services – general	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Postal service	P	 	P	 	P	 

	Professional and administrative services	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Retail sales – general (less than 10,000 sq. ft. building)	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Spectator sports and entertainment – indoor and outdoor	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Tourist habitation – waterfront heritage bed and breakfast	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Transportation service – rail and marine only	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Watercraft sales/rentals	P	 	P	 	P	 

P = Permitted use.

[Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.245 WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (W-I)

Sections:

17.245.010    Intent.

17.245.020    Uses.

17.245.030    Property development requirements.


17.245.010 Intent.

The W-I district is included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following city objectives:

(1) To reserve the waterfront for uses which require water access for successful operation.

(2) To support the economic well-being and stability of the city’s maritime economy.

(3) To preserve lands determined to be exceptionally suited for water-dependent and water-related uses. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.245.020 Uses.

The uses, which are permitted, conditional, or prohibited, shall be regulated by the Coos Bay estuary management plan. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.245.030 Property development requirements.

(1) Special Permits.

(a) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to acquire other permits required by local, state and federal agencies prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city.

(2) Lot Standards.

(a) Minimum Area. No requirements.

(b) Minimum Width. No requirements.

(3) Building Coverage. No requirements.

(4) Building Height. No requirements.

(5) Fences and Walls. No requirements, except to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.

(6) Landscaping and Screening.

(a) All heating and air-handling equipment shall be appropriately screened from public view. This does not apply to roof-mounted equipment.

(b) All storage and trash areas must be enclosed and screened from public view.

(7) Utilities. When practical, utilities such as power lines, telephone lines, and television cable shall be installed in underground conduits and approved by the public works department.

(8) By-Products. There shall be no emissions, odor, gas, mist, vapor, pollen, soot, carbon, acid, smoke, fume, dust, particulate matter, or other air, water, or land pollution which exceeds permitted levels of local, state, or federal regulations. If the director determines that the proposed use might violate these standards or if a valid complaint has been registered about the possible pollution, the director may require the owner or agent to show written compliance with state regulations.

(9) Noise. Maximum permissible noise level shall not exceed permitted levels measured at the appropriate measuring points established by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. If there is doubt that the proposed use will violate these standards or if a valid complaint has been registered about the level of noise, the owner or agent may be required to show written compliance with state regulations. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.250 HOLLERING PLACE DISTRICT (HP)

Sections:

17.250.010    Intent.

17.250.020    HP zoning subdistricts.

17.250.030    HP-1, upper bluff area.

17.250.040    HP-2, lower bench area.

17.250.050    Conditional uses in HP-2.

17.250.060    Estuarine uses and activities.

17.250.070    Property development requirements.

17.250.080    Site design, guidelines and standards.

17.250.090    General design guidelines and standards – Architectural form and composition.


17.250.010 Intent.

The area encompassed by the Hollering Place zoning district is intended to be developed as a planned unit development (PUD) based on the guidelines and requirements outlined below and the Hollering Place master plan. A cohesive design celebrating historic seaside architecture, reclamation of native shoreline habitats, sustainability, interpretation of local history and reconnection to the water are unifying elements relevant to the zoning district.

Development on the site must complement and connect with the existing business district to the east and act as a catalyst to help spur additional development and investment in the Empire area. A small-scaled gateway development near the intersection of Newmark Avenue and Empire Boulevard should act as a connection to the existing business district and as an entry statement signaling the presence of the remainder of the project. Preserving and enhancing views is a key component and must be balanced with achieving the right development mix and ensuring access for people and vehicles. The myriad of weather and environmental factors is also significant, as is making sure the new development is complementary to adjacent uses.

The master plan referred to herein was prepared not as a detailed requirement, but as an example of the uses, property organization and development, site design, and architectural form and composition that can meet the intent of this code. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.020 HP zoning subdistricts.

The Hollering Place (HP) district shall be made up of two subdistricts, described as follows:

(1) HP-1, Upper Bluff Area. The upper bluff area encompasses the area west of Empire Boulevard, south of Newmark Avenue for a distance of approximately 225 feet, and east of the HP-2 subdistrict at the bottom of the bluff. This area contains approximately 0.84 acre (36,779 square feet).

(2) HP-2, Lower Bench Area. The remainder of the zoning district includes the area at the bottom of the bluff east of Mill Street for a distance of approximately 260 feet south of Newmark and the area west of Mill Street, south of Newmark Avenue, east of the mean high-water line and north of Holland Avenue. This area contains approximately 2.11 acres (92,049 square feet). The area west of Mill Street and east of the mean high-water line is also designated Coos Bay estuary management plan 54-UW (urban water-dependent). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.030 HP-1, upper bluff area.

(1) The Hollering Place master plan recognizes that connection to the existing Empire business district is critical. Small-scaled gateway development near the intersection of Newmark Avenue and Empire Boulevard should serve as an anchor and entry statement signaling the remainder of the project. Preserving and enhancing views is a key component along with ensuring access for people and vehicles. Suggested uses in the area include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Dining establishment – fast order food and sit-down;

(b) Drinking establishment;

(c) Food and beverage retail sales;

(d) Visitor information service;

(e) Retail sales;

(f) Office/reservations for lower bench area uses;

(g) Library service and cultural exhibit; and

(h) Drive-through or drive-in facilities subject to the requirements of CBDC 17.355.070.

Not more than 15 percent of the HP-1 area shall be occupied by structures. A structure must occupy a footprint of not more than 1,500 square feet; however, lot area may be used for incidental use of the structure, such as outdoor seating and viewing. At least 75 percent of the HP-1 area must be dedicated to preserving and enhancing the views, and without cost to the user, parking and open space (trails, interpretive signage, kiosks, landscaping, etc.) for the outdoor enjoyment of the view and surrounding area.

(2) Architectural Character.

(a) A main building is intended to be a landmark on the bluff near the intersection of Newmark Avenue and Empire Boulevard and serve as an attractor for the activities on the lower portion of the site without compromising views of the bay from Newmark Avenue and Empire Boulevard.

(b) Commercial uses should open onto Empire Boulevard with functional doors and windows, canopies/awnings, recessed entrance doors, and attractive signage at an appropriate scale to the building. Parking is to be located to the south of the landmark building. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.040 HP-2, lower bench area.

(1) To engage the community and visitors alike, the master plan for the HP-2 area anticipates a range/mix of uses: commercial, residential, overnight lodging, hands-on/educational and recreational. Development in this area should:

(a) Capitalize on views, the bayfront and recreational opportunities;

(b) Serve as a catalyst for the Empire business district and other, nearby developments; and

(c) Raise the standards for quality development.

Uses such as, but not limited to, religious assembly, lodge, club or fraternal/civic organizations which are not intended for the general public are not appropriate in this zone.

(2) Phased development of the area is allowed within the constraints of an overall development program and approval of a PUD which must include both HP-1 and HP-2. Because Hollering Place is not intended to be a single-type use development (that is, all residential or all commercial), each phase of development must:

(a) Contain a reasonable balance of use types that will advance the intent of the Hollering Place as a whole; and

(b) Advance the historical element as delineated in the Hollering Place PUD.

(3) Architectural Character. Structures, which are limited to a footprint of 1,500 square feet, should evoke a village feel that is created through the buildings’ design, scale, massing, and connection to public space and relationships to each other.

(a) Structures east of Mill Street must be designed so as not to obscure the view from the upper bluff area, HP-1.

(b) Residences are encouraged on the second floor of structures in the area west of Mill Street.

(c) Retail/cottage units may be mixed-use or live/work structures with retail or workshop spaces on the ground floor and a loft-style residential cottage unit above. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.050 Conditional uses in HP-2.

The following uses are permitted in the HP-2 subdistrict if authorized in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses, and adequate findings can be made to show the proposed use is complementary to the master plan.

(1) Commercial Use Types.

(a) Limited manufacturing. (See Chapter 17.235 CBDC, Industrial-Commercial District (I-C).)

(2) Any civic, commercial, or agricultural use which is proposed to exceed a 1,500-square-foot footprint in gross floor area. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.060 Estuarine uses and activities.

The uses and activities set forth in Coos Bay estuary management plan 54-UW may be permitted if, by allowing the use/activity, the intent of the HP zoning district is met. In addition, the use/activity must satisfy Chapter 17.330 CBDC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, and the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.070 Property development requirements.

The property development requirements shall apply to all development in the HP district:

(1) Building Height. Buildings shall be arranged and built to maximize the view of the bay, water and water access, and the North Spit.

(a) HP-1 Zoning Subdistrict. Buildings shall be no more than 25 feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof.

(b) HP-2 Zoning Subdistrict. Buildings shall be no more than 35 feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof.

(2) Yards. Setbacks are regulated by state building codes. Setbacks from the line of nonaquatic vegetation are regulated by Coos Bay estuary management plan, Policy 23.

(3) Screening. Mechanical equipment, outdoor storage areas, utility vaults, refuse storage, fuel storage tanks, fire check valves, service and loading areas, and the like, shall be located out of view from the general public and shall be screened in a manner so that they are not visible from adjacent streets, public pedestrian walkways, the water, or the upper bluff area. Satellite dishes and mobile communications cell sites shall be screened and located in such a manner so as to reduce visibility from adjacent roadways, pedestrian ways and the bluff.

Screening devices must be designed to directly relate in materials, character, finish, color and detail to the primary structure. Landscaping may assist in screening enclosures and equipment/utility storage areas. Screening should not result in hiding places or entrapment areas.

(4) Utility Lines. Utility lines, including, but not limited to, those used for electricity, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground. The director may waive the requirements if topographical, soil or other conditions make such underground installation or screening of aboveground equipment impracticable.

(5) Repealed by Ord. 511.

(6) Murals are prohibited.

(7) Site Plan Review. A PUD, as required for the HP zoning district, requires, in part, approval of a site plan review, as set forth in Chapter 17.365 CBDC, Site Plan Review. Likewise, after approval of the PUD, a site plan may be required to ensure an improvement is suitably related to its site and surrounding site and structures.

(a) The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any buildings or portion of a building when the building official or fire marshal determines that such an emergency action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition.

(b) Ordinary maintenance or repair of the exterior of a structure that does not involve a change in design or external appearance is exempt from design review. Similar or like materials must be used for the maintenance or repair.

(8) Historical Elements. The “story trail” concept in the Hollering Place master plan, which describes the Hollering Place and its history, shall be exhibited at different interpretive points of interest throughout the HP zoning district. Developers will be required to set aside space to accommodate historical elements such as the story trail and interpretive signs. The location of the elements must be determined at the time of the PUD.

(9) Parking. All parking areas must be supported by landscape buffers. Parking in HP-1 must be located on the southern portion of the area and visually subdued from Empire Boulevard with low-growing plant material. Except for residential uses, off-street parking requirements as set forth in Chapter 17.330 CBDC do not apply for the HP zoning district.

(10) Partitioning to allow for separate financing of individual components of the development may be done as part of the planned unit development process. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.080 Site design, guidelines and standards.

All development in the HP district shall be consistent with the intent of the master plan and with the site design, guidelines and standards listed in this section. Site design shall respond to environmental, cultural and historic site features by taking advantage of existing view corridors, land use patterns, landforms, prevailing winds, and water-related activities. Long-term sustainable practices should be a focus, including marine resource protection, restoration of native plant communities, and habitat enhancement.

(1) Vehicle Circulation. The existing street patterns, access points and rights-of-way off of Empire Boulevard shall remain. The primary entry point to the lower development will be from Newmark Avenue with a secondary access along Mill Street off of Michigan Avenue. Access to existing businesses and uses will remain, but will be modified to support on-street parking. Existing access to the boat ramp and parking lot shall remain. Parking along Holland Avenue, the south property line of the subject property, shall remain as boat ramp parking.

(2) Pedestrian Circulation. Pedestrian connectivity and continuity should be provided throughout the project with clear crosswalks, curb cuts that meet code, and adequate lighting. Provide high-quality site furnishings suitable for coastal environments with long life and low maintenance.

(3) Historic Elements. The installation of interpretive panels are to celebrate early Hanisitch settlements and stories; early settlers and industries; estuary and wildlife themes. During the PUD process, the developer will set aside designated space where the panels and story trail will be located. The creation, installation and maintenance of panels and trail will be the responsibility of the city as development occurs.

(4) Landscape. All landscaping plans, including the plan for irrigation, shall be approved by the approving authority and installed and subsequently maintained in good condition and in perpetuity by the owner of the property. The landscape plan should reflect a theme (continuity) to be carried out throughout the development. For example, two to three large tree types, four to six shrub types, evergreen and deciduous framework, and color and highlights. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, pruning, trimming, mowing, debris and weed removal, and, if necessary, replanting or replacement of failed landscape elements. Failure to maintain the landscaping in good condition shall be considered a violation of this code. Landscaping must not result in hiding places or entrapment areas or create a danger to pedestrians.

(a) Landscaping should be in scale with adjacent buildings and be of appropriate size at maturity. Trees and shrubs used shall be selected from varieties compatible with the southern Oregon coast climate and which do not have destructive root systems which could damage either buildings or paved surfaces. Where parking lots abut buildings, foundation plantings are required.

(b) The landscaped area shall be planted with shrubs and/or ground cover to assure 50 percent coverage within one year and 90 percent coverage within five years. All landscaped areas should be planted and uniformly mulched. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.250.090 General design guidelines and standards – Architectural form and composition.

Establish visual linkages between the Empire business district and development on the bluff along Empire Boulevard, the various development areas on the lower site, views to the bay, and potential future development on adjacent sites. Design and locate buildings to minimize the effects of undesirable bay winds at ground level. The following design guidelines and standards are provided for all development in the HP zoning district:

(1) Respond to public streets and public spaces. Along pedestrian routes, design development to encourage use by pedestrians by providing a safe, comfortable, and interesting walking environment.

(2) Architectural Character. The desired architectural character of the Hollering Place project is that of vernacular maritime or fishing villages. Examples of this include the many seaside villages and destinations in New England, such as Nantucket, and some of the small towns on the Oregon coast, such as Cannon Beach and Nye Beach, and the Oregon Institute of Marine Biology (OIMB).

Design and scale buildings for their function and with respect to their context. Building elevations shall be articulated; long, continuous, unbroken wall and roof planes should be avoided. Architectural detailing and ornamentation, such as cornices, eaves, recessed or covered entryways, and awnings, are encouraged.

(a) Attention shall be paid to the following architectural elements:

(i) Building form and massing;

(ii) Building height;

(iii) Rooflines and parapet features;

(iv) Special building features (e.g., towers, porches, entries, canopies, signs, and artwork);

(v) Window size, orientation, and detailing;

(vi) Materials and color; and

(vii) The building’s relationship to the site, climate, topography and surrounding buildings.

(b) Building Entries.

(i) The main entrances to buildings shall be prominent, interesting and pedestrian-accessible.

(ii) The orientation of building entries shall:

(A) Orient the primary entrance toward the street, pedestrian walkway, public plaza or courtyard rather than the parking lot;

(B) Connect the building’s main entrance to the sidewalk with a well-defined pedestrian walkway; and

(C) Primary entrances shall be designed as inviting architectural features so they are clearly identifiable and offer a sense of arrival.

(c) Building Facades.

(i) Building frontages shall include architectural elements such as, but not limited to: bay windows, recessed entrances and windows, display windows, porches, balconies, or other architectural details or articulation, so as to provide visual interest in addition to creating community character and pedestrian scale. The overall design shall recognize that the simple relief provided by window cutouts or sills on an otherwise flat facade, in and of itself, does not meet the requirements of this subsection.

(ii) The dominant feature of any building frontage that is visible from the public area shall be the habitable area with its accompanying windows and doors.

(iii) Developments shall be designed to encourage informal surveillance of the public areas by maximizing sight lines between the buildings, public spaces and streets. This includes views both at ground level and from upper level balconies and windows.

(iv) The exterior walls of all building facades shall be of suitable durable building materials. All facades of any given building should be of consistent building materials. Side and rear building facades must have a level of detail and finish compatible with the front facade. If windowless walls are proposed, appropriate wall articulation is to be incorporated into the design to be compatible with the more prominent facades of the building.

(v) A preliminary review by the city is required if the following materials are contemplated:

(A) Unfinished concrete (painted or unpainted);

(B) Unfinished concrete block (painted or unpainted);

(C) Unarticulated board siding (e.g., T1-11 siding, plain plywood, sheet pressboard);

(D) Concrete block, split-face block, and cinder block.

(vi) Appropriately scaled architectural detailing is encouraged.

(vii) Awnings or canopies are encouraged. Backlit awnings are prohibited.

(d) Darkly tinted windows and mirrored windows that block two-way visibility are prohibited as ground floor windows.

(e) Use muted and naturally occurring colors as predominant building colors.

(f) Building rooflines shall be designed to create architectural interest and contribute to the overall identity of the area.

(g) Lighting of a building facade shall be designed to complement the architectural design. Lighting shall not draw inordinate attention to the building.

(h) Service Zones.

(i) Building and sites shall be organized to group the utilitarian functions away from view of the public area.

(ii) Delivery and loading operations, mechanical equipment (HVAC), trash compacting/collection, and other utility and service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building(s) and the landscaping. Because of views from the wayside in HP-1, roof-mounted equipment, such as HVAC, etc., shall be prohibited unless incorporated with architectural screening.

(iii) The visual and acoustic impacts of these functions, along with all wall or ground-mounted mechanical, electrical and communications equipment, shall be out of view from adjacent properties and the public realm.

(iv) Screening materials and landscape screens shall be architecturally compatible with the principal materials of the building.

(3) Signs. The standards in this subsection are in addition to the standards in Chapter 17.333 CBDC, Signs. If the provisions conflict, the stricter shall apply. Signs on the building facade should be clear, informative and made of high-quality, durable materials for longevity. Oversized, glaring and excessive signage is prohibited. Signs should take into account the scale of the building and the viewer, particularly the pedestrian. General standards for signage are as follows:

(a) Size, materials, style, position and color shall complement the building facade and shall be compatible with the surrounding area. Signs may be illuminated by very low-level lighting during evening hours and the lighting shall not flow onto the adjacent property or street.

(b) Signs on a business front are limited to a building sign on each building face (identifying the building name) and a sign for each business entry (vehicular or pedestrian).

(c) Sign Types.

(i) Wall-mounted signs are permitted not exceeding two feet in height. Letters shall not exceed 18 inches in height or width and one inch in relief. A wall/fascia sign must not extend across two storefronts or across separate buildings.

(ii) Building plaques bearing an appropriate thematic decorative motif, or an owner’s or building’s name, may be placed in the building’s cornice wall or under the eaves, and above the upper story windows.

(iii) Street addresses (building numbers) shall be placed above street entry doors and be visible to the pedestrian and emergency services. In instances where the entry doors are not clearly visible from the street, the street address shall be affixed to a permanent structure at the primary entranceway to the property.

(iv) Building identification shall include signage at the pedestrian level, clearly visible from the adjacent sidewalk. This can include one or more of the following: window and door signs, projecting signs and awning signs as described below.

(v) Temporary window signs may be allowed on storefronts. The area of the text and graphics shall not cover more than 30 percent of the window area.

(vi) Door signs of wood, bronze, metal, stone or glass may be placed on either or both sides of the entry doors with the street address located above the door. They shall not exceed two square feet and one inch in relief.

(vii) Awning Sign. Advertising material attached to an awning is an awning sign. Signs may be hung from or located on the face of any overhang or awning.

(viii) Projecting Sign. A projecting sign is a sign where the message area is displayed perpendicular to the building facade. The sign should be hung from the building face below upper floors so as to be visible to pedestrians.

(ix) Freestanding signs, such as, but not limited to, a sandwich board, pedestal sign holder, and other types of freestanding signs shall be included as part of the maximum allowable area for signs and are prohibited in the right-of-way without a right-of-way use permit.

(x) Neon Sign. Any sign where neon or other gas contained in tubing is illuminated by the application of electric current. Signs such as “open” or “closed,” which are no more than two square feet in size, are permitted without review.

(xi) Miscellaneous. In addition to the above sign types, other types of signing may be appropriate if they meet the criteria of this section.

(xii) Prohibited Signs.

(A) Pole-mounted signs and billboards;

(B) Electrical or Mechanical Signs. No sign shall contain or be illuminated by any flashing, blinking, moving or rotating light;

(C) Internally illuminated sign (neon tubing signage shall not be considered as internally illuminated sign);

(D) Readerboards;

(E) Electric message display signs;

(F) Roof signs; and

(G) Attraction devices (strings, groupings, or pinwheels). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.255 URBAN PUBLIC DISTRICT (UP)

Sections:

17.255.010    Establishment of district designation.

17.255.020    Uses.

17.255.030    Development standards.


17.255.010 Establishment of district designation.

The urban public (UP) district applies to areas designated at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This designation may be applied to additional areas pursuant to a zone change. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.255.020 Uses.

The permitted uses in the UP district include public facilities, public parks, playgrounds, open spaces, cemeteries, and natural resource preservation or enhancement, subject to the applicable provisions of this and other applicable provisions of this title.

The following uses in the urban public district zone are permitted (P), conditional (C) or prohibited (X) as indicated in Table 17.255.020.

Table 17.255.020 – Uses  

	Residential

	Single-family dwelling, only in conjunction with a permitted use	C

	Civic Use Types

	Community recreation	P

	Parking service	P

	Government offices and related uses	C

	Bus shelter	C

	Educational service and related buildings	P

	Commercial Use Types

	Funeral and interment services – cemetery	P

	Dining establishments, only in conjunction with a permitted use	C

	Uses Expressly Prohibited

	All nonrelated uses	X

[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.255.030 Development standards.

(1) All development proposal requests shall participate in the pre-application process.

(2) In general, the dimensional and development standards of the commercial zoning district shall apply. At the time of pre-application conference, the director shall determine which base zone standards shall be required or whether additional standards are necessary.

(3) The following development standards apply to all land and structures in the UP district:

(a) Building Height. No building shall have a height greater than three stories, not to exceed 35 feet in height.

(b) Riparian Vegetation.

(i) Riparian vegetation surrounding Empire Lakes is considered significant habitat in the comprehensive plan. This habitat shall be protected by leaving the existing vegetation undisturbed to its full width, if possible, but at least to a width of 50 feet measured horizontally from the shoreline. If there is less than 50 feet of vegetation, all of it shall be protected. The shoreline shall be the line of nonaquatic vegetation.

(ii) Water access, trails/paths, picnicking areas, or other recreation uses may be permitted if the activities are part of a master plan for the park, and if they constitute no more than a 20 percent cumulative reduction in the total vegetation surrounding the lake within the zoning designation.

(iii) The riparian vegetation along the shoreline in the Eastside area will be protected based on Policy 23 of the Coos Bay estuary management plan. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.260 MEDICAL PARK DISTRICT (MP)

Sections:

17.260.010    Intent.

17.260.020    Uses.

17.260.030    Property development requirements.

17.260.040    Repealed.


17.260.010 Intent.

The medical park district is designed to achieve the following city objectives:

(1) Encourage the centralization of Coos Bay’s medical facilities.

(2) Provide space for semipublic facilities needed to complement medical facilities.

(3) Facilitate the establishment of the medical park district as an efficient regional referral center.

(4) Facilitate the planning and programming of desirable and/or needed utilities and facilities to adequately accommodate planned service level and intensity of use.

(5) Create an aesthetically pleasing, park-like environment conducive to the promotion of mental health and general well-being.

(6) Establish and reserve appropriately located areas for desirable mixtures of medically related professional, limited complementary commercial, administrative business offices, and medically related multifamily residential uses.

(7) Control the encroachment of medically related facilities into established or intended residential areas. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.260.020 Uses.

The uses set out in Table 17.260.020 are examples of uses allowable in the medical park district. Where a specific use is not listed in the table, the director shall determine the most appropriate similar use in the table.

P = Permitted use.

C = Conditional use.

X = Prohibited use. 

Table 17.260.020 – Uses 

	Use	 

	Residential	 

	Group residential care facility	P

	Multifamily which is medically related or fulfills a direct need to the district which cannot be fulfilled in other areas	C

	Residential uses not authorized by this chapter	X

	Civic	 

	Bus shelters	C

[Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.260.030 Property development requirements.

(1) Site Plan. Except for bus shelters, a site plan and approval are required for the establishment or change of any use in the MP district.

(2) Lot Standards.

(a) Residential.

(i) Minimum area: 8,000 square feet for the first three dwelling units and not more than one dwelling unit per 1,200 square feet thereafter.

(ii) Minimum width: each lot shall have a minimum width of 40 feet.

(b) Nonresidential.

(i) Minimum area: none required.

(ii) Minimum width: none required.

(3) Building Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area.

(4) Building Height. No building or structure shall have a height greater than three stories, not to exceed 35 feet, unless otherwise approved through site plan.

(5) Landscaping and Screening.

(a) Screen heating and air equipment from public view. This does not apply to roof-mounted equipment.

(b) Enclose and screen all storage and trash areas from public view. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.260.050].


17.260.040 Uses expressly prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 511. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.265 EMPIRE WATERFRONT SETTLEMENT DESIGN REVIEW

(Recodified as Chapter 17.316 by Ord. 503)


Chapter 17.270 WATERSHED DISTRICT (WS)

Sections:

17.270.010    Intent.

17.270.020    Permitted uses.

17.270.030    Conditional uses.

17.270.040    Uses expressly prohibited.

17.270.050    Property development requirements.


17.270.010 Intent.

The watershed district is included in the zoning regulations to preserve and protect lands providing the city’s water supply. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.270.020 Permitted uses.

Only uses related to the operation and maintenance of the water system are allowed. Civic uses authorized by the Coos Bay/North Bend water board may also be allowed on property within the watershed district, provided the use takes place on property that does not directly drain into Upper or Lower Pony Creek Reservoir. However, the use will be subject to a site plan review (see Chapter 17.365 CBDC). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.270.030 Conditional uses.

None. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.270.040 Uses expressly prohibited.

All other uses. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.270.050 Property development requirements.

The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the watershed district:

(1) Site Plan. Site plan review is required prior to the establishment or change of any structure which is accessible to the public in the watershed district.

(2) Building Height. No building shall have a height greater than three stories, not to exceed 35 feet.

(3) Riparian Vegetation.

(a) Riparian vegetation surrounding Upper and Lower Pony Creek Reservoir is considered significant habitat in the comprehensive plan. Protect riparian habitat by leaving the existing vegetation undisturbed to its full width, if possible, but at least to a width of 50 feet measured horizontally from the shoreline. If there is less than 50 feet of vegetation, all of it shall be protected. The shoreline shall be the line of nonaquatic vegetation.

(b) Water access, road, and timber management activities may be permitted if they are part of a master plan for the watershed and forest management program, and if they comply with Oregon Forest Practice Rules. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.310 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.310.010    Short title.

17.310.020    Purposes.

17.310.030    Plat, partition, or other review required.

17.310.040    Agreements to transfer land after preliminary plat approval.

17.310.050    Divisions of developed land.


17.310.010 Short title.

Chapters 17.310, 17.359 and 17.367 CBDC are known as the land division ordinance and may be cited as such. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.310.020 Purposes.

The land division regulations are intended to fulfill the following purposes: to promote the effective use of land; to make adequate provision for the residential, commercial, and industrial needs of the city; to provide for the division of land in accordance with officially adopted plans, policies, and standards, including the zoning ordinance and related development regulations of the city; and to provide for the efficient processing of land division applications in an efficient and timely manner. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.310.030 Plat, partition, or other review required.

All divisions of land shall comply with this title and other applicable city ordinances and regulations. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.310.040 Agreements to transfer land after preliminary plat approval.

Agreements to transfer land prior to final plat or partition are authorized; provided, that the performance of an offer or agreement to sell, lease, or otherwise transfer a lot, tract, or parcel of land following preliminary plat or partition approval is expressly conditioned on the recording of the final plat or partition containing the lot, tract, or parcel. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


17.310.050 Divisions of developed land.

Divisions of developed land may be reviewed and approved the same as undeveloped land; provided, the review authority shall consider existing and approved development on the site which may be relevant to adjustments, modifications and variations of standards that otherwise apply if consistent with this title or other applicable city regulation. For the purpose of this section, “developed land” means a lot, tract, or parcel upon which substantial development has taken place (e.g., framing inspection approval has been granted). Such construction shall be a permanent building or structure. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 17.312 ACCESSORY DWELLING

Sections:

17.312.010    Purpose.

17.312.020    Definition.

17.312.030    Use and restrictions.

17.312.040    Development and design standards.


17.312.010 Purpose.

ORS 197.312 requires that at least one accessory dwelling be allowed per detached single-family dwelling in every zone within an urban growth boundary that allows detached single-family dwellings. Accessory dwellings are an economical way to provide additional housing choices, particularly in communities with high land prices or a lack of investment in affordable housing. Accessory dwelling units provide an opportunity to increase housing supply in developed neighborhoods and can blend in well with single-family detached dwellings. Accessory dwellings may be used as long-term housing rentals (no less than 30 days per month and not a vacation rental) or as a property owner’s residence. [Ord. 524 § 7 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


17.312.020 Definition.

“Accessory dwelling unit” is an interior, attached or detached residential structure that is used in connection with or that is accessory to a single-family dwelling. [Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


17.312.030 Use and restrictions.

An accessory dwelling unit, where allowed, is subject to review and approval through a Type II procedure, pursuant to CBDC 17.130.090, and shall conform to the following restrictions:

(1) One accessory dwelling is allowed per legal lot of record containing a detached single-family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion of a detached accessory building (e.g., above a garage or workshop), a unit attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the conversion of an existing floor) or tiny home subject to the requirements of CBDC 17.312.040(1)(g);

(2) The accessory dwelling unit may not be used as vacation rental;

(3) Construction of an accessory dwelling unit must meet the minimum standards of the current state residential specialty code or the requirements of CBDC 17.312.040(1)(g);

(4) A separate address shall be assigned to the accessory dwelling and the address shall be clearly identified, as required by state building code; and

(5) A deed restriction must be recorded with the property advising future owners and lenders of the use restrictions. The deed restriction document will be created by the city and recorded at the county clerk’s office. [Ord. 524 § 7 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


17.312.040 Development and design standards.

(1) Development Standards.

(a) A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area, or 75 percent of the primary dwelling’s total floor area, whichever is smaller.

(b) An attached or interior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area, or 75 percent of the primary dwelling’s total floor area, whichever is smaller. However, an accessory dwelling unit that results from the conversion of a level or floor (e.g., basement, attic, or second story) of the primary dwelling may occupy the entire level or floor, even if the floor area of the accessory dwelling unit would be more than 1,000 square feet.

(c) Accessory dwellings shall meet all other development standards (e.g., height, setbacks, lot coverage, etc.) for buildings in the designated zoning district, except that conversion of an existing legal nonconforming structure to an accessory dwelling is allowed; provided, that the conversion does not increase the nonconformity.

(d) Accessory dwellings are not subject to the density requirements of the zone.

(e) Accessory dwellings shall conform to the overall maximum lot coverage and setback requirements of the underlying zone.

(f) Structures detached from the primary home on a residential lot may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit if the structure meets the standards and requirements of the Oregon Specialty Building Code, this title’s setback requirements and does not eliminate an existing functional garage.

(g) A permanent tiny home may be attached to an approved foundation subject to the Oregon Residential Specialty Code (ORSC) and Oregon Fire Code or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Manufactured Home Construction and Safety standards.

 (2) Design Standards.

(a) An accessory dwelling unit, located in a historic district, must comply with the historic district regulations.

(b) An accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot as a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or listed as a cultural resource will be held to a high development standard, in that the exterior must be compatible with the primary structure.

(c) The exterior finish and trim materials of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be similar to the primary dwelling unit in terms of type, size, placement, and finish.

(d) The roof pitch of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be similar to the roof pitch of the primary dwelling. [Ord. 524 § 7 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 518 § 8 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


Chapter 17.314 ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING ON A SEPARATE LOT OR PARCEL

Sections:

17.314.010    General regulations.


17.314.010 General regulations.

(1) An accessory use or building may be located on a neighboring lot or parcel, provided:

(a) The neighboring lot or parcel is within 20 feet of the principal property; and

(b) The neighboring lot or parcel is within the same zoning district as the principal property; and

(c) A deed restriction approved by the department is filed with the county which states:

The following described property on which an accessory building is to be built (insert description of neighboring property on which accessory building is to be built) cannot be sold or otherwise transferred separate from the following described property: (insert description of property on which the principal use is located) on which the principal use is located. This restriction shall remain in effect until the city of Coos Bay community development department finds the accessory building is accessory to a principal use on the same property or the accessory building no longer exists.

[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.367.010].


Chapter 17.316 EMPIRE WATERFRONT SETTLEMENT DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

17.316.010    Purpose.

17.316.020    Definitions and exemptions.

17.316.030    Architectural design.


17.316.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are intended to: provide a mechanism to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the community; provide an opportunity to reclaim the waterfront heritage setting and to guide development in a direction that strengthens a relationship with that setting; and guide the construction of private and public development to evoke the architectural styles which existed in Empire from the mid-to-late 1800s. Common architectural styles of the time period include Cascadian rustic, plank styles, false front, salt box, Queen Anne and Victorian. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.265.010].


17.316.020 Definitions and exemptions.

(1) The design area includes lots or parcels abutting Newmark Avenue or any portion of a structure that is contiguous to a structure located on a lot or parcel abutting Newmark Avenue. The design area extends west along Newmark Avenue from the intersection of Ocean Boulevard to Empire Boulevard. All development must comply with design requirements of this chapter.

(2) For commercial uses and the purposes of this chapter, “development” is defined as any new structure or an extension or increase in floor area or height of an existing structure, or change to the style, signage, color, window (size/pattern/material), siding or detailing on the exterior of any existing building. Alterations to a structure are considered development when there is a change in design, material or external appearance.

(3) The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any building or portion of a building when the building official or fire marshal determines that such an emergency action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition.

(4) Ordinary maintenance or repair of the exterior of a structure that does not involve a change in design or external appearance is exempt from design review. Use similar or like materials for the maintenance or repair.

Examples of maintenance include, but are not limited to: replacing a window with the same type of glass, framing material and style of window or replacing siding in disrepair with siding of the same or similar material.

Exterior alterations which involve replacement with dissimilar materials and/or any new construction, that is not visible from Newmark Avenue, are exempt from design review.

(5) The director shall review the application of exterior paint color or stain visible from Newmark Avenue. The director shall only approve colors selected from or similar to the community services historical color palette the department maintains.

During a 12-month period, if less than 10 percent of the paintable wall area visible from Newmark Avenue is to be covered with the building’s existing paint color or stain, approval of the color is not necessary. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.265.020].


17.316.030 Architectural design.

The architectural design review goals and standards are intended to supplement the development standards of the commercial zoning district. Where the provisions of this section conflict with the provisions of the zoning district, the stricter shall apply.

(1) Intent. The intent of the architectural design review goals and standards is to ensure that proposals for development evoke the appearance of the prevailing architectural styles of buildings as they might have existed if constructed in the Empire area during the mid-to-late 1800s. For the purposes of this chapter, these styles are referred to as the “designated historic styles.”

“Historical Buildings of Empire and Front Street,” a notebook of photographs from the historical time period, is available for review at the community services department, planning division.

(2) Architectural Design Review Goals and Standards. In order to be approved, a design proposal must comply with both the architectural design review goals and standards.

(a) Architectural design review goals are the conceptual framework establishing the underlying objectives to be achieved by development in the design area. Architectural design review standards are the approval criteria developed to implement the architectural design review goals and used to review development.

(b) Architectural design review standards are mandatory approval criteria used in the design review process. The review authority shall approve a design review application if it finds the proposal clearly complies with the applicable architectural design review standards; provided, however, the review authority may waive one or more of the architectural design review standards during the design review process if the applicant clearly demonstrates the proposal satisfies the architectural design review goals for the design area.

(c) The review authority shall consider factors such as the architectural style of the proposal; compatibility with scenic values and architectural resources in the design area; design quality; structural placement; dimensions; height; bulk; lot coverage by structures; exterior appearance of the building; open areas; and landscaping.

(3) Architectural Design Review Goals.

(a) Building Design – Massing. “Massing” is defined as a composition of two-dimensional shapes or three-dimensional volumes, which gives the impression of weight, density and bulk. If the following architectural design review goals are met in the architectural design of development, acceptable massing may be accomplished:

(i) Design should result in buildings with a perceived size that maintains a human scale that is comfortable for and attractive to pedestrians;

(ii) Design should result in a quality street environment that is attractive to pedestrians and development;

(iii) Buildings of historic significance and merit should be preserved. Maintain or restore as many of the proportions, dimensions and architectural details of historical significance which were original or added to the building during the designated historic period (the identified historic building in the design area is the house at 476 Newmark Avenue);

(iv) Design new or remodeled structures abutting or directly across from an historic building so as to preserve, not detract from, the historic context and merit of the building; and

(v) Buildings should have consistent visual identity from all sides visible to the general public from Newmark Avenue.

(b) Building Design – Articulation. “Articulation” is defined as the emphasis given to architectural elements (such as windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or rhythm dividing large buildings into smaller identifiable pieces. If the following design review goals are met in the architectural design of development, acceptable articulation may be accomplished:

(i) Doors and window patterns should evoke buildings constructed during the designated historic period; and

(ii) Finish materials, details and colors should evoke the designated historic styles and period.

(c) Signage. Design for signs should emulate signage that existed during the designated historic period.

(4) Architectural Design Review Standards. The purpose of the architectural design review standards, along with the notebook “Historical Buildings of Empire and Front Street,” is to serve as a resource for designing development that will satisfy the architectural design review goals of the architectural design review standards for the design area. Design proposals may be approved if the following architectural design review standards are met in the architectural design of development:

(a) Building Design – Massing.

(i) Use articulation on either new or existing building facades to reduce the bulk of buildings. Methods include, but are not limited to, the following:

(A) Modulation;

(B) Broken rooflines; or

(C) Building elements such as balconies, chimneys, porches or other entry details, and landscaping.

(ii) Use architectural features such as cornices or other details that lower the apparent height of the building.

(iii) Place display windows at the street level around the exterior of larger commercial buildings.

The pattern and proportion of windows, doors and other glazed areas is important in determining the building’s architectural character.
[IMAGE]


Rooflines can reinforce the architectural character of a street.
[IMAGE]


Architectural features like cornices can relate to adjacent buildings, lowering the apparent, conflicting height of the building.

(iv) Larger building facades shall be broken down into units that resemble the size of storefront facades from the historical era. When the front elevation of a structure is more than 750 square feet in area, divide the elevation into distinct areas by:

(A) Creating a bay window or other building extension of at least one foot or more from the main structure;

(B) Creating a roof pediment that is the full width of the structure; or

(C) Setting part of the facade back one or more feet from the rest of the facade.

(v) For existing buildings of historic significance:

(A) Restore or retain as many historic features as possible;

(B) Maintain or restore original proportions, dimensions and architectural elements;

(C) Select paint and material colors which are historically accurate, coordinate the entire facade, and do not conflict with adjacent buildings; and

(D) Consult available historical resources such as the Coos Historical Society, private historians or photographic archives.

(vi) At locations across from, abutting or adjacent to buildings of historical significance:

(A) Use a roofline that emulates the historic building;

(B) Use doors, windows, materials and details similar to the historic building; and

(C) Break up the building facade using articulation which reflects the scale and proportions of the historic building.

(vii) Flat roofs are permitted with detailed stepped parapets.

(viii) The facade must be designed to emphasize the center or primary entrance(s).

(ix) Continue exterior materials, architectural detailing, and color scheme around all sides of the building visible to the public from Newmark Avenue. Buildings must present an equivalent level of quality of materials, detailing and fenestration on all sides visible to the general public from Newmark Avenue.

(x) Reserve bright colors and black for trim or accents unless it is consistent with the architectural style.

(xi) Use of reflective exterior materials where glare would shine into nearby buildings is prohibited.

(b) Building Design – Articulation – Finish Materials.

(i) Vary and articulate facades to provide visual interest to pedestrians.

(ii) Buildings should use wood or simulated wood products as their exterior finish material on elevations exposed to view from locations accessible by the public.

(iii) Do not use plain plywood or grooved plywood panels as exterior finish materials on elevations exposed to view from locations accessible by the public.

(iv) Do not expose concrete or concrete block to view as exterior finish materials except for foundation walls not extending more than one foot above the finished grade level adjacent to the wall.

(v) Metal siding is prohibited for exterior walls.

(vi) The design, detailing and trimming of the rooflines, porches, windows, doors and other architectural features should be in a manner that is in keeping with the designated historic styles.

(vii) Glass should be clear, lightly tinted or ornamental stained glass. Use translucent glazing only for restrooms.

(viii) Roofing materials exposed to view should be wood shingles, composition roofing, or wavy corrugated metal roofing (rather than bold rib, box rib or v-beam) in a subdued color that is in keeping with the historic styles noted. Decorative features such as cupolas, cresting, chimneys, barge (rake), and soffit/fascia trim are encouraged if it is consistent with the architectural style.

(ix) Integrate light fixtures with architectural elements. Decorative light fixtures that are in keeping with the historic styles are encouraged.

(x) Exterior light fixtures must not compete with city-furnished sidewalk period lights. Building lights should be metal halide or incandescent and are to be directed away from pedestrians and street traffic so as to avoid glare.

Table 17.316.030 – Proposed Historic Color Palette for the Empire Historic District 

	Style Classification	 Proposed Palette

	Cascadian Rustic 	Body and trim: HC 40 – 51 and 64 – 75.

	Plank Style 	Unfinished.

	False Front 	Body and trim: HC 85 – 87, 103 – 107 Downing Sand, Stone, Earth (100 Years of Color).

	Salt Box 	Body color: Colonial Revival series (100 Years of Color). Also, HC 4 – 6, 31 – 33, 114 – 120, 127 – 132, 138 – 153, 162 – 165, 169 – 174, white. 

Trim: white.

	Queen Anne/Victorian 	“Painted Ladies” palette. Rookwood series palette (100 Years of Color).

	Vernacular 	Body color: all of Ben Moore HC palette except: HC 40, 49 – 51, 61 – 73, 85, 100, 101, 103, 106, 121, 124 – 126, 133 – 135, 154 – 160. 

Trim: entire palette.

Note: HC = Historic colors from Benjamin Moore Paints.

(5) Signage Standards. The standards below are in addition to the standards in Chapter 17.333 CBDC, Signs. If the provisions conflict, the stricter shall apply. A sign permit is required.

(a) Signs must be consistent with the character of the facade, the building on which they are situated and the abutting and adjacent area. Review for consistency includes, but is not limited to, evaluation of size, shape, position, materials and illumination in relationship to the facade and abutting and adjacent developments.

(b) Signs on a business front are limited to a building sign on each building face (identifying the building name), a sign for each business entry (vehicular or pedestrian), and interior painting of street-front windows.

(c) Signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above a pedestrian walkway and 15 feet above a public street or alley, driveway, or parking lot. Signs shall not be closer than two feet to any curbline. A projecting sign shall not project more than eight feet beyond the property line.

(d) All signs shall:

(i) Be of an appropriate size and design;

(ii) Be sited sympathetically on the building;

(iii) Not obscure or remove detailing on the building;

(iv) Be designed as part of the building and not treated as an unrelated addition; and

(v) Be related to the style and character of the building or area.

(e) Allowed Sign Types.

(i) Wall/Fascia Sign. A “wall/fascia sign” is defined as the vertical surface of a wall/fascia which is suitable for sign attachment. A wall/fascia sign must not extend across two storefronts or across separate buildings.
[IMAGE]


(ii) Projecting or Hanging Sign. A “projecting or hanging sign” is defined as a sign whereon the message area is displayed perpendicular to the building facade.
[IMAGE]


(iii) Awning Sign. An “awning” is any structure made of fabric or similar material with a painted metal frame which is attached to a building and projects over a public walkway. An awning shall have no soffits, plastic components or internal lighting. Plastic awning fabrics are prohibited. Advertising material attached to an awning is an awning sign.
[IMAGE]


(iv) Roof Sign. Any sign that is displayed upon or supported in any way by a roof.

(A) Roof signs are discouraged.

(B) Where the design of a building dictates that a roof sign is necessary, the sign must:

1. Be related to the style and character of the building or area; and

2. Not project above the roof ridge line.

(v) Marquee Sign. A “marquee sign” is defined either as a fascia sign or a projecting sign or awning sign which contains movable letters or devices. A marquee sign shall not contain any plastic parts and shall not be internally illuminated.

(vi) Interior Painted Window Signs. These signs are regulated. However, interior painted window signs with holiday themes are allowed for up to 45 days without approval of a sign permit.

(vii) Miscellaneous. In addition to the above sign types, other types of signing may be appropriate if it meets the criteria listed in this subsection (5).

(viii) Neon signs (any sign where neon or other gas contained in tubing is illuminated by the application of electric current) are prohibited.

(ix) Pole-mounted or freestanding signs are subject to review.

(x) Sandwich board signs are prohibited. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.265.030].


Chapter 17.318 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:

17.318.010    General.

17.318.020    Authorization.

17.318.030    Findings of fact.

17.318.040    Statement of purpose.

17.318.050    Methods of reducing flood losses.

17.318.060    Definitions.

17.318.070    General provisions – Lands to which this chapter applies.

17.318.080    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

17.318.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

17.318.100    Interpretation and severability.

17.318.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

17.318.120    Alteration of watercourses.

17.318.130    Special flood hazard areas.

17.318.140    Development permit required – Obtaining and maintaining information.

17.318.150    Review of development permits.

17.318.160    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

17.318.170    Below-grade crawl spaces.

17.318.180    Critical facility.

17.318.190    Manufactured dwelling parks.

17.318.200    Standards for storage of materials and equipment.

17.318.300    Variance.

17.318.400    Violation penalties.


17.318.010 General.

(1) Areas within the city of Coos Bay are subject to periodic flooding and the city is a participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program. Therefore, the city adopts land use control measures to reduce flood hazard and assure that city residents will continue to benefit from the national program.

(2) As part of this program, the city shall, as referenced in CBDC 17.318.140 and 17.318.150:

(a) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary federal, state, or local governmental agency permits have been obtained which require prior approval;

(b) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements and conditions of this chapter have been satisfied;

(c) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures, substantially improved structures, or substantially improved floodproofed structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement; and

(d) Maintain floodproofing certification required by CBDC 17.318.160(2)(c), Nonresidential Construction.

(e) The city’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease, resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the city shall notify FEMA in the form of a map revision or amendment by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with CFR Title 44. Such a submission is necessary so that, upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.010].


17.318.020 Authorization.

The state of Oregon has, in ORS 203.035, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Coos Bay does ordain as follows in this chapter. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.020].


17.318.030 Findings of fact.

(1) The flood hazard areas of the city of Coos Bay are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.030].


17.318.040 Statement of purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

(1) Protect human life and health;

(2) Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and

(9) Maintain eligibility for disaster relief. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.040].


17.318.050 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;

(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas; and

(6) Coordinating and supplementing the provisions of the state building code with local land use and development ordinances. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.050].


17.318.060 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

Appeal – A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

Area of special flood hazard – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”

Base flood – The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

Basement – Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

Below-grade crawl space – An enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point.

Building official – The city building official or his/her designee.

Critical facility – A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

Development – Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

Elevated building – For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

Existing manufactured dwelling park or subdivision – A manufactured dwelling park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured dwellings are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.

Expansion to an existing manufactured dwelling park or subdivision – The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured dwellings are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

Flood or Flooding.

(a) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(i) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

(ii) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

(iii) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (a)(ii) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 

(b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (a)(i) of this definition.

Flood elevation study – An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.

Flood hazard administrator – The public works director or his/her designee.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) – An official map of a community on which both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a “digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).”

Floodway – The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

Grade (adjacent ground level) – The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet from the wall. If walls are parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way. For the NFIP, the lowest adjacent grade is the lowest point of the ground level next to the building.

Lowest floor – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at CBDC 17.318.160(2)(b), Residential Construction.

Manufactured dwelling – A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a recreational vehicle. The term “manufactured dwelling” is synonymous with the term “manufactured home.”

Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision – A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.

New construction – For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of March 1977 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

New manufactured dwelling subdivision – A manufactured dwelling subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured dwellings are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations.

Recreational vehicle – A vehicle which is:

(a) Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Start of construction – Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation. “Permanent construction” does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

State building code – The combined specialty codes.

Structure – For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured dwelling.

Substantial damage – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial improvement – Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.

The term does not, however, include either:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s being listed on a state inventory or the National Register of Historic Places.

Variance – A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

Water-dependent – A structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 490 § 1, 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.060].


17.318.070 General provisions – Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Coos Bay. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.070].


17.318.080 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

(1) The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Coos County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” dated December 7, 2018, and accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and the FIRM are on file at 500 Central Avenue, Coos Bay, Oregon 97420. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in subsection (2) of this section shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under subsection (2) of this section.

(2) When base flood elevation data described in subsection (1) of this section has not been provided, the city’s flood hazard administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source to administer CBDC 17.318.130 and 17.318.160(2), Specific Standards.

(3) The city shall make an interpretation, where needed, as to the exact location of FIRM boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-76). [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.080].


17.318.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, state building code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.090].


17.318.100 Interpretation and severability.

(1) In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(a) Considered as minimum requirements;

(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes and rules, including the state building code.

(2) Severability. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.100].


17.318.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Coos Bay, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.110].


17.318.120 Alteration of watercourses.

Adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Land Conservation and Development, and other appropriate state and federal agencies shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse subject to flood hazard, and the city shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. Maintenance shall be required within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that its flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.120].


17.318.130 Special flood hazard areas.

In special flood hazard areas, where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within Zones A and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.130].


17.318.140 Development permit required – Obtaining and maintaining information.

(1) A development permit shall be obtained before construction, including substantial improvements, or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in CBDC 17.318.080. The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured dwellings, and for all development including fill and other activities, as set forth in Chapter 17.322 CBDC and this chapter.

(2) Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit as described in Chapter 17.130 CBDC shall be made on forms furnished by the department and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in CBDC 17.318.160(2)(c), Nonresidential Construction; and

(d) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

(3) Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

(a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or required as in CBDC 17.318.080(2), Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, obtain and record the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements and below-grade crawl spaces) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or as required in CBDC 17.318.080(2):

(i) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and

(ii) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection (2) of this section.

(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.140].


17.318.150 Review of development permits.

The flood hazard administrator is hereby appointed to administer, implement, interpret and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. The flood hazard administrator duties include, but are not limited to:

(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements and conditions of this chapter have been satisfied.

(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of CBDC 17.318.130 are met.

(4) Interpret the provisions of this chapter as noted in CBDC 17.318.100.

Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source (CBDC 17.318.080(2)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historic data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate the lowest floor at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.150].


17.318.160 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

Substantial improvements to existing structures located at or below the base flood elevation and all new construction shall conform to the following standards. The building official shall be responsible to review plans and inspect construction to determine that it is reasonably safe from flooding and complies with provisions of the International Code Council (ICC).

(1) General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:

(a) Anchoring.

(i) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; and

(ii) All manufactured dwellings must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

(b) Construction Materials and Methods.

(i) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

(ii) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and

(iii) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(c) Utilities.

(i) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

(ii) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

(iii) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(d) Subdivision and Planned Unit Development (PUD) Proposals.

(i) All subdivision and PUD proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(ii) All subdivision and PUD proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(iii) All subdivision and PUD proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(iv) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authorized source, it shall be generated for subdivision and/or PUD proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

(2) Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in CBDC 17.318.080(1) or (2), the following provisions are required:

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

(b) Residential Construction.

(i) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.

(ii) New construction shall comply with the requirements of subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(c) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure (including a detached garage) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(i) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

(iii) Be certified by a registered engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based upon their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the city as set forth in this chapter;

(iv) Nonresidential structures which are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (2)(a) of this section; and

(v) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below the base flood level).

(d) Manufactured Dwellings.

(i) Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply with subsection (2)(a) of this section;

(ii) The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or above the BFE;

(iii) The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques); and

(iv) Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE.

(e) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to:

(i) Occupy the site for less than 180 consecutive days;

(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(iii) Meet the requirements of subsection (2)(d) of this section, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured dwellings. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.160].


17.318.170 Below-grade crawl spaces.

Below-grade crawl spaces are allowed subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas:

(1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required openings stated in subsection (2) of this section. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawl space construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.

(2) The crawl space is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

(3) Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.

(4) Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the BFE or designed so that flood waters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from flood waters.

(5) The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

(6) The height of the below-grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.

(7) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes flood waters from the interior area of the crawl space. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.

(8) The velocity of flood waters at the site must not exceed five feet per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types shall be used.

(9) There is an increased insurance cost associated with below-grade crawl spaces.

Below are diagrams from FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01.
[IMAGE]


*    Preferred crawl space construction.

*    Requirements regarding below-grade crawl space construction.

*    For residential structures, state building code requires the lowest floor to be elevated a minimum of one foot above BFE and the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam to be elevated to or above the BFE for manufactured dwellings.

[Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.170].


17.318.180 Critical facility.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.180].


17.318.190 Manufactured dwelling parks. 

All development proposals for manufactured dwelling parks shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for those development proposals which contain at least 50 lots or spaces, or five acres (whichever is less). [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.190].


17.318.200 Standards for storage of materials and equipment.

(1) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.

(2) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.347.200].


17.318.300 Variance.

(1) The issuance of a variance noted in this chapter is for flood hazard management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. The city’s flood hazard administrator, after examining the applicant’s hardships, shall approve or disapprove a variance request in compliance with the following standards and requirements: 

(a) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief from: 

(i) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.

(ii) The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.

(iii) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.

(iv) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.

(v) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.

(vi) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.

(vii) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.

(viii) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area.

(b) Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 

(c) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the procedures of this section. While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviations from that limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases. 

(d) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 

(e) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that:

(i) The criteria of this section are met; and 

(ii) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

(f) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(2) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(3) Granting of a variance is subject to the requirements of the Type II authorization and appeal procedure specified in Chapter 17.130 CBDC. 

(4) Upon approval of a variance, the flood hazard administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that:

(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance;

(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions as required in subsection (5) of this section.

(5) The flood hazard administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


17.318.400 Violation penalties.

Violations of this chapter, consistent with CBMC 9.45.030, are punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. However, if the state of Oregon statutes allow a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in the state law. [Ord. 512 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


Chapter 17.320 HOME OCCUPATION

Sections:

17.320.010    General.

17.320.020    Approval criteria.

17.320.030    Licensing.

17.320.040    Revocation.


17.320.010 General.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to promote opportunities for small-scale economic development and to assure that home occupations do not infringe upon the rights of other residents or alter the residential character of the area.

(2) All home occupations applications are subject to review and approval of a special permit. The director shall review these applications using a Type I review procedure and may approve a home occupation permit; provided, that the applicant satisfies all applicable requirements of this title and chapter. An applicant or aggrieved person may appeal a decision to the planning commission consistent with CBDC 17.130.130, Appeal.

(3) Home occupations with the following characteristics are permitted only after securing a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.347 CBDC. All other requirements listed in this chapter must also be satisfied by the applicant. An applicant or aggrieved person may appeal a decision to the city council consistent with CBDC 17.130.130, Appeal.

(a) Retail sales on the premises.

(b) More than one nonresident employee or associate working on the premises some or all of the time. The permit shall be effective for three years. Extensions may be approved by filing a new conditional use application. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.335.010].


17.320.020 Approval criteria.

(1) Employees. One nonresident associate or employee is allowed to work on the premises.

(2) Area. The use shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the existing building coverage of the property.

(3) Structure.

(a) The proposed use shall not change the character and use of the residence and premises, including elements such as colors, materials, design, construction, lighting, landscaping, or lack of landscaping.

(b) The proposed use shall not remodel or structurally alter the interior or exterior of the structure which changes the residential use and appearance of the dwelling.

(4) Equipment and Storage.

(a) No material or mechanical equipment shall be used that will be detrimental to the residential use of the property or adjoining residences because of vibration, noise, smoke, odor, interference with radio or television reception, or other factors.

(b) Outside storage of equipment, products, or materials used in or serviced by the home occupation, other than plant materials, are prohibited.

(5) Deliveries. No materials or commodities shall be delivered to or from the property which are of bulk or quantity to require delivery by a commercial vehicle or trailer, except such vehicles as a UPS, postal service truck, or similar vehicle.

(6) Traffic and Parking. Vehicles associated with the home occupation shall not cause a disturbance or inconvenience to nearby residents.

(7) Signs. Only one nonilluminated sign shall be permitted. The sign shall not exceed four square feet and shall bear only the name and/or occupation of the resident. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.335.020].


17.320.030 Licensing.

Home occupation uses shall apply for and maintain a current Coos Bay business license. Failure to hold a current business license may be grounds for revocation of the home occupation permit. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.335.030].


17.320.040 Revocation.

The planning commission, though a Type III procedure, may revoke an approved home occupation permit if it finds the use violates one or more provisions of CBDC 17.320.020 or other applicable provisions of this title. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.335.040].


Chapter 17.322 MANUFACTURED HOME SPECIAL SITING STANDARDS

Sections:

17.322.010    Type and size.

17.322.020    Siting requirements.

17.322.030    Roof.

17.322.040    Siding.

17.322.050    Insulation.

17.322.060    Unauthorized location.


17.322.010 Type and size.

A manufactured home must be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.365.010].


17.322.020 Siting requirements.

The home shall be enclosed at the perimeter with a concrete or concrete masonry wall which extends from the bottom of the excavated area to the underside of the manufactured home. The required wall must be trimmed at the meeting with the home to approximate the appearance of a concrete foundation for a conventional single-family dwelling. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.365.020].


17.322.030 Roof.

The manufactured home must have a sloping roof with a minimum pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (3:12). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.365.030].


17.322.040 Siding.

The manufactured home must have conventional wood or textured siding material. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.365.040].


17.322.050 Insulation.

(1) The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope that meets the performance standards equivalent to that required for a single-family dwelling constructed pursuant to specialty code as defined in ORS 455.010.

(2) Documentation that the home meets “Super Good Cents” energy efficiency standards is acceptable in lieu of the manufacturer’s certification. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.365.050].


17.322.060 Unauthorized location.

Manufactured homes are not permitted on property located 100 feet from the external boundaries of property identified in the State Inventory of Historic Property, the National Register of Historic Property, or property designated in the comprehensive plan as a historic district or cultural resource. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.365.060].


Chapter 17.325 MITIGATION OF ADVERSE IMPACTS

Sections:

17.325.010    Purpose.

17.325.020    Determination of direct impacts.

17.325.030    Mitigation of direct impacts.

17.325.040    Voluntary payment agreements as alternatives to dedication and improvements.


17.325.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide alternatives for prospective developers of land within this city to mitigate the direct impacts that have been specifically identified by the city as a consequence of proposed development, and to make provisions for impacts including, but not limited to, impacts upon the public health, safety and general welfare, for open spaces, drainage ways, streets, other public ways, parks, playgrounds, and sites for schools and school grounds.

For purposes of this chapter the term “development” shall include, but not be limited to, subdivision approval, partition approval, site plan approval and the issuance of any building permit related to the foregoing. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.360.010].


17.325.020 Determination of direct impacts.

(1) Before any development is given the required approval or is permitted to proceed, the review authority shall determine all significant adverse impacts, if any, that are a direct consequence of the proposed development and which require mitigation, considering but not limited to the following factors:

(a) Pre-development versus post-development demands upon city streets, drainage facilities, parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, schools, police services, and other development facilities or services;

(b) Likelihood that a direct impact of a proposed development would require mitigation due to the cumulative effect of such impact when aggregated with the similar impacts of future development in the general vicinity of the proposed development;

(c) Size, number, condition and proximity of existing facilities to be affected by the proposed development;

(d) Nature and quantity of capital improvements reasonably necessary to mitigate specific direct impacts identified as a consequence of the proposed development;

(e) Likelihood that the users of the proposed development will benefit from any mitigating capital improvements;

(f) Potential significant adverse environmental impacts of the proposed development;

(g) Consistency with the city’s comprehensive plan;

(h) Likelihood of city growth by annexation into areas immediately adjacent to the proposed development;

(i) Appropriateness of financing necessary capital improvements by means of local improvement districts;

(j) Whether the designated capital improvement furthers the public health, safety or general welfare; and

(k) Any other facts the review authority determines to be relevant.

(2) The applicant shall assume the cost of any investigations, analysis or reports necessary for a determination of direct impact. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.360.020].


17.325.030 Mitigation of direct impacts.

(1) The review authority shall consider an applicant’s proposal for mitigating any identified direct impacts and determine whether the proposal is an acceptable mitigation measure considering the cost and land requirements of the required improvement and the extent to which the necessity for the improvement is attributable to the direct impacts of the proposed development. The city shall not approve a development until provisions have been made to mitigate identified direct impacts that are consequences of the development.

(2) The methods of mitigating identified direct impacts required as a condition to any development approval may include, but are not limited to, dedication of land to any public body and/or off-site improvements. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.360.030].


17.325.040 Voluntary payment agreements as alternatives to dedication and improvements.

(1) In lieu of a dedication of land or to mitigate a direct impact identified as a consequence of a proposed development, subdivision or plat, the city may approve a voluntary payment agreement with the developer; provided, however, no such agreement shall be required as any condition of approval, and any such agreement shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a) The review authority must find that the money offered will mitigate or is a satisfactory alternative to mitigate the identified direct impact.

(b) The payment shall be held in a reserve account and may only be expended to fund a capital improvement agreed upon by the parties to mitigate the identified direct impact.

(c) The payment shall be expended in all cases within five years of collection, unless otherwise agreed to by the developer and approved by his legal advisor due to the unique circumstances involved.

(d) Any payment not so expended shall be refunded to the property owners of record at the time of the refund with interest at the rate applied to judgments at the time of the refund. However, if the payment is not expended within five years due to delay attributable to the developer, the payment shall be refunded without interest; provided, property owners entitled to a refund and/or interest under the provisions of this chapter may voluntarily and in writing waive their right to a refund for a specified period of time in the interests of providing the designated capital improvement or any other capital improvement identified by the property owner.

(2) Further, at the time a developer enters into a voluntary agreement pursuant to this chapter, the developer may voluntarily and in writing waive on behalf of the developer and subsequent purchasers the right to interest and/or a refund in order to facilitate completion of an improvement. The city shall not require a waiver as a condition of approval. Approved waivers shall be recorded with the Coos County assessor’s office and shall be binding on subsequent owners. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.360.040].


Chapter 17.328 NONCONFORMING USES

Sections:

17.328.010    Nonconforming uses and development generally.

17.328.020    Discontinuance, destruction, expansion and changes.

17.328.030    Nonconforming development.


17.328.010 Nonconforming uses and development generally.

(1) Establishment of Nonconforming Status. Legally established nonconforming uses and development may be continued and maintained without city review and approval. A nonconforming use or development may be altered or expanded subject to the provisions of this chapter and other applicable sections of the CBDC.

(2) The proponent of a nonconforming use or development shall bear the burden of establishing that the use or development was legally established and to what extent at the time the use or development became nonconforming.

(3) Ownership. Changes in ownership of a nonconforming use or development are exempt from city review or approval.

(4) Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration, or designated use of a structure for which a building permit has been legally issued, and construction commenced prior to the adoption of the regulation that would make such use or structure nonconforming.

(5) This chapter does not apply to existing single-family dwellings in the commercial and industrial districts; provided any addition, improvement or reconstruction thereto shall comply with the standards of the residential districts. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.327.010].


17.328.020 Discontinuance, destruction, expansion and changes.

(1) Discontinuance. A nonconforming use not actively used for a period of two years shall be deemed discontinued. A discontinued nonconforming use cannot be revived, and any further uses of the property must conform to the provisions of this title as provided for above.

(a) Periods of reduced operation caused by normal fluctuations in business demand are not discontinuances; provided, that periods of reduced operation in excess of two years shall have the effect of discontinuance.

(b) Rights to continue a nonconforming use or development expire if a structure containing a nonconforming use or a nonconforming development is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding 75 percent of the cost of replacement of the structure, using new materials. After such destruction, development or use of the property shall comply with the regulations applicable to the zoning district.

(2) Expansion. Expansion of a nonconforming use or development shall be subject to the same standards and procedure as for a change in the nonconforming use or development as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(3) Changes.

(a) A nonconforming use or development may be changed to a conforming use or development in whole or in part. Once a nonconforming use or development becomes conforming, in whole or in part, the nonconforming rights are lost and the nonconformity may not be reestablished.

(b) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use through a Type II procedure, provided the applicant demonstrates that the proposed use will have no greater adverse impacts on surrounding properties than the existing use; adverse effects include, but are not limited to, generation of more traffic, noise, dust or fumes, or increased hours of operation. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.327.020].


17.328.030 Nonconforming development.

Development which is nonconforming with respect to height, yard requirements, lot coverage, screening and buffering or density may be utilized by a use which is permitted in the district in which it occurs. The development may be repaired, modified, or altered, internally or externally; provided, such repairs and modifications do not increase the nonconformance of the development and comply with the International Building Code standards, or are required by building, health, fire or other applicable standards to make a structure safe for occupancy. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.327.030].


Chapter 17.330 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

17.330.010    Off-street parking requirements.

17.330.020    Joint use of facilities.

17.330.030    Parking design standards.

17.330.040    Loading.

17.330.050    Vehicles in residential zones.

17.330.060    Multifamily parking lots and circulation.

17.330.070    Parking requirements of manufactured home parks.


17.330.010 Off-street parking requirements.

(1) General Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Table 17.330.010(A).

Table 17.330.010(A) – Off-Street Parking Requirements  

	Use	Minimum Number of Parking Spaces

	Residential:

	Single or duplex	2 spaces per dwelling unit

	Multifamily, group residential	1.5 spaces for multifamily

	Group residential care or treatment facility or senior citizen housing	1 space per 3 beds

	Commercial:

	Auto, boat, trailer/mobile home sales or service or nursery	1 space per 500 square feet

	Retail stores	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area

	Furniture or appliance sales and service	1 space per 500 square feet

	Bank, medical or office buildings	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area

	Personal service and repair	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area

	Hotel, motel or bed and breakfast houses	1 space per guestroom, plus 1 per every 25 rooms

	Group residential care facility or emergency shelter or housing	1 space per 3 beds

	Hospital	3 spaces per 2 beds

	Restaurants or drinking establishments	1 space per 100 square feet of floor area

	Religious institutions	1 space for each 6 seats or 12 feet of bench in the principal place of worship

	Skating rink or dance hall	2 spaces per 100 square feet plus 1 per 2 employees

	Bowling alley	2 spaces per lane

	Schools and Civic Uses:

	Preschool, elementary and middle school	2 spaces per classroom and 1 space per additional office

	High school and further education	6 spaces per classroom and 3 spaces per additional office

	Library, museums, art galleries	1 space per 400 square feet of floor area

	Day care	1 space per employee

	Industrial or manufacturing	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area

	Commercial storage or warehousing	1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area

	Government buildings	1 space per 330 square feet of floor area

	Place of assembly with seating	1 space for each 4 seats or 8 feet of bench length which may potentially be provided in the main room of a church, religious institution, or other auditorium. Such space may not be provided in the required first 10 feet of any yard which abuts a street.

	Place of assembly without seating	1 space per 4 persons, based on the occupancy load

(2) Exempt Parking.

(a) There shall be no off-street parking requirements for any property included within the area identified in Figure 17.330.010(B), Downtown Parking District. This area includes property within the parking lot assessment district, city-owned property, public right-of-way, and private property that has provided land for public parking.

Figure 17.330.010(B) – Downtown Parking District
[IMAGE]


(b) Any use included in the area identified in Figure 17.330.010(C), Exempt Parking Area with Cap, must provide off-street parking for the number of spaces required in Table 17.330.010(A), Off-Street Parking Requirements, in excess of 25 spaces.

Figure 17.330.010(C) – Exempt Parking Area with Cap
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.010].


17.330.020 Joint use of facilities.

Joint parking and/or loading facilities serving two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be approved to satisfy the requirements of both facilities, provided the owners or operators of the uses, structures, or parcels show that their operations and parking needs do not overlap in point of time. If the uses, structures, or parcels are under separate ownership, the right to joint use of the parking space must be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or other appropriate written document to establish the joint use. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.020].


17.330.030 Parking design standards.

(1) Size of Parking Space. Each off-street parking space shall not be less than nine feet by 18 feet. Up to 25 percent of all required parking spaces can be used for compact vehicles. These compact spaces shall not be less than eight feet by 16 feet. Each space shall be provided with adequate ingress and egress.

(2) Location. Off-street parking facilities shall be located on site to the extent feasible. Off-site parking shall be no further than 300 feet from the site, measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the nearest building that the facility is required to serve. Off-site parking shall be primarily employee parking.

(3) Materials, Design, and Lighting.

(a) Off-street parking facilities shall be surfaced with a durable and dustless surface, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water to the satisfaction of the public works department and shall be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris.

(b) Except for a single-family or duplex dwelling, groups of more than two parking spaces per lot must:

(i) Provide aisles or turnaround areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner; and

(ii) Serve a driveway designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic on and off the site, with due regard to pedestrian and vehicle safety, and shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined. In no case shall two-way and one-way driveways be less than 20 feet and 12 feet, respectively, and arranged so as not to use any part of adjoining public sidewalks, street, or alley rights-of-way, except for ingress and egress.

(c) Delays – Unimproved Rights-of-Way. Off-street parking and loading for residential and nonresidential uses on existing unpaved streets are allowed a delay from the surfacing requirements prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. However, the property owner must consent and present a recorded deed restriction or covenant which states that remonstrance against any future street improvement project has been waived and that the required paving will be completed within 12 months after the street is improved. 

(d) Improvements to the parking facilities of residential uses, such as the addition of a carport or garage, shall require compliance with the surfacing requirements of the driveway and maneuvering areas if the dwelling gains access from an improved street. At a minimum, the paved access must be 20 feet in length measured from the property line in which access is gained.

(e) Lighting used to illuminated off-street parking facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect light away from any adjoining residential area(s).

(4) All uses, except for single-family dwellings and duplexes, required to provide off-street vehicle parking shall provide bicycle parking consistent with the standards in Table 17.330.030.

 

Table 17.330.030 – Bicycle Parking 

	Type of Use	Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces

	Multifamily residential	One space per dwelling unit

	Commercial	One space per use plus one space per 50 vehicle parking spaces

	Industrial, institutional and public uses	Schools – One space per 10 students Other uses – One space per use plus one space per 10 vehicle parking spaces

(a) Bicycle parking space may be located within garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area.

(b) Bicycle Parking Location. Bicycle parking shall be located in lighted, secure locations within 50 feet of the main entrance to a building, but not further from the entrance than the closest general-purpose automobile parking space. Where a building has multiple entrances, required bicycle parking shall be no farther than 50 feet from an entrance. Bicycle parking shall be located and designed so as to not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians (at least 36 inches between bicycles and other obstructions or buildings). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.030].


17.330.040 Loading.

Every use for which a building is erected or structurally altered which will require the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by truck or similar vehicle shall provide off-street loading space on the basis of minimum requirements as follows:

(1) Commercial, industrial, and public uses shall provide truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with Table 17.330.040(A):

Table 17.330.040(A) 

	Square Feet of Floor Area	Number of Berths Required

	Less than 5,000	0

	5,000 – 30,000	1

	30,000 – 100,000	2

	100,000 and over	3

(2) Restaurants, office buildings, hotels, motels, hospitals and institutions, schools and colleges, public buildings, recreation or entertainment facilities, and any similar uses shall provide off-street truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with Table 17.330.040(B):

Table 17.330.040(B) 

	Square Feet of Floor Area	Number of Berths Required

	Less than 30,000	0

	30,000 – 100,000	1

	100,000 and over	2

(3) A loading berth shall contain space 12 feet wide, 35 feet long, and have a height clearance of 14 feet. Where the vehicles generally used for loading and unloading exceed these dimensions, the required length of these berths shall be increased.

(4) Existing loading space shall not be eliminated, if elimination would result in less space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.

(5) Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the requirement of this title shall not be used for loading and unloading operations except during periods of the day when not required to take care of parking needs.

(6) Loading docks shall be located on the side or rear of the building. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.040].


17.330.050 Vehicles in residential zones.

(1) Purpose. Parking lots and outdoor storage of vehicles or recreational vehicles shall not be a primary use for any property located within a single-family residential zone.

(2) Where Applicable. These regulations apply to all residential users in LDR-6 and LDR-8.5 zoning districts unless otherwise expressly indicated.

(3) Off-Street Parking. Each single-family residence, constructed after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, shall provide for at least two off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking must provide a minimum of 20 feet of lineal parking between the street and the dwelling setback. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.050].


17.330.060 Multifamily parking lots and circulation.

Except for townhouse structures containing garages, parking lots and garages for developments in MDR zoning districts shall be located in the rear portions of the property, with building construction occurring toward the front, closest to employment centers, shopping centers and transit corridors to minimize walking distance. Parking lots and garages located between buildings and streets are not permitted, except for townhouse structures that contain garages, in which case no more than 40 percent of the front of each townhouse dwelling unit shall be devoted to garage door space.

(1) At least one and one-half parking spaces shall be provided on site for each multiple-family dwelling unit.

(2) A minimum of 10 feet of landscaped buffer area shall separate parking lots from adjoining properties and streets. Driveways to townhouse garages, which provide off-street parking, shall not be considered parking lots.

(3) MDR development projects shall provide access to collector or arterial streets; however, individual dwelling units within an MDR development project shall not have direct access to an arterial or a collector street.

(a) Within an MDR development project, parking lots or driveways to individual dwelling units shall connect directly to a local residential street with direct access to an arterial or collector street.

(b) MDR development projects shall not have direct primary access to existing local residential streets within an MDR zoning district unless the review authority finds, by substantial evidence, that environmental, topographic or other issues relating directly to public safety or welfare require general access to a local, public residential street.

(4) Pedestrian access shall be provided to transit corridors without having to pass through a parking lot whenever possible.

(5) Parking lots associated with conditional or nonconforming uses in these districts are subject to site plan review and approval.

(6) In no event shall on-site parking facilities exceed 50 contiguous spaces per parking cluster. Where more than 50 spaces are required, there shall be a landscaped buffer, not less than 20 feet wide, between parking clusters. Where the applicant desires more than one parking cluster on a lot or contiguous lots, the director, through the site review process, shall require that each cluster be designed to accommodate bicycle parking facilities, and that pedestrian walk lanes are provided and clearly marked.

(7) Through a Type II adjustment request, an applicant may request adjustments to this section if the topography or other environmental constraints associated with the property prevent reasonable compliance with this standard. Where the applicant desires more than one parking cluster on a lot or contiguous lots, the director, through the site review process, shall require that each cluster be designed to accommodate bicycle parking facilities, and that pedestrian walk lanes are provided and clearly marked.

(8) All new townhouse developments shall include four additional off-street parking spaces for every three units. These spaces are to be evenly dispersed throughout the development with no more than four spaces being located in any one specific area. The director is authorized to establish final location of these parking spaces. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.060].


17.330.070 Parking requirements of manufactured home parks.

(1) Off-street parking shall be provided for at least two automobiles per dwelling unit, located on the lot or property which they are intended to serve. Off-street parking shall be provided within a garage or carport.

(2) Visitor Parking. At least one automobile parking space shall be provided for every two manufactured home lots or sites for use by visitors and delivery vehicles. These spaces shall be signed or designated as such. These spaces shall be within 100 feet of the lots to be served. Visitor parking may be provided on streets designed to accommodate parking and two standard lanes of traffic.

(3) All on-site parking shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the parking facility standards of this chapter.

(4) Trucks with a maximum gross vehicle weight more than one and one-half tons, recreational vehicles, boats on boat trailers, and similar equipment shall be parked in one of the two allocated off-street parking spaces if stored on an individual lot or space; provided no more than one passenger vehicle may be parked on a given lot or space. Car-top boats and canoes are exempt from this requirement. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.340.070].


Chapter 17.333 SIGNS

Sections:

17.333.010    Purpose.

17.333.020    General provisions.

17.333.030    Signs allowed without permit.

17.333.040    Prohibited signs.

17.333.050    Special signs.

17.333.060    Standards – Residential zoning districts.

17.333.070    Standards – Mixed-use, commercial and industrial zoning districts.

17.333.080    Standards – Medical park district.

17.333.090    Standards – Urban public district.


17.333.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are intended to: improve the effectiveness of signs in identifying and advertising businesses; prevent signs from detracting from the enjoyment and pleasure of the city’s natural beauty; provide uniform sign standards and fair and equal treatment of sign users; protect public safety by ensuring that official traffic regulating devices are easily visible; ensure the safe construction, erection, and maintenance of outdoor signs; and comply with state and federal constitutional requirements relating to speech. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.010].


17.333.020 General provisions.

(1) General Location of Signs. No sign allowed by this title shall be placed so that it is supported within a public right-of-way, unless this title specifies otherwise. Some signs may project over rights-of-way, subject to the standards for that type of sign or for the underlying zoning district.

(2) Permits.

(a) Sign permits are required before the installation of all signs except those exempted in CBDC 17.333.030. Permits may be issued to the sign contractor or to the owner of the business or property.

(b) Applications for sign permits shall contain at least the following information:

(i) Name and address of the applicant;

(ii) Location of the property on which the sign is to be erected, and the amount of lot and building frontages;

(iii) Scaled dimensions of the sign and its height above grade;

(iv) A sketch showing the location of all existing and proposed signs on the premises;

(v) An accurate depiction, or rendering, showing advertising copy on the proposed sign; and

(vi) If applicable, a drawing showing clearly the structural elements.

(3) Installation and Maintenance. The installation of all signs shall be in compliance with the appropriate chapter of the State Structural Specialty Code in effect. No signs shall be erected, relocated, or maintained to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape required by code. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, complete, and neat condition.

(4) For the purpose of this chapter, the zoning designations are as follows:

(a) Residential: (LDR-6), (LDR-8.5) and (MDR-16).

(b) Medical park (MP).

(c) Commercial: commercial (C-1) and mixed-use (MX).

(d) Industrial: industrial/commercial (I-C), waterfront industrial (W-I) and waterfront heritage (WH).

(e) Urban public (UP).

(5) Applicability of Chapter. Murals are not considered signs. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.020].


17.333.030 Signs allowed without permit.

(1) Public Signs. Signs of a public, noncommercial nature which shall include traffic control signs, safety signs, danger signs, no trespassing signs, signs indicating scenic or historic points of interest, and all signs erected by a public employee in the performance of public duty.

(2) Memorial Signs or Tablets. Nonilluminated memorial signs or tablets indicating the name of a building and/or the date of erection. Exempted signs shall not exceed five feet in area.

(3) Private Traffic Direction Signs. Signs guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic on private property. Exempt signs shall be less than three square feet, shall not be placed within a public right-of-way, except by right-of-way use permit, and shall contain no advertising copy.

(4) Name Plates. Nonilluminated, single-faced, wall-mounted name plates indicating only the name, address, and occupation of the occupant. Exempt signs shall not exceed one name plate per dwelling unit or business, no larger than two square feet, nor a combined area of six square feet for multiple businesses or units.

(5) Construction Signs. Signs identifying the architect, engineer, contractor, or other firm involved with building construction, and naming the building or its purpose, and the expected completion date. Only one sign per street frontage shall be allowed, not to exceed 12 square feet in residential zones, 24 square feet in professional zones, or 32 square feet in all other zones. If there is only one street frontage, more than one sign may be allowed, provided the total sign area does not exceed the maximum specified above. These signs shall be removed within 14 days after the building receives a final occupancy permit.

(6) Real Estate Signs. Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed. Signs are limited to one double-faced sign per property, not to exceed six square feet in residential zones, 24 square feet in professional zones, or 32 square feet in all other zones. A real estate sign advertising a development of multiple properties, such as a subdivision or industrial park, shall not exceed one square foot per lot, with a maximum size of 32 square feet in total area. For multiple properties, one sign of the maximum size may be allowed on each street frontage; provided, that the signs are 400 feet apart measured along the frontage.

(7) Vehicle Signs. Signs painted on or permanently affixed to lawfully parked and operable motor vehicles or trailers.

(8) Window Signs. Signs affixed to or painted on the inside or outside of windows and visible from the exterior of a structure.

(9) Political campaign signs.

(10) Special Event Signs. Signs or outdoor displays of a temporary nature advertising or promoting a specific event, seasonal or holiday decoration or display. These signs may contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, flags or other similar moving devices.

(11) Attraction Devices. Devices, designs, or symbols which may consist of banners, windsocks, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, or other similar nonautomated, nonelectronic, or nonilluminated moving devices. These devices may not encroach upon a public right-of-way if they are a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. See also CBDC 17.333.040(4) for prohibitions regarding attraction devices.

(12) National, State, or City Flags. These signs shall be maintained in a manner which befits the respect due to the entities they represent.

(13) Wall-Mounted Signs. These signs shall be exempted in commercial and industrial zones.

(14) Sign Maintenance or Changing Copy. Painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or a sign structure unless a structural change is made; changing advertising copy on a billboard, on a reader board, or on a permitted sign if that sign belongs to the same owner or advertises the same business. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.030].


17.333.040 Prohibited signs.

(1) Obscene or Indecent Signs. Any visual representation or verbal description of sexual conduct, sexual excitement, sado-masochistic abuse, or excretory functions or products, as further defined in ORS 167.060 et seq.

(2) Signs Interfering with Traffic. Signs or other devices in any location which, because of position, shape, color, or animation, may interfere with, obstruct or be confused with any authorized traffic sign or highway identification sign; or which use the words, “stop,” “look,” “danger,” or other words, phrases, symbols, characters, or animation which would interfere with, mislead, distract, or confuse vehicle operators; and signs located at the intersection of streets or driveways which substantially obstruct clear vision of vehicle operators.

(3) Defunct Businesses. Signs which advertise an activity, business, product or services no longer on the premises, including all related off-premises signs.

(4) Attraction Devices. Strings, groupings, or clusters of pennants and pinwheels shall not be permitted in the commercial, urban public or residential zones. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.040].


17.333.050 Special signs.

Special signs require a permit and shall conform to the maintenance and safety requirements of CBDC 17.333.020 and to requirements of the underlying zone.

(1) Street Banners. Banners erected over authorized public rights-of-way which advertise events or entertainment of community interest under the sponsorship of a nonprofit organization may only be erected in places and in a fashion authorized by the department for a maximum of 14 days. A longer period of time may be allowed if no other organization reserves the installation.

(2) Portable Signs. Signs containing advertising copy which are not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground and are designed to be moved, such as sandwich boards and signs on wheels, except political campaign and real estate signs. One portable sign per business with a maximum of two faces and 10 square feet or less per face is allowed and shall not be charged to the property’s allowable sign area. Any excess size over 10 square feet shall be charged as shall additional portable signs. Portable signs may be placed in the public right-of-way fronting the business; provided, that a safety or vision clearance problem does not result.

(3) Off-Premises Signs. Signs other than a billboard which advertise a business, commodity, and/or activity which are not sold, manufactured, or conducted on the premises where the sign is located. These signs shall be charged to the property on which they are located. Therefore, the permit must be accompanied by a written documentation from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located acknowledging this charge. To allow an unobstructed view of the bay, off-premises signs in the following locations must be wall-mounted:

(a) On the bayside of Bayshore Drive north of Elrod Avenue.

(b) On the bayside of South Empire Boulevard south of Newmark Avenue.

(c) On the bayside of 6th Avenue south of “F” Street.

(4) Billboards. Billboards are off-premises signs which are generally for hire. They shall only be allowed in the commercial and industrial zones, except that no billboard shall be allowed on the bayside of Bayshore Drive north of Elrod Avenue, nor on the bayside of South Empire Boulevard south of Newmark Avenue, nor on the bayside of 6th Avenue south of “F” Street. The size of billboards shall not exceed a total of 300 square feet; back-to-back installation on one supporting structure is permitted. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.050].


17.333.060 Standards – Residential zoning districts.

(1) General. This section shall apply to all residential zones listed in CBDC 17.220.020, low density residential locational criteria.

(2) Size.

(a) Each dwelling unit, including home occupations, shall be allowed one sign with a maximum of two faces not to exceed two square feet in area per face.

(b) Subdivisions, factory-built home parks, PUDs, other housing complexes, and all other uses without structures thereon shall be allowed one additional sign with a maximum of two faces not exceeding 24 square feet in area per face to identify the premises.

(c) Group residential and multiple-family dwellings shall be allowed the greater of either:

(i) One wall-mounted or double-faced freestanding sign not to exceed 15 square feet; or

(ii) One wall-mounted sign not to exceed 10 percent of the property’s lot frontage.

(iii) Commercial and civic uses shall be allowed both signs under subsection (2)(b) of this section; the smaller sign shall be oriented to a parking area or to the other street frontage on a corner lot.

(3) Location.

(a) In addition to the requirements of CBDC 17.220.020, low density residential locational criteria, freestanding signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line and shall not be placed within the vision clearance area or in a manner which obstructs vision or vehicular traffic.

(b) Building-mounted signs shall be placed flat against the wall and shall not project from the building or above the roofline.

(c) Roof-mounted signs are prohibited.

(i) Height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed five feet in height from grade to the top of the sign. There are no height limitations for wall-mounted signs, except that no part of the sign shall extend above the roofline.

(ii) Content. Signs for residential uses shall only bear the name of the occupant and address, and the occupation if the sign advertises a home occupation. The additional sign allowed under subsections (2)(b) and (c) of this section shall only identify the complex. The content of signs for commercial and civic uses is not restricted.

(iii) Lighting. Interior illumination, flashing, moving, or animated lights are prohibited. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.060].


17.333.070 Standards – Mixed-use, commercial and industrial zoning districts.

(1) General. This section shall apply to all commercial and industrial zones established by this title, except the zoning districts regulated by CBDC 17.333.080, Standards – Medical park district.

(2) Size.

(a) The total allowable sign area, exclusive of wall-mounted signs, for each frontage shall be based upon either the lot or building frontage of the business along a publicly dedicated right-of-way or upon a building frontage along a parking lot. The total allowable sign area shall be computed at one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage, or at one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of building frontage, whichever is greater. Each sign shall be limited to two faces and no individual sign shall exceed 300 square feet per face. However, all businesses shall be allowed a minimum of 37.5 square feet of sign area per face, regardless of the amount of frontage.

(b) Multi-Story Buildings. Ground floor businesses of multi-story buildings shall be entitled to 100 percent of the maximum allowable sign area computed for the building based upon the lot or building frontage. Different businesses above the ground floor shall share 50 percent of that sign area amount.

(c) Shopping Centers. Each business in a shopping center shall be allowed sign area based upon the business’s building frontage on a public right-of-way or parking lot. In addition, the shopping center shall be allowed one double-faced sign on each right-of-way, each not exceeding 100 square feet per face, which shall identify the center itself and may also identify businesses in the center.

(3) Location and Placement. A sign shall be placed to have exposure from the frontage on which it is computed, in compliance with CBDC 17.333.020 and as follows:

(a) Projecting Signs. These signs shall not project more than eight feet beyond the property line and shall not be closer than two feet to any curbline. These projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above a pedestrian walkway and 15 feet above a public street or alley, driveway, or parking lot.

(b) Marquee Signs. Marquee signs, including signs on awnings or canopies, shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet from the grade of the pedestrian way to the bottom of the sign, and shall not project closer than two feet to any curbline.

(c) Signs Computed by Parking Lot Frontage. Signs computed on building frontage along a parking lot shall be painted on the building or flush-mounted on the wall surface of the building, and shall not extend above the top of the wall.

(4) Height. Signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height measured from grade to the highest element of the sign. This requirement shall not apply to signs affixed to the walls or to the roof. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.070].


17.333.080 Standards – Medical park district.

(1) General. This section shall apply to the medical park and residential/professional zones established by this title.

(2) Size.

(a) Each building of a commercial or civic use shall be allowed either one double-faced sign no greater than 24 square feet or two single-faced signs no greater than 24 square feet each.

(b) Residential uses shall conform to the requirements of CBDC 17.333.060(2).

(3) Location and Placement. Signs may be located anywhere on the property, except in compliance with CBDC 17.333.020 and as follows:

(a) Residential Signs. Freestanding signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line and shall not be placed within the vision clearance area or in a manner which obstructs vision or vehicular traffic. Roof-mounted signs are prohibited.

(b) Commercial and civic use signs shall not project over public property.

(4) Height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed five feet in height from grade to the top of the sign. There are no height limitations for wall-mounted signs, except that they shall not extend above the roofline.

(5) Lighting. Flashing, moving, or animated lights are prohibited. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.080].


17.333.090 Standards – Urban public district.

There shall are no special requirements applied in the urban public district established by this title, except that flashing, moving, or animated signs are prohibited, excluding scoreboards. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.337.090].


Chapter 17.335 SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

17.335.010    Generally.

17.335.020    Height of fences and hedges.

17.335.030    Solid waste.

17.335.040    Lighting.

17.335.050    Noise.

17.335.060    Landscaping.

17.335.070    Drive-ins/drive-throughs.

17.335.080    Indoor marijuana-related businesses.


17.335.010 Generally.

The standards in this chapter apply to development generally within the city of Coos Bay. They can be used in any review process where applicable to evaluate or to set conditions of approval of an application. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.362.010].


17.335.020 Height of fences and hedges.

(1) Fences, walls and hedges not greater than eight feet in height shall be permitted on or within all property lines which are not within any vision clearance area. For any fence greater than eight feet in height a setback from the property line of one foot shall be provided for each additional foot or fraction of a foot.

(2) Commercial fences or walls located in the following areas shall only be allowed subject to approval of a Type II review (Chapter 17.365 CBDC):

(a) Bayshore Drive between Elrod Avenue and Highland Avenue.

(b) Bayshore Drive north of Fir Avenue.

(c) South Empire Boulevard south of Newmark Avenue.

(d) 6th Avenue south of “F” Street.

(e) All area located in the downtown Coos Bay and Empire urban renewal areas in commercial land use districts.

(f) Chain link fences are prohibited in the areas noted in subsections (2)(a) through (e) of this section. [Ord. 524 § 7 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.362.020].


17.335.030 Solid waste.

If refuse containers are used by more than one unit for temporary storage of solid wastes, the container(s) shall be screened from view from off site by a sight-obscuring fence and/or evergreen landscaping and the area kept clean of all litter. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.362.030].


17.335.040 Lighting.

(1) Street lighting shall be a required component of all residential, commercial and industrial developments within the city of Coos Bay. Lighting plans shall be a required component of complete preliminary subdivision, partition and site plan applications. All lighting plans shall be approved by the director.

(2) Lighting, including permitted illuminated signs, shall be designed and arranged so as to not:

(a) Reflect or cast glare into any residential zone;

(b) Rotate, glitter, or flash; or

(c) Conflict with the readability of traffic signs and control signals.

(3) Lighting on any site shall not cause more than one foot-candle measured at any property line. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.362.040].


17.335.050 Noise.

All development shall comply with the noise standards established in the city. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.362.050].


17.335.060 Landscaping.

The following standards apply to landscaping and screening on private property required pursuant to this title. The city’s public works department shall review and authorize landscaping and screening within public rights-of-way.

(1) At a minimum, 15 percent of each new commercial or industrial zoned lot or development must be landscaped to the standards within this chapter.

(2) Applicants are encouraged to provide flexible landscaping design that takes advantage of natural features and addresses the use and function of the proposed development. Landscaping choices should consider the aesthetic qualities of the existing site and provide attractive variety in tree and shrub species, texture, color, height and density.

(3) Existing vegetation may fulfill landscaping and screening requirements of this chapter if the existing landscaping provides at least an equivalent level of screening as the standard required for the development in question.

(4) As a condition of approval for a conditional use or PUD, the city may require an applicant to provide landscaping and screening that differs from the standards in this section where necessary to comply with the other applicable approval standards for the use or development.

(5) Landscaped areas required for stormwater management purposes may be used to satisfy the landscaping area requirements of this chapter, even though those areas may be inundated by surface water. Required stormwater management facilities are not classified as areas inundated by water.

(6) Required landscaping and screening shall be located on the perimeter of a lot or parcel. Required landscaping and screening shall not be located on a public right-of-way or private street easement, unless authorized by the city’s public works department.

(7) Parking and loading areas shall be landscaped as follows:

(a) A minimum five-foot-wide landscaped strip shall be provided where vehicle parking or loading adjoins a public road right-of-way.

(b) Parking areas that contain at least seven spaces are required to provide landscaping islands throughout the development. A landscape island shall contain at least 25 square feet, shall be at least four feet wide, and shall prevent vehicles from damaging trees by using a wheel stop or curb.

(8) The applicant shall install required landscaping and screening consistent with the approved site plan or development, or an approved modification thereto, before the city issues an occupancy permit or final inspection for the development in question; provided, the city may defer installation of plant materials for up to six months after the city issues an occupancy permit or final inspection for the development in question if doing so increases the likely survival of plants.

(9) All required ground cover plants and shrubs must be of sufficient size and number to meet the required standards within three years of planting. Mulch (as a ground cover) must be confined to areas underneath plants and is not a substitute for living ground cover plants, lawn or approved flowers.

(10) Shrubs shall be supplied in a minimum of two-gallon containers or equivalent burlap balls, with a minimum spread of three inches. Reduction in the minimum size may be permitted if certified by a registered landscape architect that the reduction shall not diminish the intended effect or the likelihood the plants will survive.

(11) Trees shall be measured from the ground level at final planting to the top of the tree.

(a) Trees required for parking and loading areas shall be a minimum caliper of two inches and a minimum height of 10 feet at the time of planting.

(b) Required deciduous trees (other than street trees) shall be fully branched, have a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches and a minimum height of eight feet at the time of planting.

(c) Required evergreen trees (other than street trees) shall be fully branched and a minimum of six feet high at the time of planting.

(d) The review authority may reduce the minimum size of trees (other than street trees) if the applicant submits a written statement by a landscape architect registered in Oregon or expert in the growing of the tree(s) in question certifies that the reduction in size at planting will not decrease the likelihood the trees will survive.

(12) Landscape materials should be selected and sited to produce a hardy and drought-resistant landscape area. Selection should include consideration of soil type and depth, the amount of maintenance required, spacing, exposure to sun and wind, the slope and contours of the site, compatibility with existing native vegetation preserved on the site, water conservation where needed, and the impact of landscaping on visibility of the site for purposes of public safety and surveillance. Landscaping materials shall be selected in accordance with a list of plant materials adopted by reference as the Sunset Western Garden Book.

(13) The applicant shall demonstrate and comply with the following:

(a) Plant materials shall be installed to current nursery industry standards.

(b) Plant materials shall be properly supported to ensure survival. Support devices such as guy wires or stakes shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement.

(c) Existing trees and plant materials to be retained shall be protected during construction, such as by use of chain-link or other sturdy fence placed at the drip-line of trees to be retained. Grading, topsoil storage, construction material storage, vehicles and equipment shall not be allowed within the drip-line of trees to be retained.

(14) Maintenance of landscaped areas is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy manner. Plants that die must be replaced with in-kind materials unless otherwise authorized by the review authority. Vegetation shall be controlled by pruning, trimming or otherwise so that it will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public utility, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or obstruct sight distance at intersections.

(15) Irrigation. The intent of this standard is to ensure that plants will survive the critical establishment period when they are most vulnerable due to lack of watering. All required landscaped areas must comply with one of the following:

(a) A permanent built-in irrigation system with an automatic controller will serve the landscape area in question, and the system will be installed and operational before the city grants an occupancy permit or final inspection for the development in question; or

(b) A temporary irrigation system will be acceptable, provided the applicant must submit a statement from a landscape architect registered in Oregon or expert in the growing of the vegetation in question which certifies that the proposed temporary irrigation system will provide sufficient water to ensure that the plant materials to be planted will survive installation and, once established, will survive without watering other than natural rainfall; or

(c) A permanent or temporary irrigation system will not serve the landscape area in question; provided the applicant submits the following:

(i) A statement from a landscape architect registered in Oregon or expert in the growing of the vegetation in question certifying that the materials to be planted will survive without watering other than natural rainfall; and

(ii) A plan for monitoring the survival of required vegetation on the approved site plan for at least one year and for detection and replacement of required vegetation that does not survive with like-kind material or other material approved by the city. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.362.060]


17.335.070 Drive-ins/drive-throughs.

Drive-in/drive-through uses and facilities are subject to the following standards and conditions:

(1) All drive-in/drive-through service facilities shall provide a designated parking area for two cars in close proximity to the facility or provide other satisfactory methods to allow customers requiring excessive waiting time to receive service while parked.

(2) Drive-in/drive-through facilities shall be designed and verified by a traffic engineer that vehicles will have appropriate stacking distance, will not obstruct any vision clearance and shall maintain clear drive aisles, pedestrian walkways and public rights-of-way. Drive-up/drive-through design shall assure prohibition from backing into a vehicular or pedestrian path of travel. 

(3) The sound level of communications systems shall comply with CBMC Title 9.

(4) All components of a drive-in/drive-through use shall be removed within one year of discontinuation of the use through abandonment, relocation, or redevelopment.

(5) No demolition of or exterior change to a building considered to be a city-designated cultural resource or listed on the National Register of Historic Places shall be permitted to accommodate a drive-in/drive-through use. [Ord. 511 § 6 (Exh. 2), 2019].


17.335.080 Indoor marijuana-related businesses.

Marijuana-related businesses may be operated indoors only and shall meet all of the following requirements:

(1) Location. The business must be located in a permanent building in the industrial-commercial zone and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container, motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, manufactured home, greenhouse, or building designed and defined by the building code as a residence, nor within 1,000 feet of any residential use in any zone of the city nor within 1,000 feet of another marijuana-related business of the same type.

For the purposes of determining the distance between a marijuana-related business and another marijuana-related business and a marijuana business and a residential use, “within 1,000 feet” means a straight line measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or less in every direction from the closest point anywhere on the premises of an approved marijuana-related business to the closest point anywhere on the premises of a proposed marijuana-related business of the same type. If any portion of the premises of a proposed marijuana-related business is within 1,000 feet of an approved marijuana-related business of the same type, it may not be approved. For the purpose of this section, premises are all public and private enclosed areas within a building at the location that are used in the business operation, including offices, kitchens, restrooms, and storerooms.

(2) Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage for merchandise or any material associated with a marijuana business is prohibited.

(3) Site Plan Review Consistency. Modifications to the subject site or exterior of a building housing the business must be consistent with Chapter 17.365 CBDC, Site Plan Review.

(4) Design criteria for processing and production facilities are subject to the following site and building design criteria:

(a) Security bars or grates on windows and doors are prohibited.

(b) Building frontage on Highway 101/Bayshore Drive shall include exemplary design and is subject to review by the design assistance team.

(5) Disposal. The business must provide for secure disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products; such remnants or by-products shall not be placed within the business’s exterior refuse containers.

(6) Light and Glare. For production of marijuana, shield lighting systems and window coverings are required to confine light and glare from the interior of the structure.

(7) Building Code. Any structure, accessory structure, electrical service, plumbing, or mechanical equipment (e.g., lighting, fans, heating and cooling systems) associated with a business shall satisfy the building code requirements and obtain all required building permits prior to installation.

(8) Property Owner Claim Waiver Requirement. The property owner of a structure in which an indoor marijuana business is to be located shall record a declaration which waives any claim or right to hold the city liable for damages they or a tenant may suffer from state or federal enforcement actions for activities the city permits as a result of its approval of the proposed use or development once such approval is granted. Furthermore, the owner and tenant agree not to unreasonably disobey the city’s order to halt or suspend business if state or federal authorities order or otherwise subject the city to enforcement to comply with laws in contradiction to the continued operations of the business as permitted in Table 17.235.020 – I-C Uses.

(9) A marijuana-related business must obtain an approved license or registration from the state of Oregon and meet all applicable Oregon Revised Statutes and Oregon Administrative Rules.

(10) Marijuana Production. Marijuana production shall be limited to 5,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per lot.

(11) Drive-Up Use. A marijuana retail sales outlet shall not include a drive-up facility or use. [Ord. 513 § 7 (Exh. 2), 2019].


Chapter 17.337 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT

Sections:

17.337.010    Pre-application review.

17.337.020    Review process.

17.337.030    Application contents.

17.337.040    Approval criteria.

17.337.050    Expiration and extension.

17.337.060    Limitation on new application.


17.337.010 Pre-application review.

An application for a temporary use permit is not subject to pre-application review, unless included with an application that is subject to pre-application review. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.332.010].


17.337.020 Review process.

(1) Review of a technically complete application for a temporary use permit for a use that will exist not more than 60 days is subject to a Type I process, CBDC 17.130.080.

(2) Review of a technically complete application for a temporary use permit for a use that will exist for more than 60 calendar days but less than six months is subject to a Type II process, CBDC 17.130.090. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.332.020].


17.337.030 Application contents.

An applicant for a temporary use permit shall submit the requisite fee and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the information required by CBDC 17.130.040 and other information the director determines necessary to review the application. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.332.030].


17.337.040 Approval criteria.

(1) The review authority shall approve or approve with conditions an application for a temporary use permit in any zone if he or she finds the applicant has sustained the burden of proving that:

(a) The use is of a temporary nature, limited to a structure which can be readily dismantled and removed from the site within 48 hours of cessation of the use or activity, or converted to a permitted use in the zoning district;

(b) The use will cease and/or the structure will be removed or converted to a permitted use within six months; and

(c) Establishment and operation of the temporary use will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare.

(2) The review authority may impose conditions of approval deemed necessary to ensure the proposed temporary use complies with the foregoing approval criteria. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.332.040].


17.337.050 Expiration and extension.

(1) A temporary use permit shall automatically expire on the date specified in the approval.

(2) A temporary use permit approved through a Type I process may be extended for up to an additional 60 calendar days through a Type I process.

(3) A temporary use permit approved through a Type II process may be extended for up to an additional three calendar months through a Type I process, provided the duration of the temporary use permit may not exceed one calendar year. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.332.050].


17.337.060 Limitation on new application.

(1) Where a temporary use permit was approved for a particular property through a Type I process, no new applications for a temporary use permit may be approved for the same property for six calendar months after the prior permit or extension expired.

(2) Where a temporary use permit was approved for a particular property through a Type II process, no new applications for a temporary use permit may be approved for the same property for one calendar year after the prior permit or extension expired. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.332.060].


Chapter 17.338 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

17.338.010    Additional standards.

17.338.020    Expiration and extension.

17.338.030    Transfer prohibited.


17.338.010 Additional standards.

In addition to complying with other applicable standards and federal law, a telecommunications facility shall comply with the following siting and design standards:

(1) A new telecommunications facility shall be reviewed and processed as a conditional use in all zones within the city.

(2) A telecommunications facility may exceed the height limit of the underlying zone, if any.

(3) The base of the tower for a telecommunications facility shall be set back from property lines a distance equal to or greater than one-half the height of the tower. All other structures and improvements associated with a telecommunications facility shall comply with applicable dimensional standards of the base zone or as otherwise provided by the approval authority.

(4) The setback of a telecommunications facility shall include landscaping as provided in CBDC 17.335.060.

(5) Generators and other equipment associated with a telecommunications facility shall not cause noise in excess of limitations within the city.

(6) Lights associated with a telecommunications facility shall be the minimum necessary to provide for security and safety. Advertising or signage of any kind is prohibited on a telecommunications facility tower except for a sign identifying safety and emergency information. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.355.010].


17.338.020 Expiration and extension.

If a conditional use permit expires, it can be extended as provided in CBDC 17.347.040, Criteria for approval, minor modifications and revocation. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.355.020].


17.338.030 Transfer prohibited.

An approved conditional use permit is specific to the subject property and cannot be transferred to another property. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.355.030].


Chapter 17.340 ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

17.340.010    Pre-application.

17.340.020    Permits required.

17.340.030    Standards.


17.340.010 Pre-application.

The applicant shall submit a sketch plan to the department of community services and shall discuss the general proposal with staff before filing for any special development permits. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


17.340.020 Permits required.

New construction or the replacement, addition, or major improvement of existing development shall be subject to site plan review. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


17.340.030 Standards.

The general conditions of the district shall prevail in addition to the special standards listed in this section: (See Figure 17.340.030.)

(1) The lot(s) contiguous to the zero-setback yard must be under the same ownership at the time of initial construction, or the applicant must produce written evidence that the contiguous property owner consents to this type of construction and is willing to enter into the required covenant agreement.

(2) The yard setback on the lot contiguous to the zero lot line development must comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

(3) If dwellings are constructed against both side lot lines, access must be provided along the rear lot lines for public pedestrian or vehicular access to the rear yards and for access by protection service vehicles.

(4) When two dwellings are built against the same zero lot line, no portion of them shall project over any property line.

(5) Property owners of this kind of development and property owners of contiguous property shall sign a covenant agreement with the city which shall be recorded against the lots. The agreement shall provide that:

(a) In case of destruction of one or more units, new construction must follow the same concept of construction as previously designed.

(b) Each owner shall carry fire and liability insurance on their portion of the building with the contiguous owner(s) also listed on the policy.

(c) Provisions for the maintenance of the zero lot line wall, the roof and any common facilities are included.

(d) The procedures for the resolution of disputes is specified.

Figure 17.340.030 – Examples of Zero Lot Line Development
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018].


Chapter 17.342 ALTERATIONS OF FINAL PLATS AND PARTITIONS

Sections:

17.342.010    Revisions to approved plats recorded and nonrecorded.


17.342.010 Revisions to approved plats recorded and nonrecorded.

The developer shall file the final partition or subdivision plat and attached documents for recording with the Coos County assessor and a copy of the recorded document to the city of Coos Bay within 60 days. No person or body may change a final plat in any respect except through the appropriate post-decision approval process or plat amendment process and as approved by the director. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.352.010].


Chapter 17.345 ANNEXATION

Sections:

17.345.010    General.

17.345.020    Initiation.

17.345.030    Hearing.

17.345.040    Decision.

17.345.050    Conditions.

17.345.060    Zoning of annexed area.

17.345.070    Final action.


17.345.010 General.

Annexation procedures are meant to facilitate the orderly expansion of the city and the efficient extension of public facilities and services. They are also intended to provide adequate public review and establish a system for measuring the physical, environmental, and related social impacts of a proposed annexation. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.010].


17.345.020 Initiation.

In accordance with state law, initiation of an annexation may be made by the petition of a property owner in the area proposed for annexation or by a majority vote of the city council. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.020].


17.345.030 Hearing.

Upon initiation of an annexation, the council shall set a date for a public hearing to be held before the planning commission in accordance with all provisions of this chapter to determine whether the proposed annexation complies with the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.030].


17.345.040 Decision.

The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council, based on substantial evidence in the record, whether the proposed annexation is consistent with the comprehensive plan or that substantial changes in conditions have occurred which render the comprehensive plan inapplicable to the annexation. The council shall review the recommendation of the planning commission and either affirm, alter, or remand the annexation proposal back to the planning commission consistent with ORS 220.111 through 220.183. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.040].


17.345.050 Conditions.

The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose special conditions necessary to mitigate potential social, environmental, and physical impacts resulting from the annexation or to facilitate the provision of public facilities and services. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.050].


17.345.060 Zoning of annexed area.

Zoning regulations applicable to an area prior to its annexation shall continue to apply in accordance with state law unless at the time of annexation or at a subsequent time the city council rezones the annexed parcel consistent with the comprehensive plan and this title. The annexation ordinance shall expressly provide for the zoning of the annexed area. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.060].


17.345.070 Final action.

The city council shall conduct a public hearing prior to adoption of an annexation ordinance, consistent with this title and applicable state law. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.342.070].


Chapter 17.347 CONDITIONAL USES

Sections:

17.347.010    Purpose of a conditional use.

17.347.020    Pre-application review.

17.347.030    Application content and review processes.

17.347.040    Criteria for approval, minor modifications and revocation.

17.347.050    Ownership, transfer and cessation of use.


17.347.010 Purpose of a conditional use.

There are certain uses which may be generally similar and appropriate within a given zone, but which, due to the nature of their potential impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. Uses subject to a conditional use review may also possess unique or special characteristics that necessitate certain requirements or “conditions” to review them to successfully be integrated into a particular zone. The intent of the conditional use process is to identify potential negative impacts of a proposal, if any, and determine whether conditions of approval should be imposed on the proposed use to mitigate potential negative impacts. Only if conditions of approval cannot be imposed to mitigate any identified impact should a conditional use be denied. [Ord. 506 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018].


17.347.020 Pre-application review.

Applications for conditional use review or modification of a conditional use review is not subject to pre-application review unless requested by the applicant. Applications must be consistent with CBDC 17.130.020, Pre-application review. [Ord. 506 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.325.010].


17.347.030 Application content and review processes.

An applicant for a conditional use review shall submit the requisite fee and the information required in CBDC 17.130.040, Application contents, and other information the director or their     designee determines necessary to review the application. 

(1) Review of a technically complete application for conditional use review is subject to a Type III process. See CBDC 17.130.100, Type III procedure.

(2) Review of a technically complete application for a minor modification, alteration, intensification or expansion of a previously approved conditional use review is subject to a Type II process consistent with CBDC 17.130.090, Type II procedure. [Ord. 506 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.325.020].


17.347.040 Criteria for approval, minor modifications and revocation.

(1) The planning commission shall approve or approve with conditions an application for conditional use review if it finds the applicant has sustained the burden of proving that:

(a) The proposed use complies with the applicable requirements of the zone except as otherwise approved by variance or other means consistent with this title;

(b) The site size, dimensions, location, topography, and access characteristics of the site are suitable to accommodate the proposed use and necessary mitigation of potential adverse impacts considering size, shape, location, topography and natural features;

(c) All required public facilities (i.e., water, sanitary waste, drainage and roads) have adequate capacity and design to serve the proposed use either as they exist, or as they may be modified by conditions of approval;

(d) Any impacts related to building mass, parking, access, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust and emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, heat, fire hazards, visibility, and safety are no greater than other uses permitted in the zone, or can be mitigated by imposing reasonable conditions of approval which specifically address the potential impact and are intended to reduce the impact to levels consistent with other uses permitted in the zone.

(2) The planning commission may impose, in addition to regulations and standards expressly specified in this title, reasonable conditions of approval necessary to mitigate potential impacts. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Increased setbacks, lot size or yard dimensions;

(b) Additional design features necessary to mitigate impacts related to building mass, parking, access, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust and emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, heat, fire hazards, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations such as, but not limited to, the potential conditions listed below, such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor and dust;

(c) Restrictions on the location, number and design of vehicular access points to the property;

(d) Requirements of CBMC Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; CBMC Title 13, increases Public Utilities and Services; CBMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction; and CBMC Title 18, Engineering Design Standards;

(e) Increases in right-of-way dedication for street capacity warranted by increases in traffic generated or in turning movements that can be attributed to the project;

(f) Restrictions on the hours, days, place and manner of operations;

(g) Additional requirements for drainage and surfacing of maneuvering, off-street parking and loading areas;

(h) Limits on the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;

(i) Requiring increased buffering between uses, including berming, screening, landscaping and/or fencing;

(j) Arrangement of buildings and use areas on the site;

(k) Other conditions substantiated by state or federal regulations; and

(l) Mitigations for adverse impacts as further specified in Chapter 17.325 CBDC, Mitigation of Adverse Impacts.

(3) Conditions may not be imposed that restrict the use to a specific person or group.

(4) The review authority may approve a minor modification, alteration or expansion of an approved conditional use pursuant to a Type II process if:

(a) The modification, alteration or expansion will result in less than a 20 percent cumulative enlargement or relocation of the structure, floor area, parking area or exterior improvement area, up to a total maximum of 5,000 square feet;

(b) The existing use is in compliance with all conditions of approval of the original review; and

(c) The proposed modification, alteration or expansion is not expressly prohibited by the zone or the conditional use review issued for the existing use.

(5) Revocation of an approved conditional use review is subject to a Type III process. Revocation shall be initiated by the director or their designee by scheduling a hearing and issuing the required notice. Revocation shall not be the exclusive remedy for violation.

The planning commission may revoke or amend a conditional use review pursuant to a Type III process if it finds:

(a) The conditional use is not being conducted consistent with the decision or conditions of approval authorizing the conditional use review or other applicable standards of this title; and

(b) The applicant has failed to remedy the alleged violation within a reasonable time required by the community development department or within 60 calendar days after the city mails notice of such alleged violations to the operator of the conditional use or owner of the property, whichever is first. [Ord. 506 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.325.040].


17.347.050 Ownership, transfer and cessation of use.

(1) An approved conditional use review is specific to the subject property and cannot be transferred to another property.

(2) The planning commission may limit the conditional use to a specific business or owner, if necessary, to help assure compliance with all conditions of the original conditional use approval; otherwise, a conditional use approval is for the use, not for the specific business, business name, or ownership which may change. However, all conditions of approval continue to apply.

(3) A conditional use approval is automatically revoked if the use is discontinued for a period of 24 months. [Ord. 506 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.325.050].


Chapter 17.349 CULTURAL RESOURCES

Sections:

17.349.010    Purpose.

17.349.020    General provisions.

17.349.030    Development, alteration, or demolition of cultural resources.

17.349.040    Hearing.

17.349.050    Decision.

17.349.060    Waiting period.

17.349.070    Conditions.

17.349.080    Maintenance and repair.


17.349.010 Purpose.

The recognition, protection, enhancement, recovery, and adaptive use of cultural resources embodying Coos Bay’s historical heritage can improve civic identity and add cultural and educational enrichment. The purpose of the following regulations is to: identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses; promote the continued use of historic buildings without detrimentally affecting their significance; enhance the visual character of the city by encouraging the renovation of historic structures; foster public appreciation and a sense of community identity based on the beauty and heritage of the city; and protect and enhance the city’s attraction to residents, tourists, and visitors. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.010].


17.349.020 General provisions.

Any property identified as a cultural resource shall not be developed, altered, remodeled, relocated, or demolished if this activity will detrimentally affect the significance of the resource. Determination of a site’s significance and consideration of the proposed changes against the site’s cultural value shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.020].


17.349.030 Development, alteration, or demolition of cultural resources.

(1) General. This section establishes the procedure to determine the site’s significance and to weigh potential conflicts between conservation and alteration or removal before approval of any such activity.

(2) Application. Prior to the issuance of any general or specific development permit, the property owner or authorized agent shall provide the department, as applicable:

(a) Property legal description.

(b) Plans or drawings showing the property and existing building dimensions and the character or details of the exterior, structural alterations (including additions), and, if a demolition is planned, the proposed use of the site.

(c) Statement explaining why the resource should or should not be preserved or protected. Supporting evidence from a qualified resource specialist is encouraged.

(d) If a demolition is proposed, a statement from the State Historic Preservation Office relating to the resource’s value and a structural survey by the building official.

(e) If an archaeological site will be disturbed, proof that the Coos, Siuslaw, and Lower Umpqua Tribal Council and the State Historic Preservation Office have been notified and given the opportunity to respond.

(3) Exception. A cultural resource permit shall not be required of a certified cultural resource if:

(a) The owner or agent has received a special assessment for historic properties from the State Historic Preservation Office; and

(b) The approval of special assessment includes a review of the proposed development, alteration, or remodel.

To be eligible for this exception, the owner or agent shall submit plans for the work and documentation that these plans have received state approval. If a development or building permit is issued for the work, the city shall assure that the work is completed in conformance with the state-approved plan. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.030].


17.349.040 Hearing.

The planning commission shall conduct a Type III hearing prior to the designation, development, alteration, or demolition of a cultural resource. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.040].


17.349.050 Decision.

The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application after adopting findings of fact based on substantial evidence in the record.

(1) Cultural Resource Value. The commission must make findings to support at least one of the following conclusions:

(a) The resource exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, or architectural history; or

(b) The resource is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history; or

(c) The resource is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer, or architect; or

(d) The resource embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period, or method of construction or is valuable as an example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship.

(2) Development, Alteration, or Relocation of a Structure. The commission must make findings to support the conclusion that the proposal is compatible with the character and value of the resource. Applicable criteria include:

(a) Building coverage and height;

(b) Yards;

(c) Predominant architectural features and fixtures, appurtenances, or detailing;

(d) Building materials; and

(e) Visual characteristics, such as paint color and surface texture, grading, surface paving, and landscaping.

(3) Demolition of a Structure or Disturbance of an Archaeological Resource. Prior to issuance of a permit to demolish a structure or disturb a resource, the commission must make findings to support all of the following conclusions:

(a) All feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed activity have been explored;

(b) Whether it is feasible to maintain or preserve the resource; and

(c) The proposed use is compatible with the zoning and current use of the land and its immediate surroundings. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.050].


17.349.060 Waiting period.

If a demolition or disturbance to an historic or archaeological site is proposed, the commission may impose a waiting period up to 120 days to enable the applicant to seek other alternatives. If the demolition of a structure is proposed, the alternatives shall include but not be limited to:

(1) Public or private acquisition and restoration;

(2) Sale of the premises to a party capable of maintaining, restoring, or relocating the resource; and

(3) Salvage of Significant Features. If a disturbance to an archaeological site is proposed, or a previously unknown or unrecorded archaeological site is encountered during the development, the alternatives shall include but not be limited to:

(a) Clustering development to avoid disturbing the resource;

(b) Designing the development so that the sensitive resource area is used for nonimpacting activities, such as storage, parking, or open space;

(c) If permitted pursuant to the requirements of state law, contracting with a qualified archaeologist to excavate the site and remove any cultural objects and human remains, reinterring the human remains in accordance with the wishes of Tribal Council; and

(d) Using civic means to ensure adequate protection of the resources such as acquisition of easements, public dedications, or transfer of title.

(4) At the next regularly scheduled commission meeting after the end of the waiting period, the commission shall reconsider evidence that alternatives were pursued in good faith and shall evaluate this information against the decision criteria in CBDC 17.349.050. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.060].


17.349.070 Conditions.

The planning commission may impose other conditions deemed to be necessary to ensure the value of the resource will be protected. These conditions shall be stated in terms that are specific and measurable so the applicant is fully aware of the intent and justification of the condition and how and when implementation is to be accomplished.

(1) These conditions may include those specified in Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses.

(2) File a pictorial or graphic record of the structure with the department prior to alteration or demolition. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.070].


17.349.080 Maintenance and repair.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance. This chapter shall not prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any feature if the building official certifies to the commission that the action is required for public safety by the State Structural Specialty Code. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.372.080].


Chapter 17.352 ESTUARINE AND COASTAL SHORELAND USES AND ACTIVITIES

Sections:

17.352.010    General.

17.352.020    Initiation.

17.352.030    Application.

17.352.040    Tentative decision.

17.352.050    Conditions.

17.352.060    Tentative order and notice.

17.352.070    Final order.

17.352.080    Appeal.


17.352.010 General.

Uses and activities permitted by the Coos Bay estuary management plan are subject to general and special conditions and policies to comply with statewide planning goals and the Coos Bay estuary plan as adopted by the city of Coos Bay. Compliance with these conditions and policies must be verified; therefore, all uses and activities under jurisdiction of the Coos Bay estuary management plan must be reviewed. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.010].


17.352.020 Initiation.

A request to permit these uses and activities may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent through a Type I review process and application to the community development department. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.020].


17.352.030 Application.

An application may include any or all of the following items at the discretion of the director. The applicant shall provide three copies of the required information.

(1) A general location map of the property and a detailed parcel map of the property, each on approximately eight-inch-by-11-inch paper.

(2) Address and legal description of the property.

(3) Detailed description of the proposed use or activity.

(4) Statement explaining how the proposed use and/or activity complies with the applicable management plan and title provisions. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.030].


17.352.040 Tentative decision.

Within 15 working days of a complete application, the director shall render a tentative decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request after adopting findings of fact which address applicable general or special conditions or policies of the Coos Bay estuary management plan, special resources delineated on the special considerations map of the estuary management plan, and applicable provisions of this title.

The director may defer the initial review to the planning commission which shall be conducted at a public hearing. If the proposed use is also identified as a conditional use by this title, the decision shall be made by the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.040].


17.352.050 Conditions.

The city may impose conditions if it finds that a use or activity may have an adverse impact on the site itself or nearby property. Conditions of approval, including those identified in Chapter 17.347 CBDC, Conditional Uses, shall be stated in terms that are specific and measurable so that the applicant is fully aware of the intent and justification of the condition and how and when to implement them. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.050].


17.352.060 Tentative order and notice.

The review authority shall issue a written tentative order and notice containing preliminary findings of fact and conclusions of law. Upon completion of the tentative order and notice, the city shall provide notice as follows:

(1) Mailed notice of the tentative decision shall include:

(a) Date of the tentative decision and the date the decision will become final.

(b) A reasonably written description of the subject property which may include, but is not limited to, any one of the following: a map, postal address, legal description, or tax map designation.

(c) The nature of the pending issue or proposed use.

(d) A list of the applicable criteria upon which the tentative decision was based.

(2) Within 10 days of the date of the order, the city shall provide written notice of the tentative decision to the applicant, the planning commission, property owners within 250 feet of the external boundaries of the property, and to the following list of interested agencies:

(a) State Agencies.

(i) Division of State Lands.

(ii) Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(iii) Department of Environmental Quality.

(iv) Water Resources Department (uses including appropriation of water only).

(v) Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (mining and mineral extraction only).

(vi) Department of Energy (generating and other energy facilities only).

(vii) Department of Economic Development (dock, industrial and port facilities, and marinas only).

(b) Federal Agencies.

(i) U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

(ii) National Marine Fisheries Service.

(iii) U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.060].


17.352.070 Final order.

The tentative decision shall become final 15 days from the date the order is mailed. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.070].


17.352.080 Appeal.

Prior to the date that the decision becomes final, a person or agency may appeal the tentative decision by filing an appeal with the department. The planning commission shall hear the appeal at a public hearing in accordance with the applicable procedures of Chapter 17.130 CBDC, Procedures. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.370.080].


Chapter 17.355 LEGAL LOT DETERMINATIONS

Sections:

17.355.010    Legal lot determinations.


17.355.010 Legal lot determinations.

(1) Purpose and Summary.

(a) The purpose of this section is to provide a process and criteria for determining whether parcels are lots of record consistent with applicable state and local law, and to include a list of potential remedial measures available to owners of property which do not meet the criteria.

(b) In summary, parcels are lots of record if they were in compliance with applicable laws regarding zoning and platting at the time of their creation. Zoning laws pertain primarily to the minimum lot size and dimensions of the property. Platting laws pertain primarily to the review process used in the creation of the lots. Specific provisions are listed herein.

(2) Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all requests for individual lot determinations applications or as a part of an application packet being submitted by the applicant.

(3) Determination Process. Lot of record status may be formally determined through the following ways:

(a) Lot Determinations as Part of a Building Permit or Other Development Request. Building or other development applications for new principal structures on parcels which are not part of a platted land division shall be reviewed by the city for compliance with the criteria standards of this section, according to the timelines and procedure of the building permit or other applicable review involved. Lot determination fees pursuant to the Coos Bay fee schedule shall be assessed, unless the parcel was recognized through a previous lot determination or other review in which such recognition was made. Lot determination fees will be assessed for placement or replacement of primary structures. A separate written approval will not be issued unless requested by the applicant.

(b) Lot Determination Requests Submitted without Other Development Review. Requests for determinations of lot of record status not involving any other city development reviews shall submit an application for lot determination. The city shall use a Type I process, CBDC 17.130.080. The city will issue a letter of determination in response to all such requests.

(4) Application and Submittal Requirements. The following shall be submitted with all applications for lot determination, or applications for other development review in which a lot determination is involved. Applicants are encouraged to submit material as necessary to demonstrate compliance with this section.

(a) Prior city/county partition, subdivision, lot determination or other written approvals, if any, in which the parcel was formally created or determined to be a lot of record;

(b) Sales or transfer deed history;

(c) Prior segregation request, if any;

(d) Prior recorded survey, if any; and

(e) At the discretion of the applicant, any other information demonstrating compliance with criteria of this section.

(5) Approval Criteria.

(a) For a parcel to be deemed a legal lot of record one of the following must apply:

(i) A lot must have been created through the legal zoning requirements at the time of its creation; or

(ii) The lot was created prior to zoning requirements being placed on the property approved subdivision or partition.

NOTE: Assessment tax lines do not by themselves create legal lots for development. They only provide for the orderly collection of taxes.

(b) Public Interest Exception, Discretionary. The responsible official may, but is not obligated to, determine that parcels meeting the following criteria are lots of record:

(i) Zoning. The parcel lacks sufficient area or dimension to meet current zoning requirements but meets minimum zoning dimensional requirements, including lot size, dimensions and frontage width, in effect at the time the parcel was created; and

(ii) Platting.

(A) The responsible official determines that conditions of approval which would have been imposed if the parcel had been established through platting under current standards are already present on the land; or

(B) The property owner completes conditions of approval which the responsible official determines would otherwise be imposed if the parcel had been established through platting under current standards. Preliminary and final submittal plans shall be required where applicable.

(iii) The responsible official shall apply the following factors in making a lot of record determination under the discretionary public interest exception:

(A) The parcel size is generally consistent with surrounding lots of record within 1,000 feet;

(B) Recognition of the parcel does not adversely impact public health or safety;

(C) Recognition of the parcel does not adversely affect or interfere with the implementation of the comprehensive plan; and

(D) Recognition of lot of record status based on the public interest exception shall be valid for five years from the date of lot determination or review in which the determination was made. If a building or other development permit is not sought within that time, the determination will expire. Applications for development or lot recognition submitted after five years shall require compliance with applicable standards at that time.

(c) As an alternative to city staff reviewing the above required materials, the applicant may elect to submit the application page, applicable fee(s), required drawings, and a signed stamped letter from a licensed surveyor stating the lot is a legal lot meeting the requirements in this section.

(6) De Minimis Lot Size Standard. For the purposes of reviewing the status of preexisting lots for compliance with platting and zoning standards, parcels within one percent of minimum lot size requirements shall be considered in compliance with those standards. Parcels within 10 percent of lot size standards shall be similarly considered in compliance unless the department determines that public health or safety impacts are present. The planning commission shall review appeals of this chapter. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.350.010].


Chapter 17.359 PARTITIONS

Sections:

17.359.005    Purpose.

17.359.010    Review processes for partitions.

17.359.020    Preliminary partition application contents.

17.359.030    Approval criteria for a preliminary partition.

17.359.040    Expiration and extension of preliminary partition approval.


17.359.005 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the policies of the applicable state statutes and the city of Coos Bay comprehensive plan. The regulations contained herein are intended to: promote the effective use of land and infrastructure; address the housing needs of the city; prescribe procedures for the subdivision of land in accordance with officially adopted plans, policies and standards, including the provisions of the development code; and provide for the efficient processing of partition applications without undue delay. A partition application shall be processed when no more than three parcels are created from the original unit of land. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.312.005].


17.359.010 Review processes for partitions.

(1) Technically complete review of a partition application is subject to CBDC 17.130.050.

(2) A technically complete application for a preliminary partition shall be subject to a Type II process. 

(3) Appeal and post-decision review of decisions regarding partitions are permitted as provided in CBDC 17.130.130 and 17.130.150, respectively. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.312.020].


17.359.020 Preliminary partition application contents.

An applicant for a preliminary partition shall submit the requisite fee, a completed application review form provided for that purpose by the city, and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the following information:

(1) Partition name (if any).

(2) Contact information including the name, mailing address, and telephone number of the owner(s), engineer, surveyor, planner, and/or attorney and the person with whom official contact should be made regarding the partition.

(3) A preliminary partition at a scale of no more than one inch equals 100 feet, with north arrow, date, graphic scale, existing and proposed lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures on the site, and existing lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures abutting the site; provided, information about off-site structures and other features may be approximate if such information is not in the public record. The partition shall show the dimensions and areas of all proposed lots, tracts and dedications. The partition shall show the distance from proposed lot lines to the nearest existing structures on the site unless those structures will be removed.

(4) Proposed dedications of title, easements or other interests to the city or other agency, if applicable.

(5) Written authorization to file the application signed by the owner of the property that is the subject of the application, if the applicant is not the same as the owner as listed by the Coos County assessor.

(6) Proof of ownership document, such as copies of deeds and/or a policy or satisfactory commitment for title insurance.

(7) A legal description of the property proposed to be divided.

(8) If a partition contains large lots which at some future time could be re-subdivided, the application shall include a master plan of all land under common ownership. At a minimum, this plan shall show the extension and opening of streets at intervals which will permit a subsequent division of each divisible parcel into lots of smaller size.

(9) A copy of the pre-application conference summary, and a description of information submitted in response to the issues, comments and concerns in the summary.

(10) A written description of how the proposed preliminary partition does or can comply with each applicable approval criterion for the preliminary partition, and basic facts and other substantial evidence that supports the description.

(11) An application for partition shall include all other applications necessary to approve the proposed partition, including but not limited to applications for exceptions, adjustments or variances to dimensional requirements of the base or overlay zones or for modifications to road standards.

(12) If applicable, preliminary grading, erosion control and drainage plans, which may be a single plan, consistent with applicable provisions.

(13) Evidence that the applicant can provide potable water to each lot from a public water system, and that each lot will be connected to public sewer. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.312.030].


17.359.030 Approval criteria for a preliminary partition.

The review authority shall approve a preliminary partition if he or she finds:

(1) The applicant has sustained the burden of proving that the application complies with the applicable sections of this title to the extent relevant;

(2) That the application will comply with all applicable regulations by satisfying all adopted conditions of approval; or that necessary adjustments, exceptions, modifications or variations have been approved or are required to be approved before the final partition is approved; and

(3) The application makes appropriate provision for potable water supplies and for disposal of sanitary wastes. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.312.040].


17.359.040 Expiration and extension of preliminary partition approval.

A decision approving a preliminary partition expires three years from the effective date of approval and can be extended as provided in CBDC 17.130.140. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.312.050].


Chapter 17.360 PLAN AMENDMENTS AND ZONE CHANGES

Sections:

17.360.010    Comprehensive plan amendment.

17.360.015    Zoning text and map amendment.

17.360.020    Initiation of amendment.

17.360.030    Pre-application review.

17.360.040    Application contents.

17.360.060    Approval criteria.

17.360.070    Expiration and extension.

17.360.080    Concomitant rezone.


17.360.010 Comprehensive plan amendment.

(1) The boundaries of the comprehensive plan map designations and the comprehensive plan text may be amended as provided in CBDC 17.360.020.

(2) The city may amend its comprehensive plan and/or plan map. The approval body shall consider the cumulative effects of the proposed comprehensive plan and/or map amendments on other zoning districts and uses within the general area. Cumulative effects include sufficiency of capital facilities services, transportation, zone and location compatibility, and other issues related to public health and safety and welfare the decision-making body determines to be relevant to the proposed amendment. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.010].


17.360.015 Zoning text and map amendment.

The boundaries of the zoning districts established on maps by this title, the classification of uses therein, or other provisions of the title may be amended as provided in CBDC 17.360.020. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.015].


17.360.020 Initiation of amendment.

Amendments of the comprehensive plan text or map, zoning map, or this title may be initiated by the following:

(1) A Type III application, CBDC 17.130.100, Type III procedure, by one or more owners of the property proposed to be changed or reclassified consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan; or

(2) A Type IV legislative process, CBDC 17.130.110, Type IV procedure, by motion of the planning commission and adoption by the city council. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.020].


17.360.030 Pre-application review.

(1) An application for a Type III or Type IV review is subject to pre-application review under CBDC 17.130.020, Pre-application review.

(2) An applicant for pre-application review for a plan map amendment or zone change shall submit the requisite fee and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the following information except as otherwise provided by the city:

(a) A completed form provided by the city for that purpose;

(b) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the owner(s), engineer, surveyor, planner, and/or attorney and the person with whom official contact should be made regarding the application;

(c) A preliminary plan at a scale of no more than one inch equals 200 feet, with north arrow, date, graphic scale and information relevant to the plan map amendment and/or zone change, such as existing and proposed lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way, development, access, parking, maneuvering and structures on the site; existing and proposed natural features on the site, including vegetation, topography and grades; existing and proposed utilities (water, sewer, drainage, fire hydrants); and existing lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures abutting the site; provided, information about off-site structures and other features may be approximate if such information is not in the public record. The applicant shall provide one copy of the plan reduced to fit on an eight-and-one-half-inch-by-11-inch page. Principal features of the plan shall be dimensioned; and

(d) A written summary of the proposed plan map amendment and/or zone change and facts and evidence based on which the application(s) can be approved. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.030].


17.360.040 Application contents.

(1) An amendment application shall include the requisite fee and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the applicable information required by CBDC 17.130.050(2), Standards for Technical Completeness.

(2) A technically complete application shall contain:

(a) A map of the proposed amendment, if applicable;

(b) The complete proposed text amendment, if applicable;

(c) A narrative describing the potential effects the proposal will have on public services, including streets, schools, parks and utilities, to the extent applicable;

(d) An analysis of the potential cumulative effects of the proposal;

(e) Materials required under CBDC 17.130.050(2); and

(f) Other materials the director deems necessary. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.040].


17.360.060 Approval criteria.

(1) For a Type III or Type IV review, the city council shall approve the proposal upon finding that:

(a) The proposed amendment is consistent with the applicable policies of the comprehensive plan or that a significant change in circumstances requires an amendment to the plan or map;

(b) The proposed amendment is in the public interest; and

(c) Approval of the amendment will not result in a decrease in the level of service for capital facilities and services identified in the Coos Bay capital improvement plan(s). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.060].


17.360.070 Expiration and extension.

A decision approving or conditionally approving a Type III request enacted by ordinance, other than a concomitant rezone, does not expire. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.070].


17.360.080 Concomitant rezone.

(1) Rezone Agreements.

(a) The purpose of this subsection is to allow for the implementation of the comprehensive plan policies relating to future commercial centers and industrial developments, as appropriate and consistent with the Coos Bay comprehensive plan and Coos Bay capital improvement plan. If, from the facts presented, and the findings, report and recommendations of the planning commission as required by this section thereof, the city council determines that the public health, safety and general welfare will be best served by a proposed change of zone, the city council may indicate its general approval, in principle, of the proposed rezoning by the adoption of a “resolution of intent to rezone” the area involved. This resolution shall include any conditions, stipulations or limitations which the city council may feel necessary to require in the public interest as a prerequisite to final action. The fulfillment of all conditions, stipulations and limitations contained in said resolution, on the part of the applicant, shall make such a resolution a binding commitment on the city council. Such a resolution shall not be used to justify spot zoning, to create unauthorized zoning categories by excluding uses otherwise permitted in the proposed zoning, or by imposing setback, area or lot coverage restrictions not specified in the code for the zoning classification, or as a substitute for a variance.

Upon completion of compliance action by the applicant, the city council shall, by ordinance, effect such rezoning. The failure of the applicant to meet any or all conditions, stipulations or limitations contained in the resolution, including the time limit placed in the resolution, shall render the resolution of intent to rezone null and void, unless an extension is granted by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission. Generally, the time limitation shall be one year. The city council may grant one one-year extension, after which the resolution shall be null and void if all conditions, stipulations and limitations have not been met by the applicant.

(b) Concomitant Rezone Agreements.

(i) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to explicitly provide for the use of agreements concomitant to rezone approvals. The agreement may call for performance by the applicant which is directly related to public needs which may be expected to result from the proposed usage of the property. The performance called for will mitigate the public burden in meeting those resulting needs by placing it more directly on the party whose property use will give rise to such needs. The agreement shall generally be in the form of a covenant running with the land. The provisions of the agreement shall be in addition to all other pertinent CBDC requirements.

(ii) Applicability. This agreement process will not generally be used for rezones to residential zoning districts. It may, however, be used in any situation where extraordinary potential adverse impacts from a proposed rezone may be neutralized by the agreement. The agreement process may be employed for rezones in sensitive geographic areas or areas such as critical transportation corridors. The agreement process will generally be used for rezones to commercial, industrial, and non-single-family residential not specifically identified by the comprehensive plan map. The intent is that concomitant rezone agreements shall only be used when normal review and approval procedures are not adequate to resolve the specific issues involved in the rezone proposal.

(iii) Mitigating Measures. The agreement may include mitigating measures, such as:

(A) Access control;

(B) Landscaping, screening, buffering;

(C) Improvements to public services, including drainage, sewer, water and roads;

(D) Lot coverage, dimension; and

(E) Phasing of development.

(iv) Concept Plan. A concept plan may be required. When required, the concept plan shall be drawn to a one-inch-to-100-foot scale and include:

(A) General location of structures;

(B) Location and number of access points;

(C) Approximate gross floor area of structures;

(D) Name of the proposal;

(E) Identification of areas requiring special treatment due to their sensitive nature;

(F) North directional arrow; and

(G) Names and location of all public streets or roads bordering the site.

(v) Application Procedure. The applicant may propose an agreement concomitant to rezone approval at the time of, or after, a pre-application conference with the director.

The proposed agreement shall include any proposed mitigating measures and concept plan as provided for by this chapter. In cases where a specific project is to be considered in conjunction with a rezone request, the responsible review authority shall review the site plan.

(vi) Modifications. Modifications which are minor and without major impact may be approved by the director or his/her duly authorized representative, administratively and without public hearing. Any other modifications shall only be approved after the same procedure applicable to all rezones has been followed, including a public hearing.

(vii) Enforcement. The agreement shall provide for appropriate enforcement mechanisms and performance guarantees.

(2) Release of Concomitant Rezone Agreements.

(a) Upon petition by the property owner, a concomitant rezone covenant may be fully or partially released, or modified, by the city council following a public hearing with notice as prescribed by CBDC 17.130.120, Notices, and in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section.

(b) In considering requests for release or modification of concomitant rezone covenants, the review authority shall consider the following:

(i) In the case of full covenant release, whether development of the site would be consistent with current zoning regulations and comprehensive plan recommendations; and

(ii) In the case of either full or partial covenant release or covenant modification, whether adequate public/private services are available to support development of the site; and

(iii) In the case of either full or partial covenant release or covenant modification, whether the requested action would unreasonably impact development undertaken on nearby properties in reliance upon the covenant commitments; and

(iv) In the case of partial covenant release or covenant modifications, whether future development under current zoning will be consistent with existing and planned development. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.215.080].


Chapter 17.362 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

17.362.010    General.

17.362.020    Preliminary PUD application contents.

17.362.030    Approval criteria for a preliminary PUD.

17.362.040    Property development requirements.

17.362.050    Expiration and extension of preliminary PUD approval.

17.362.060    Construction prior to final plat approval – Bonds.

17.362.070    Improvement plans.


17.362.010 General.

The planned unit development (PUD) process is established to encourage the development of single or multiple tracts of land as one project. An approved PUD may deviate from specific site standards as long as the PUD substantially complies with general purposes of the applicable standards of this title. The PUD approach is appropriate if it maintains compatibility with surrounding areas and creates an attractive, healthful, efficient, and stable environment. It is the intent of the PUD chapter to: achieve a more efficient use of land through shared facilities and services, thereby economizing on development costs; afford innovative design opportunities rather than the conventional lot-and-block land use so that a developer gains freedom in the placement and uses of buildings and open space, and in the design of facilities and traffic circulation systems; maximize development potential of building sites constrained by special features such as topography, shape, or size while minimizing the potential for hazardous conditions; and provide substantial active and passive open space and trail systems for use of nearby residents. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.010].


17.362.020 Preliminary PUD application contents.

An applicant for a preliminary partition shall submit the materials required for subdivision required by CBDC 17.367.030, Preliminary plat application contents. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.020].


17.362.030 Approval criteria for a preliminary PUD.

The review authority shall evaluate a preliminary PUD against the approval in CBDC 17.367.040, Approval criteria for a preliminary plat, and the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.030].


17.362.040 Property development requirements.

(1) Minimum Area. The minimum gross area of a PUD is two acres.

(2) Permitted Uses. Within a PUD, the city may allow any permitted or conditional use in any residential zone of the city as a part of the conditional use process, regardless of the underlying zoning district. Within commercial or industrial districts, the conditional and permitted uses of the underlying district shall be permitted.

(3) Density. The density of a PUD shall not be more or less than 10 percent of the overall density permitted by the underlying zoning district.

(4) Access and Roads.

(a) The development shall provide vehicular and pedestrian access from a dedicated and improved street.

(b) Private streets within the development shall meet the following minimum paving standards:

(i) Eighteen feet where no on-street parking is allowed.

(ii) Twenty-eight feet where on-street parking is allowed only on one side of the right-of-way.

(iii) Thirty-six feet where parking is permitted on both sides of the right-of-way.

(iv) All private streets within a PUD shall be designed and constructed to city standards.

(v) An additional three feet on each side of pavement shall be designated as right-of-way area in which no construction shall take place.

(vi) The review authority shall approve the names of all streets within the PUD. The owner or operator of the development shall furnish, install, and maintain street signs of a type approved by the review authority.

(5) Services.

(a) Fire Protection. The PUD shall provide on-site fire protection facilities in accordance with current regulations and requirements of the city applicable to the development.

(b) Lighting. All roads within the planned unit development shall be lighted at night to provide a minimum of 0.35 foot-candles of illumination.

(6) Recreational Areas and/or Open Space (Residential Only).

(a) Minimum Area. A PUD shall provide not less than 40 percent of the total gross area as recreation areas and/or open space. Designated recreational and/or open space shall contain a minimum area of 3,000 square feet with a minimum dimension of 30 feet.

(b) Plan. The plan shall contain the following:

(i) The boundaries of the proposed area;

(ii) A written explanation of the purpose of the area and a description of any improvements to be made; and

(iii) A description of the manner in which the area will be perpetuated, maintained, and administered.

(c) Guarantee. The preservation and continued maintenance of property commonly owned and/or held for common use shall be guaranteed by a restrictive covenant running with the land specifying the description of the area, its designated purpose(s), and maintenance assurances. Copies of these legal documents shall be filed with the community development department before occupancy of any dwelling.

(7) Off-Street Parking and Loading. The provisions of Chapter 17.330 CBDC shall apply.

(8) Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.333 CBDC shall apply. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.040].


17.362.050 Expiration and extension of preliminary PUD approval.

A PUD is subject to CBDC 17.367.050, Expiration and extension of preliminary plat approval. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.050].


17.362.060 Construction prior to final plat approval – Bonds.

A PUD is subject to CBDC 17.367.060, Construction prior to final plat approval – Bonds. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.060].


17.362.070 Improvement plans.

A PUD is subject to CBDC 17.367.070, Improvement plans. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.317.070].


Chapter 17.363 REPLATS AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

17.363.010    Replatting and vacation of plats.

17.363.020    Property line adjustments.


17.363.010 Replatting and vacation of plats.

The act of replatting shall allow the reconfiguration of lots or parcels and public easements within a recorded plat.

(1) Replats serve to vacate the platted lots, parcels or easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.

(2) A replat shall not serve to vacate any dedicated public street or road. The replat of a portion of a recorded plat shall not act to vacate any recorded covenants or restrictions.

(3) When a utility easement is proposed to be realigned, reduced in width or omitted by a replat, all affected utility companies or public agencies shall be notified consistent with CBDC 17.130.120, Notices. Any utility company that desires to maintain an easement subject to vacation must notify the governing body in writing within 14 days of the mailing or other service of the notice.

(4) If the proposed action replats all of an undeveloped subdivision, a hearing before the review authority is required to determine whether the undeveloped subdivision should be revised and the subdivision replatted or vacated and all lands within the subdivision that have been dedicated for public use vacated. The director shall notify each owner of record of lands described in the plat under review not later than 30 days before the date of the hearing in conformance with CBDC 17.130.120, Notices.

A subdivision is considered to be “developed” if any of the following apply:

(a) Roadways providing access into and travel within the subdivision have been or are being constructed to meet specifications approved by the city;

(b) Facilities to provide water or sewer to the lots created by the subdivision have been or are being constructed;

(c) Buildings have been or are being constructed or permits have been issued for the construction of buildings upon the land; and

(d) One or more lots described in the plat of the subdivision have been sold or otherwise transferred prior to the date of this review.

(5) Any plat or portion thereof may be replatted upon receiving an application signed by all the owners as appearing on the deed. All applications for a replat shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and standards for a partition, Chapter 17.359 CBDC, or a subdivision, Chapter 17.367 CBDC. The replat must comply with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.322.010].


17.363.020 Property line adjustments.

A property line adjustment means the relocation or elimination of a common property line between abutting properties where an additional unit of land is not created and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with this title.

The director shall determine whether a property line adjustment is reviewed as a Type I or Type II review or is referred to the planning commission.

(1) Application. Prior to filing an application, the department shall meet with the prospective applicant. If multiple property line adjustments are proposed, a replat or partial replat of the subdivision may be required.

(a) The application form must be signed by the owner(s) of record of the real property addressed in the application and the appropriate fee paid. An application form may also be signed by the duly authorized representative of the owner of record.

(b) A site plan, drawn to scale, shall include the following information:

(i) The existing and proposed property boundaries and dimensions;

(ii) The footprint of existing structures on the affected properties along with the dimensions, uses, and number of stories for each structure;

(iii) Location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject properties;

(iv) Location and purpose of easements, if applicable; and

(v) A copy of the deed for the properties involved and any covenants, conditions, and restrictions applicable to the subject property.

(c) Repealed by Ord. 503.

(d) A property line adjustment shall not be in violation of any applicable city or state regulations.

(2) Survey Required. An adjusted property line created by the relocation of a common boundary must be surveyed in accordance with ORS 92.060. This requirement does not apply for the following:

(a) Property transferred by a public agency or public body or excess property resulting from the acquisition of land by the state, a political subdivision or special district for highways, county roads, city streets or other right-of-way purposes when the sale or grant is part of a property line adjustment incorporating the excess right-of-way into adjacent property. The property line adjustment shall be approved or disapproved by the city. The applicant shall record an amended deed with Coos County.

(b) When the adjusted lots or parcels are each greater than 10 acres.

(3) Multiple Line Adjustments. When a series of property line adjustments are proposed, each of the property line adjustments must be approved separately and implemented (deed recorded) before proceeding to seek approval for any additional property line adjustment needed to achieve the desired configuration.

(4) Deed. Upon approval of a property line adjustment, a property line adjustment deed must be recorded. A copy of the deed must be provided to the department. At a minimum, the property line adjustment deed shall contain the names of the parties, the description of the adjusted line, references to original recorded documents, the survey reference number and signatures of all parties with proper acknowledgment. If the deed is not filed and a copy provided to the department within six months of approval, the decision of the department shall be null and void. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.322.020].


Chapter 17.365 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Sections:

17.365.010    Purpose.

17.365.020    Applicability.

17.365.030    Exemptions.

17.365.040    Site plan review types and procedures.

17.365.050    Submittal requirements.

17.365.060    Criteria for site plan approval.

17.365.070    Appeals.

17.365.080    Final site plan approval.

17.365.090    Modifications to approved site plan.

17.365.100    Compliance required and expiration.

17.365.110    Completion prior to occupancy.


17.365.010 Purpose.

The purpose of site plan approval is to ensure compatibility between new developments, existing uses, and future developments in a manner consistent with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. Site plan approval is required to promote developments that are harmonious with their surroundings, to maintain a high quality of life for area residents, to ensure that new developments are planned and designed to protect privacy, to determine appropriate lighting and noise mitigation measures, and to ensure adequate and safe access. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.010].


17.365.020 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all changes of use, new construction and expansion or alteration of any use unless expressly exempted by this title. No use shall be established, no structure erected or enlarged, and no other improvement or construction undertaken except as shown upon an approved plan which is in conformance with the requirements set out in this title. Applications for site plan review are subject to CBDC 17.130.020, Pre-application review. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.020].


17.365.030 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the site plan review:

(1) Residential proposals creating less than 10 new units in any zone;

(2) Modifications to the interior of an existing structure that does not change the use or the intensity of a use;

(3) Subdivisions or partitions;

(4) The installation or replacement of underground utilities; and

(5) Other development the director determines to be exempt because it does not result in an appreciable increase in land use activity and intensity and does not create an additional significant adverse impact. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.030].


17.365.040 Site plan review types and procedures.

(1) Site plan reviews are classified and processed as follows:

(a) Permit Reviews. These site plan reviews are typically relatively minor in nature, consistent with the zoning of surrounding land uses, and do not have a substantial impact on the natural and built environment. The following are classified as Type II site plan reviews:

(i) Changes in use of an existing structure or site;

(ii) New construction or expansions of existing construction which do not exceed:

(A) Four thousand square feet of additional floor area;

(B) Twenty new parking spaces; and

(C) Four new multifamily residential structures.

(b) Development Reviews. Any site plan review not listed as a Type II review in subsection (1)(a) of this section is classified as Type III site plan review.

(2) If a site plan review is part of an overall application that is subject to a higher review process, e.g., conditional use, the city shall review all applications at the higher level of review. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.040].


17.365.050 Submittal requirements.

(1) For a Type II site plan review application, the applicant shall submit the information required for a Type II application as set forth in CBDC 17.130.050, Review for technically complete status, and the following:

(a) A site plan meeting the standards of this chapter;

(b) Written narrative description of uses, types of structures proposed, hours of operation, abutting properties, proposed access, frequency of deliveries and construction schedule including project phasing, if known;

(c) A landscaping plan meeting the standards of CBDC 17.335.060, Landscaping; and

(d) A lighting plan meeting the standards of CBDC 17.335.040, Lighting.

(2) For Type III site plan review applications, the applicant shall submit the information required for a Type III application in CBDC 17.130.050, Review for technically complete status, and the following:

(a) Written narrative description of uses, types of structures proposed, hours of operation, abutting properties, proposed access, frequency of deliveries and construction schedule, including project phasing, if known.

(b) Current list of names and addresses of all property owners within a 300-foot radius as shown upon the Coos County assessor’s records. The list shall be no older than 90 days. This list shall also be provided on self-adhesive mailing labels and shall include an area map showing parcels within one-quarter mile of the subject parcel.

(c) Existing conditions plan drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet. The existing conditions plan shall at a minimum indicate the following:

(i) Vicinity map showing location of subject site within the city of Coos Bay and the surrounding existing street system;

(ii) Property boundaries, dimensions and size of the subject site;

(iii) Graphic scale of the drawing and the direction of true north;

(iv) Zoning and uses of subject site and of properties within 100 feet of the subject site;

(v) Current structural or landscaped setbacks;

(vi) Location of on-site driveways and access points within 100 feet of the subject site;

(vii) Location of existing on-site structures and the approximate location of existing structures within 100 feet of the site;

(viii) Location of existing aboveground electrical, telephone or utility poles and traffic control poles;

(ix) Location of existing fire hydrants;

(x) Location of existing structures within 100 feet of the site;

(xi) Location, centerline and dimensions of existing public rights-of-way and easements on site and within 100 feet of the site;

(xii) Location, centerline and dimensions of existing private streets on site and within 100 feet of the site; and

(xiii) Approximate on-site slopes and grades within 100 feet of the site.

(d) Site plan drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet. The site plan shall at a minimum indicate the following:

(i) Property boundaries, dimensions and size of the subject site;

(ii) Location, dimensions and height of proposed buildings;

(iii) Location of building accesses;

(iv) Proposed building and landscape setbacks;

(v) Proposed project-phasing boundaries, if applicable;

(vi) Legend indicating total site area, the total square footage of proposed building or structures including percentage of total site area, the total square footage amount of impervious area square footage, including percentage of total site area, the total square footage amount of on-site landscaping, including percentage of total site area, the total amount of dedicated parking area, including percentage of total site area, the proposed number of parking spaces, including the number of standard parking spaces, the number of compact parking spaces and the number of handicapped-accessible parking spaces. The required number of parking spaces should also be indicated;

(vii) Location of proposed access points including vehicular driveways and designated pedestrian access points, including the proposed depth of the vehicular driveway throats;

(viii) Location and dimensions of proposed on-site parking areas, including required parking landscaping islands and indicating whether proposed parking is standard, compact or handicapped-accessible. Demonstrate compliance with applicable state and federal guidelines, including, but not limited to, adequate sizing, the provision of handicapped access ramps and appropriate labeling and signing. On-site cross-aisles and circulation areas shall be indicated including their dimensions;

(ix) Location and dimensions of proposed on-site pedestrian connections between the public street and buildings, between on-site buildings, between on-site buildings and on-site or off-site parking areas;

(x) Location and size of off-site parking areas, if applicable, including details on the number and type of off-site parking spaces and existing or proposed cross-aisles and circulation areas including dimensions;

(xi) Location, centerline and dimensions of proposed on-site public or private streets and public and private easements;

(xii) Location, centerline and dimensions of proposed dedications, and identification of proposed frontage improvements, including roadway improvements, curb and gutter installation, landscaped planter strip installation and public sidewalk installation;

(xiii) The location and dimensions of loading and service areas, recreational or open space features, aboveground utilities, existing structures to be retained on the site and their distance from the property line, proposed structures (including signs, fences, etc.) and their distance from property lines and the size and location of solid waste and recyclable storage areas; and

(xiv) Specialized site treatments, including but not limited to pedestrian plazas, heavy-duty paving, concrete score patterns, bicycle parking and outdoor seating areas.

(e) Preliminary utilities plan indicating the proposed location, size, connection points to existing public systems, and terminus points for sanitary sewer, water and stormwater drainage and control. Public and private easements for sanitary sewer, water and stormwater shall also be indicated.

(f) Landscape plan indicating the location of proposed vegetation, the common and botanical name of the proposed vegetation, the initial planting size (height or gallon) and the mature planting size, and proposed methods of irrigation, if any. Landscaping proposed in and around buildings, on the perimeter of the site and within proposed parking areas shall be indicated. In addition, street trees or other forms of landscaping within the public rights-of-way shall be indicated.

(g) Architectural elevations, showing north, south, west and east elevations and specifying a measurable scale, structural dimensions and structural heights.

(h) Lighting plan indicating the location, height and type of proposed exterior lighting fixtures (pole-mounted or wall-mounted).

(i) Legal description for the parcel(s) in question.

(j) Most recent conveyance document (deed) showing current ownership.

(k) Traffic study if applicable.

(l) Sign plan(s) (if applicable).

(m) Copy of pre-application conference report and any other items requested in the pre-application conference report, if completed. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.050].


17.365.060 Criteria for site plan approval.

(1) It is the responsibility of the director or designee to review each plan for compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and any other applicable regulations.

(2) The city shall not approve an application for site plan review unless the director finds that the proposed plan meets all applicable provisions of this subsection. Failure to meet one or more of the requirements of this subsection and other applicable CBDC regulations is grounds for denial. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all of the following criteria:

(a) The proposed use is permitted within the district in which it is located;

(b) The proposal meets the lot, yard, building, height and other dimensional requirements of the district within which it is located;

(c) The proposal meets the screening, buffering and landscape strip requirements, as set forth in Chapter 17.335 CBDC, Supplementary Development Standards;

(d) Minimum parking and loading space requirements are met, as required by Chapter 17.330 CBDC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements;

(e) Improvement requirements are provided in accordance with the applicable sections of the Coos Bay development code;

(f) All conditions of any applicable previous approvals, e.g., conditional use, have been met;

(g) Development subject to site plan review has provided underground public and private utility lines, including but not limited to those for electricity and communication;

(h) Public water, sewer and stormwater lines have been installed in conformance with the standards of the city code. Public water, sewer and stormwater lines within or along the frontage of a development have been extended to the extreme property lines of that development unless it can be demonstrated to the public works department that such extensions are impractical or infeasible or inappropriate; and

(i) Proposed phasing plans do not exceed six years and all required public infrastructure is installed in the first phase of the development. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.060].


17.365.070 Appeals.

Appeals of decisions on site plans shall be made and processed pursuant to CBDC 17.130.130, Appeal. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.070].


17.365.080 Final site plan approval.

Where a site plan is issued subject to conditions that require the submittal of additional materials or changes to existing plans, the director may require that the applicant submit for final site plan approval to determine if the revised plans comply with the conditions of site plan approval. Final site plans are considered Type I applications. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.080].


17.365.090 Modifications to approved site plan.

An approved site plan may not be modified or amended except after reapplication for site plan review and subsequent approval. Minor modifications may be completed through a Type I process if the increase in density or intensity of use is 10 percent less than the approved density and intensity of use and the proposed modification will not have a significant adverse effect on adjacent properties or public facilities. All other modifications shall be processed through a Type II approval process. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.090].


17.365.100 Compliance required and expiration.

(1) All development of the property for which a site plan was approved shall conform to the approved site plan and any conditions imposed thereon unless amended or replaced by a subsequent city approval.

(2) Site plan approvals shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance, during which time substantial development of the project improvements shall have occurred. The director may approve up to two one-year extensions if:

(a) There have not been any substantial changes in the laws governing the development of the site, with which lack of compliance would be contrary to the changed laws; and

(b) The applicant has pursued development in good faith. Good faith shall be evidenced by progress on final permitting, surveying, engineering, and construction of improvements. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.100].


17.365.110 Completion prior to occupancy.

All required public and site improvements and other conditions of site plan approval shall be met prior to occupancy of any site unless required sooner as a condition of approval; provided, that completion and occupancy may be accomplished in phases if approved by the director as part of the site plan review process. Incomplete items may be secured by the issuance of a performance bond or other suitable security as a condition of approval of a site plan to secure the applicant’s obligation to complete the provisions and conditions of the approved site plan. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.320.110].


Chapter 17.367 SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.367.005    Purpose.

17.367.010    Pre-application review.

17.367.020    Review processes for subdivisions.

17.367.030    Preliminary plat application contents.

17.367.040    Approval criteria for a preliminary plat.

17.367.050    Expiration and extension of preliminary plat approval.

17.367.060    Construction prior to final plat approval – Bonds.

17.367.070    Improvement plans.


17.367.005 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the policies of the applicable state statutes and the city of Coos Bay comprehensive plan. The regulations contained herein are intended to: promote the effective use of land and infrastructure; make adequate provision for the housing needs of the city; prescribe procedures for the subdivision of land in accordance with officially adopted plans, policies and standards, including the provisions of this title; and provide for the efficient processing of subdivision applications without undue delay. A subdivision application shall be processed when subdividing into greater than three lots. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.005].


17.367.010 Pre-application review.

(1) A subdivision is subject to pre-application review.

(2) An applicant for pre-application review of a subdivision shall submit all information required under CBDC 17.130.020(3), Application Contents, and the following information:

(a) Subdivision name.

(b) The date that the application was prepared.

(c) The approximate acreage of the site and of each proposed lot and tract.

(d) Comprehensive plan and zoning designations for the site.

(e) Existing and proposed land uses and structures on the site, and the proposed disposition of existing uses and structures.

(f) A description of land title to or easements over which the applicant proposes to dedicate to the city and the purpose for such, if applicable.

(g) A proposed preliminary subdivision plat at a scale of no more than one inch equals 100 feet, with north arrow, date, graphic scale, existing and proposed lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures on the site, and existing lots, tracts, easements, rights-of-way and structures abutting the site; provided, information about off-site structures and other features may be approximate if such information is not in the public record. The plat shall show the dimensions and areas of all proposed lots, tracts and dedications. The plat shall show the distance from proposed property lines to the nearest existing structures on the site unless those structures will be removed.

(h) Any other items or details the applicant believes would assist the staff in its review, such as proposed stormwater plans, proposed utilities and their availability, geotechnical, wetland or other critical areas on or abutting the site, and a traffic impact study. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.010].


17.367.020 Review processes for subdivisions.

(1) Technically complete review of a plat application is subject to a Type I process. See CBDC 17.130.080, Type I procedure.

(2) After a preliminary subdivision application is deemed to be technically complete the review of the application for a preliminary plat approval is subject to a Type III process. See CBDC 17.130.100, Type III procedure. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.020].


17.367.030 Preliminary plat application contents.

An applicant for a preliminary partition shall submit the requisite fee, a completed application review form provided for that purpose by the city, and three paper copies and one electronic copy of the following information:

(1) Written authorization to file the application signed by the owner of the property that is the subject of the application, if the applicant is not the same as the owner as listed by the Coos County assessor.

(2) Proof of ownership document, such as copies of deeds and/or a policy or satisfactory commitment for title insurance.

(3) A legal description of the property proposed to be divided.

(4) A copy of the pre-application conference summary, if the application was subject to pre-application review, and all information required to address issues, comments and concerns in the summary.

(5) A written description of how the proposed preliminary plat does or can comply with each applicable approval criterion for the preliminary plat, and basic facts and other substantial evidence that supports the description.

(6) Applications necessarily associated with the preliminary plat, such as applications for exceptions, adjustments or variances to dimensional requirements of the base or overlay zones or for modifications to the adopted Coos Bay road standards that are required to approve the preliminary plat application as proposed.

(7) Evidence that potable water will be provided to each lot from a public water system, and that each lot will be connected to public sewer.

(8) A plan showing proposed phasing if the applicant proposes to develop the subdivision in phases. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.030].


17.367.040 Approval criteria for a preliminary plat.

(1) The review authority shall approve a preliminary plat if he or she finds:

(a) The applicant has sustained the burden of proving that the application complies with the applicable provisions of this title;

(b) The application will comply with all applicable regulations by satisfying all adopted conditions of approval; or that necessary adjustments, exceptions, modifications or variations have been approved or are required to be approved before the final partition is approved; and

(c) The subdivision makes appropriate provision for potable water supplies and for disposal of sanitary wastes.

(2) If phases are proposed, the subdivision shall comply with the following:

(a) The plat identifies the boundaries of each phase and sequence of phases;

(b) Each phase includes any open space and other required public and/or private infrastructure;

(c) The sequence and timing of phases complies with applicable standards throughout the development of the subdivision; and

(d) The applicant completes or assures completion of public improvements consistent with CBDC 17.367.070, Improvement plans.

(3) Flag lots are discouraged. When allowed, flag lots shall comply with the following standards:

(a) The flag pole shall provide an all-weather surface with an unobstructed vertical clearance of at least 13 feet six inches. The improved surface shall be at least 20 feet wide and be marked and signed as a fire lane.

(b) The pole portion of the flag lot does not count toward the minimum lot size.

(c) If the length of the flagpole is more than 150 feet, the applicant shall provide a turn-around at the end of the driveway in conformance with the current adopted edition of the International Fire Code, and structures on the lot shall incorporate a fire-hazard warning, including a hard-wired, back-up smoke detector, and a sprinkler system.

(d) Where flag lots are not provided but access easements across abutting properties to public or private rights-of-way are provided, the applicable city engineering standards shall apply. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.040].


17.367.050 Expiration and extension of preliminary plat approval.

(1) Approval of a preliminary plat expires three years from the effective date of the decision approving it unless, within that time, an applicant files an application for an extension.

(2) An application for extension of a preliminary plat approval for a subdivision or for remaining phases of a subdivision is subject to a Type I process.

An applicant for an extension shall submit the requisite fee, a completed application review form provided for that purpose by the city, and text describing how the application complies with the approval criteria for an extension, and basic facts and other substantial evidence to support the text.

(3) The review authority may approve a single one-year extension of a preliminary plat approval if he or she finds that the relevant facts and the law have not changed substantially since the original approval, or that the preliminary plat can comply with the law in effect on the date the application for the extension was filed by complying with certain additional and/or modified conditions of approval, and those additional conditions and/or modifications are adopted. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.050].


17.367.060 Construction prior to final plat approval – Bonds.

(1) In lieu of the completion of any required public improvements prior to approval of a final plat, the city may accept a bond, in an amount of at least 125 percent of the estimated cost of construction of the public improvements in question, as certified by a professional engineer and accepted by the public works and community development director, or their designee, and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the engineer, or other secure method as the engineer may require, providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the engineer, and specified in the bond or other agreement; and to be enforced by the engineer by appropriate legal and equitable remedies.

(2) Construction shall not start prior to the public works department signing and approving both the construction plans and the final plat survey computations; except that rough grading operations may proceed before the plans are approved by the engineer under the following conditions:

(a) The grading plan is submitted separately, along with an application for the grading permit.

(b) The grading plan is in conformance with the approved preliminary plat.

(c) The grading plan, if applicable, will not be in substantial conflict with the street profiles and drainage structure plans.

(d) The grading permit, if applicable, is issued. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.060].


17.367.070 Improvement plans.

Where improvements are required, plans for such improvements shall be submitted to the public works and community development director, or their designee. Improvements shall be designed by or under the direct supervision of a licensed engineer where required by statute. The engineer shall certify same by seal and signature. All improvement plans shall comply with the provisions of city ordinances pertaining to streets, roads and utilities, and any other applicable city ordinances, and in addition to the above certification shall contain the following:

(1) Subdivision name;

(2) Name, mailing address, and telephone number of the engineer preparing the plan; and

(3) Date (month and year). [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.315.070].


Chapter 17.370 VACATION

(Repealed by Ord. 517)


Chapter 17.372 VARIANCES

Sections:

17.372.010    Pre-application review.

17.372.020    Review process.

17.372.030    Application contents.

17.372.040    Approval criteria.

17.372.050    Expiration and extension.


17.372.010 Pre-application review.

An application for one or more variances subject to Type I or Type II review is not subject to pre-application review, unless filed concurrent with an application that is subject to pre-application review. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.330.010].


17.372.020 Review process.

(1) Review of a technically complete application for variance of up to 10 percent of the numerical standards for the following: setbacks, buffers, building heights, landscaping, lot coverage and lot dimensions, lot area or density, is subject to a Type I process, CBDC 17.130.080.

(2) Review of a technically complete application for all other variances greater than 10 percent are subject to a Type II process, CBDC 17.130.090.

(3) An application for a variance(s) necessarily associated with another application(s) subject to this title shall be combined with the associated application(s) for processing and review. The variance application shall be subject to the highest number review procedure applicable to the combined applications.

(4) If an application for a variance(s) is approved and an application(s) subject to an equal or higher number review procedure type is subsequently filed, the decision approving the variance may be altered for good cause by the decision on the merits of the subsequent application(s).

(5) An application for a variance(s) proposed as a post-decision action shall be subject to the post-decision review procedures of CBDC 17.130.150. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.330.020].


17.372.030 Application contents.

An applicant for a variance(s) shall submit the requisite fee and the information required by CBDC 17.130.040, except as otherwise provided therein. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.330.030].


17.372.040 Approval criteria.

The approval authority may impose appropriate conditions to ensure compliance with the criteria. The appropriate approval authority shall approve a variance request if all the following criteria are met and corresponding findings of fact prepared:

(1) The variance is the minimum variance necessary to make reasonable use of the property.

(2) The variance will not result in violation(s) of any other code standard, and the variance will meet the purposes of the regulation being modified.

(3) The need for the variance was not created by the applicant and/or owner requesting the variance.

(4) If more than one variance is requested, the cumulative effect of the variances results in a project that is consistent with the overall purpose of the zone. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.330.040].


17.372.050 Expiration and extension.

A decision approving a variance expires and can be extended as provided in CBDC 17.130.140. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 473 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016. Formerly 17.330.050].


Title 18 ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS

Chapters:

18.05    Introduction

18.10    General Requirements

18.15    Transportation Facilities

18.20    Sanitary Sewers

18.25    Stormwater Management Systems

18.30    Site Grading and Erosion Control

18.35    Standard Details

18.40    Traffic Impact Analysis Requirements


Chapter 18.05 INTRODUCTION

Sections:

18.05.005    Introduction.


18.05.005 Introduction.

The following design standards were developed by the city of Coos Bay’s public works department and established by city Ordinance No. 479. This document is intended to facilitate the planning, design and implementation of public projects, private projects, and related facilities. The design standards are primarily intended for use by a developer’s design engineer for private projects. However, they will also be utilized by design consultants under contract with the city for preparation of public infrastructure designs.

The design standards cannot provide for all situations. They are intended to establish a consistent policy for implementing design of public improvements and related facilities, but do not substitute for competent work by design professionals. Engineers are expected to provide expertise and judgment from their respective disciplines. In addition to these standards, design consultants and engineers must comply with appropriate state and federal codes, safety regulations, environmental requirements and other applicable regulations. Note that this document refers to many other potentially applicable requirements, but references herein do not necessarily comprise a comprehensive list.

Design professionals are encouraged to read this document prior to the project planning phase so that potential compliance issues may be identified and resolved early. The city’s unique terrain, geology, climate and historic context make project development to modern standards a challenging endeavor. The city recognizes these challenges and encourages designers to actively collaborate with the public works department as new projects are planned, designed and constructed.

The public works director or authorized designee has authority to periodically update and interpret the provisions of this document. Future modifications are intended to promote uniformity in the application of the design standards.

These standards are not intended to unreasonably limit any innovative or creative effort which could result in better quality. Public works will evaluate any proposed departure from these standards based on the design exception process detailed in Chapter 18.10 CBMC.

Other permits and standards may be applicable to specific projects. The design professional bears the responsibility to obtain necessary permits and to comply with all applicable standards related to specific projects. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 1), 2016].


Chapter 18.10 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.10.005    Generally.

18.10.010    Definitions and abbreviations.

18.10.020    Code compliance and permitting.

18.10.030    Construction standards.

18.10.040    Design submittal requirements.

18.10.050    Phased project submittals.

18.10.060    Design exceptions.

18.10.070    Construction inspection.

18.10.080    As-built documents for privately constructed public improvements (pertains to city owned and maintained infrastructure).

18.10.090    Final project acceptance for privately constructed public improvements.


18.10.005 Generally.

This chapter provides procedural requirements for both private and public works projects, from design through construction. Requirements for preparation, submittal and review of required documents are included, along with administrative procedures for design exceptions, design approval, construction coordination and final project acceptance by the city. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2), 2016].


18.10.010 Definitions and abbreviations.

“AASHTO” means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.

“ADA” means Americans with Disabilities Act.

“ADS” means Advanced Drainage Systems, a manufacturer of stormwater and sanitary sewer materials.

“All-weather surface” means an improved roadway surface, with sufficient ballast and structural support to be used under all weather conditions. The uppermost layer of an all-weather surface may be concrete or asphalt pavement, or in some cases gravel.

“Alley” means a narrow street through a block which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property at the rear or sides thereof.

“Appurtenance” means equipment and/or accessories that are part of an operating system or subsystem.

“APWA” means American Public Works Association.

“Arterial” means a street that serves to interconnect and support the principal arterial highway system. These streets link major commercial, residential, industrial and institutional areas. Arterial streets are typically spaced about one mile apart to assure accessibility and reduce the incidence of traffic using collectors or local streets in lieu of a well-placed arterial street. Many of these routes connect to cities surrounding Coos Bay.

“ASCE” means American Society of Civil Engineers.

“Asphalt Institute” means a United States based association of international petroleum asphalt producers, manufacturers and affiliated businesses.

“ASTM” means American Society for Testing and Materials.

“Boardwalk” means elevated walkway located over land or on submersible land, primarily for pedestrian use similar to a sidewalk or trail, not otherwise covered by pier or wharf.

“Building” means a structure constructed for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

“Building code” means the Oregon Structural, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing and Residential Specialty Codes.

“Building permit” means the document or certificate issued by the city of Coos Bay that sanctions adherence to all applicable building and development regulations and gives permission to the applicant to proceed with the actions for which the permit was requested.

“City” means the city of Coos Bay, Oregon.

“Clear-vision area” means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines for a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines or intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection.

“Clearing” means any activity that removes vegetative cover while leaving the root system intact.

“Collector” means a street that provides both access and circulation within residential and commercial/industrial areas. Collectors differ from arterials in that they provide more of a citywide circulation function and do not require as extensive control of access and penetrate residential neighborhoods, distributing trips from the neighborhood and local street system.

“Contractor” means the person, partnership, firm or corporation licensed in Oregon contracting to do work under these standards. The term shall also include the contractor’s agents, employees and subcontractors.

“Cul-de-sac” means a local street having only one means of vehicular access to another street and terminating at its other end in a circular-shaped turnaround. This definition of cul-de-sac shall in no way be interpreted to include a dead-end street.

“Curb ramp” means a short, depressed section of curb and sidewalk, normally placed at street intersections, designated to facilitate travel of persons with disabilities.

“CWA” means Clean Water Act, a federal law enacted in 1972 which establishes the structure for regulating discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States and regulating quality standards for surface waters.

“DEQ” means Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

“Design engineer” means a professional engineer licensed by the OSBEELS.

“Detention facility” means a stormwater basin or structure where excess stormwater is stored or held temporarily and then slowly drains when water levels in the receiving piping system or channel recede. A detention facility is typically dry between storm events.

“Developer” means any person, firm, or corporation undertaking the subdividing and/or development of any parcel of land; also known as the “applicant.”

“Development” means the placement, erection, or removal of any fill, solid material, or structure on land, in or under the water, discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any liquid or solid waste; or the grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials, including mineral resources; the construction, reconstruction, removal, demolition or alteration of the size of any structure; or the removal or harvesting of vegetation. Development shall not be defined or interpreted to include activities related to or undertaken in conjunction with the cultivation, use, or subdivision of land for agricultural purposes or any improvement made in the interior of any structure.

“Development agreement” means an agreement between the city and a private developer as provided in ORS Chapter 94.

“Drain” means a structure intended to receive only stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters and drainage.

“Drain, private” means privately owned drain that is not maintained by the city.

“Drainage” means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and includes the means necessary for water supply preservation, prevention, or alleviation of flooding.

“Drainage basin” means a geographic and hydrologic subunit of a watershed.

“Driveway” means that space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the movement of vehicles from one site to another or from a site to a public street.

“Driveway apron” means a concrete section of depressed sidewalk constructed in the city right-of-way to provide a transition between the city street and a private driveway.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms which have cooking and toilet facilities and are designed for occupancy by one family only.

“Easement” means a right which one person has to use the land of another for a specific purpose.

“Erosion” means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, and/or gravity.

“Excavation” means removal of topsoil, gravel, sand, rock or any other type of soil material. Also includes removal of roots.

“Existing” means buildings, facilities or conditions, which are already in existence, constructed or officially authorized prior to the adoption of these standards.

“Fence” means any artificially constructed barrier or any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

“Fill” means earth or any other approved substance or material.

“Fill, structural” means fill that is intended to support structures.

“Fire apparatus access road” means a road that provides access for fire department vehicles and equipment from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway.

“Fire code official” means the city’s fire chief or other designated official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of the Oregon Fire Code.

“Fire lane” means a road or passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.

“GPM” means gallons per minute.

“Grading” means any combination of excavation and/or fill activities.

Hammerhead. See “Cul-de-sac.”

“HDPE” means high-density polyethylene.

“Landscaping” shall mean not only trees, grass, bushes, shrubs, flowers, and garden areas, but also the arrangement of fountains, patios, decks, street furniture, and ornamental concrete or stonework areas and artificial turf or carpeting, but excluding artificial plants, shrubs, bushes, flowers, and materials in movable containers.

“Local street” means a street that has the sole function of providing access to immediate adjacent land. Service to “through traffic movement” on local streets is deliberately discouraged by design.

“Lot” means a single unit of land legally created by a subdivision of land. A parcel of land used or which is capable of being used under the regulations of CBMC Title 17, lawfully created as such in accordance with the subdivision laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. “Lot” shall also mean the individual leaseholds within an approved manufactured home park.

“Luminaire” means a complete street lighting unit, including lamps, sockets, wiring, poles, foundations and other parts needed to hold the lamp in place, and protect it.

“MUTCD” means Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

“Natural outlet” means any non-manmade discharge into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water.

“NAVD” means North American Vertical Datum. Refers to NAVD 88, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, which is the vertical control datum established in 1991 by the National Geodetic Survey for surveying in the United States.

“Neighborhood routes” means streets that are usually long relative to local streets and provide connectivity to collectors or arterials. Because neighborhood routes have greater connectivity, they generally have more traffic than local streets and are used by residents in the area to get into and out of the neighborhood, but do not serve citywide/large area circulation. They are typically about a quarter to a half-mile in total length. Traffic from cul-de-sacs and other local streets may drain onto neighborhood routes to gain access to collectors or arterials.

“NVGD” means National Geodetic Vertical Datum. Refers to the Sea Level Datum of 1929, which was adjusted in 1947, and later renamed as the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 on May 10, 1973. NVGD was used by the National Geodetic Survey prior to 1991.

“OAR” means Oregon Administrative Rules.

“ODOT” means Oregon Department of Transportation.

“OFC” means Oregon Fire Code.

“OPSC” means Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code.

“ORS” means Oregon Revised Statutes.

“OSBEELS” means Oregon State Board of Examiners for Engineering and Land Surveying.

“Owner” means the owner of record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or person purchasing a piece of property under contract. For the purposes of these standards, in terms of violations and binding agreements between the county and the owner, “owner” shall also mean a leaseholder, tenant, or other person in possession or control of the premises or property at the time of agreement, violations of agreement, or the provisions of these standards. For the purpose of processing a permit per these standards, where such application for permit must be filed by an owner, the term “owner” also includes a governmental entity contemplating acquisition of a parcel which would require such permit.

“Pathway” means a travel corridor provided for nonmotorized use. Pathways typically accommodate both bicycles and pedestrians.

“Pier” means a structure, usually of greater length than width and projecting from the shore into a body of water with direct access from land that can be either open deck or provided with a superstructure.

“Planting strip” means a vegetated area located between the back of curb and sidewalk within the walking zone.

“Public works” means the divisions and personnel of the public works department of the city of Coos Bay.

“Public works and community development director, or their designee” means the duly appointed public works director of the city of Coos Bay and/or community development director, chief land use regulatory officer, and designated authority responsible for enforcement of CBMC Title 17.

“PVC” means polyvinyl chloride.

“Retention facility” means a basin, structure or pond which stores water on a permanent or semi-permanent basis. Water often remains in a retention basin indefinitely, with the exception of volume lost to evaporation or absorbed into soils. Retention facilities typically contain water between storms, as opposed to detention facilities which typically drain after the peak of the storm flow has passed and are usually dry between storms.

“Right-of-way” means a street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement, whether physically accessible or not, that has been permanently established or dedicated for the passage of persons or vehicles. Title to this land remains with the public or private agency until the need no longer exists.

“Riprap” means a layer, facing, or protective mound of stones randomly placed to prevent erosion, scour or sloughing of a structure or embankment; also, the materials so used.

Roadway. See “Street.”

ROW. See “Right-of-way.”

Sanitary Sewer. See “Sewer, sanitary.”

“SDR” means standard dimension ratio.

“Sedimentation” means deposition of soil moved by water or wind from its site of origin.

“Sewer, private” means privately owned sewer that is not maintained by the city. The private sewer lateral is defined as the portion that serves the property from the structure to the public line, including the connection.

“Sewer, sanitary” means a pipe or conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted.

“Shall” means a requirement.

“Should” means a requirement, unless it can be shown that to comply with the requirement would be unreasonable, impractical, or unfeasible. Economic hardship alone shall not be justification for noncompliance with the requirement, but may be considered in conjunction with other reasons for noncompliance.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a transition strip improved for pedestrian traffic in accordance with standards fixed by the review authority.

“Standard details” means city of Coos Bay engineering division standard detail drawings.

“Storm drain” means a conduit intended to carry only stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters and drainage.

Storm Sewer. See “Storm drain.”

“Stormwater” means that portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, channels or pipes into a defined surface water channel, or a constructed infiltration facility.

“Street” means all roads, streets, highways, freeways, easements, and public rights-of-way used for or designed for vehicular access or use including private roads but not including private driveways.

“Street, private” means a thoroughfare that is privately built and maintained which affords a primary means of vehicular access.

“Surveyor” means a professional land surveyor licensed by the OSBEELS.

“Swale” means a shallow drainage conveyance with relatively gentle side slopes, generally with flow depths less than one foot.

“TSP” means the city of Coos Bay transportation system plan.

“Uni-Bell” means the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association.

“Utilities” means overhead or underground facilities such as towers, lines for communication and power transmission, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water lines, drains, gas lines, and other similar pipes, wires, conduits, vaults, etc.

“Vehicular zone” means the portion of a city street from face of curb to face of curb. The vehicular zone includes travel lanes for motorized vehicles and bicycles, and may also include median and parking areas.

“Walking zone” means the portion of a city street behind the face of curb that provides sidewalk, roadside landscaping, and other amenities for pedestrian travel.

“Wharf” means a structure at the shoreline, having a platform built alongside and parallel to a body of water that may have an open deck or a superstructure. [Ord. 503 § 1, 2018; Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.1), 2016].


18.10.020 Code compliance and permitting.

Private developments and public facilities must comply with all city codes, plans and permits.

Developers are also responsible for obtaining any necessary state and federal permits that may be required for construction/development near wetland areas, streams or other waterways, or if hazardous materials are present on the property. The appropriate agencies should be contacted to determine if state or federal permitting regulations apply. These agencies can include but are not limited to the following:

	Oregon Department of State Lands

	Oregon Department of Environmental Quality

	U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

	Oregon Department of Transportation

	National Marine Fisheries Service

	Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

	U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

	Oregon Department of Forestry

	Oregon State Historic Preservation Office

[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.2), 2016].


18.10.030 Construction standards.

The city has adopted requirements set forth in these standards and the 2015 Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction (or latest edition). Designers shall refer to the standard details in Chapter 18.35 CMC when preparing design plans or permit applications for infrastructure sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and transportation related infrastructure, both public and private. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.3), 2016].


18.10.040 Design submittal requirements.

Legible plans shall be submitted to public works for review. A scale of no less than one inch equals 40 feet shall be used. Other scales may be used only with the approval of public works. Plans must be submitted in digital format (i.e., PDF), unless otherwise specified.

Franchised utilities shall be exempt from utilizing an Oregon professional engineer for plan preparation if they have their own qualified staff.

(1)  General Plan Requirements. The following general items shall be shown on all plan sets submitted:

(a) Vicinity map. On first sheet of plan set.

(b) Index of plan sheets. On first sheet of plan set.

(c) Title block. Including project name, design professional, file number, sheet number, date and revision block, Oregon registered professional’s stamp and signature.

(d) North arrow. On each sheet, as applicable.

(e) Elevations shall be referenced to the NAVD 88 datum, with benchmarks identified on the plans.

(2) Utility Information. Subsurface utilities shall be depicted on design drawings per ASCE/CI 38-02 Quality Level C. Refer to ASCE Standard Guidelines for the Collection and Depiction of Existing Subsurface Utilities.

(3) Street Plans. Street plans shall have both plan and profile views on the same sheet. Typical section, signing, and striping information is also required.

(a) Plan views shall contain the following information:

(i) Right-of-way, property lines, and easements (existing and construction).

(ii) Section, township and range.

(iii) Street centerline with 100-foot stationing.

(iv) Horizontal alignment data for centerline, curb returns, cul-de-sacs, and curve radii, including tangent bearings.

(v) Curb/gutter elevations at intersections and cul-de-sacs.

(vi) Location of existing and proposed underground and overhead utilities, roadways, driveways, sidewalks, structures, watercourses, survey monuments, fences and vegetation within the right-of-way and outside right-of-way, if affected by construction.

(vii) Storm drainage facilities with station and offset referenced to street centerline.

(viii) Existing contours and spot elevations, cut/fill limits. A minimum contour interval of two feet is required.

(ix) Sidewalk ramp locations.

(b) Profile views shall show the following information:

(i) Proposed street centerline profile (bold) with tangent grades, vertical curve data (including k value, length and beginning and ending stations and elevations) and high/low points.

(ii) Original ground at centerline.

(iii) Proposed (bold) and existing storm drainage facilities with information on type, inverts, rim/grate elevations, slopes, pipe material, and trench backfill.

(iv) Existing utility crossings.

(v) Continuation of profile 200 feet beyond project limits if street is being reconstructed or if it may be extended in the future.

(c) Typical cross-sections shall show the following information:

(i) Dimensions of traffic lanes, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, swales, depths of planting strips, easements, right-of-way, etc., per the city’s adopted TSP.

(ii) Cross slope of all elements, such as pavement, sidewalks, planting strips, etc.

(iii) A separate full-width roadway typical section, for each street or portion of the street that differs significantly. Station ranges shall be provided for each typical section.

(d) The following signing and striping information shall be provided:

(i) Locations of all public and privately maintained signs to be installed, including sign details and/or MUTCD sign designation number, where applicable.

(ii) Location and dimensions of all pavement markings.

(iii) For simple projects, signing and striping information may be combined on the plan views; provided, that information is legible and does not overcrowd the sheet. For collector facilities and local access streets that may intersect with city collector routes or state highway facilities, separate signing and striping plans may be required by public works.

(4) Sanitary Sewer and Storm Drain Plans. Sanitary sewer and storm drain plans shall have plan and profile views. Profiles shall be to the same horizontal scale on the same sheet and drawn immediately below the corresponding plan view to a typical vertical scale of one inch equals five feet with stationing increasing from left to right. In areas of significant elevation change, a vertical scale of one inch equals 10 feet may be used. Public works approval is required for any other proposed vertical scale.

Sanitary sewer and/or storm drain plans may be combined into a single set of utility plans; provided, that information is legible. Utility design information may also be incorporated into street plans; provided, that all required information can be provided legibly and without overcrowding the sheet.

(a) Plan views shall contain the following information:

(i) Right-of-way, property lines, and easements (existing and construction).

(ii) Pipe centerline with stationing and reference to street stationing where appropriate.

(iii) Pipe material, length, invert elevation and slope.

(iv) Location of existing (screened or light) and proposed (bold) underground and overhead utilities, roadways, driveways, sidewalks, structures, watercourses, survey monuments, fences and vegetation within the right-of-way and outside right-of-way, if affected by construction.

(v) Existing (screened or light) and proposed (bold) contours and spot elevations. A minimum contour interval of two feet is required.

(b) Profile views shall show the following information:

(i) Pipe invert profile with grades.

(ii) Existing (screened or light) and proposed (bold) ground at centerline.

(iii) Existing (screened or light) and proposed manholes, catch basins, field drains and inlets, with information on type, inverts, rim elevations, slopes, materials, and trench backfill.

(iv) Existing (screened or light) and proposed (bold) water, storm drain, sanitary sewer, gas, power, cable and other utility crossings. Show separation requirements where appropriate.

(v) Continuation of profile 200 feet beyond project limits if sanitary sewer, water or storm drain may be extended in the future.

(5) Stormwater Management System Plans. Structural detention and retention facility plans must show:

(a) Facility dimensions and setbacks from property lines and structures.

(b) Profile view of facility, including typical cross-sections with dimensions.

(c) All stormwater piping associated with the facility, including pipe materials, sizes, slopes, and invert elevations at every bend or connection.

(d) Additional detail as determined by public works, depending on individual site conditions.

For projects that include vegetated stormwater management facilities, catch basin pretreatment inserts or stormwater retention/detention facilities, a plan outlining the scope of activities, schedule and responsible parties for periodic inspection and maintenance of those facilities shall be included with the construction submittal. This plan shall cover vegetation management, structural repairs, sediment removal/disposal and other activities necessary for the continued long-term function of the stormwater facilities.

(6) Additional Stormwater Design Documentation. Stormwater documentation prepared in accordance with the ODOT Hydraulics Manual shall be submitted, including but not limited to a hydraulics report, bridge and culvert studies, supporting data, and other stormwater design documentation, as applicable. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.4), 2016].


18.10.050 Phased project submittals.

For large developments intended to be implemented in phases over multiple years, a phased design submittal process will be considered by public works on a case-by-case basis. Public works prefers that ultimate traffic volumes, water usage, sanitary sewer flows and stormwater runoff be estimated for the entire project prior to approval of a phased approach. Design of each phase should accommodate the ultimate build-out condition and each phase should be able to stand alone, so that the required infrastructure for each phase is fully functional. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.5), 2016].


18.10.060 Design exceptions.

A documented design exception is required for any design or construction deviation from these city design standards. Exceptions may be granted by public works upon evidence that such adjustments are in the public interest. Requirements for safety, function, fire protection, transit needs, appearance and maintainability based upon sound engineering and technical judgment must be fully met.

(1) Design Exception Submittal Requirements.

(a) Design exception requests must be submitted in writing and shall include the following:

(i) Complete description of the desired modification.

(ii) Identified sections of the design standards that are relevant to the proposed alternative.

(iii) Reason for the request.

(iv) Comparison between the specification/design standard and the modification addressing the performance, particularly in regard to public safety. Document nationally accepted design standards, such as AASHTO and ASTM, where applicable.

(v) Additional design exception considerations specific to individual topics are provided in the applicable chapter of these design standards.

(vi) It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient, clear and accurate supporting information.

(b) Public works will review the design exception request and will allow a modification if one or more of the following requirements is met:

(i) The specification or design standard does not apply in the particular application.

(ii) Topography, right-of-way or other conditions specific to the site impose an unusual circumstance not typical of other sites in Coos Bay and an equivalent alternative, which can accomplish the same design objective while not adversely affecting public safety, is available.

The designated public works personnel will approve the application as is, approve with changes, or deny with an explanation.

(2) Appeal Process. If the applicant is unsatisfied with the designated public works personnel’s decision, the appeal process is as follows:

(a) Written request addressed to the public works director;

(b) If not resolved at public works director level, a written appeal shall be submitted to the city manager;

(c) If not resolved at the city manager level, the applicant shall submit a written appeal to the city council. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.6), 2016].


18.10.070 Construction inspection.

For infrastructure intended to be accepted by the city for public use, operations and maintenance, the developer is responsible for providing inspection of construction methods, materials, installation, etc., using qualified inspectors to ensure compliance/conformance with the design professional’s plans and specifications.

The following requirements apply during construction:

(1) Materials submittals are required and must be accepted by the design professional prior to construction of any facilities which are intended to be accepted by the city for public use. Refer to the Oregon 2015 Standard Specifications for Construction and city supplemental general conditions for material submittal requirements.

(2) The developer’s inspector will need to observe the following construction work:

(a) Installation of new storm drains and sanitary sewer systems.

(b) Connections to existing storm and sanitary sewers.

(c) Forms for concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk.

(d) Roadway subgrade, crushed rock base course and asphalt paving.

(3) Subgrade and base rock compaction tests shall be performed by an independent testing laboratory during construction, and results provided to public works.

(4) Pilings require inspection by a licensed professional engineer.

Copies of all inspection reports and results, reviewed and approved by the design professional, shall be provided to public works upon completion of construction work.

Furthermore, applicant is required to adhere to all additional inspections/requirements/conditions as described in the project’s approved permits. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.7), 2016].


18.10.080 As-built documents for privately constructed public improvements (pertains to city owned and maintained infrastructure).

Upon construction completion, the following documents shall be submitted to public works:

(1) As-built drawings showing actual constructed locations and elevations of all street facilities, pipes, manholes and laterals. Said drawings shall be submitted along with an AutoCAD compatible file on CD or USB drive.

(2) Copies of all inspection reports and results, reviewed and approved by the design professional.

(3) Written certification from the developer’s design professional confirming that the project was constructed in accordance with approved plans and specifications. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.8), 2016].


18.10.090 Final project acceptance for privately constructed public improvements.

Following receipt of as-built documents and completion of any outstanding “punch list” items for infrastructure intended for acceptance by the city, public works will forward a project acceptance and street adoption recommendation to the Coos Bay city council. The city will not assume maintenance responsibility for constructed facilities prior to council acceptance. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 2.9), 2016].


Chapter 18.15 TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES

Sections:

18.15.005    Generally.

18.15.010    City streets.

18.15.020    Privately maintained streets.

18.15.030    Nonmotorized facilities.

18.15.040    Transit facilities.

18.15.050    Landscaping within the right-of-way.

18.15.060    Transportation facility construction and maintenance responsibilities.

18.15.070    Formal acceptance of transportation facilities.


18.15.005 Generally.

This chapter provides information for the design of street improvements as well as nonmotorized facilities and transit infrastructure. Transportation design plans are reviewed and approved by public works. Design criteria for stormwater facilities serving transportation corridors are discussed in Chapter 18.25 CBMC.

Applicants for development and redevelopment projects that are expected to create 20 or more residential units (e.g., single-family residential lots, apartment/condo units) or 20,000 square feet or more of commercial/industrial space shall evaluate the project’s transportation system impacts in a transportation impact analysis (TIA). Such evaluations shall be prepared by a professional transportation engineer and paid for by the applicant. The TIA shall evaluate the access, circulation and other transportation requirements. The scope of TIA shall be established by public works to address issues related to a specific development proposal. See Chapter 18.40 CMC for TIA requirements.

Projects that are below the thresholds above may also be required to provide traffic analysis when, in the opinion of the public works director, a capacity problem and/or safety concern is caused and/or is adversely impacted by the development. The public works department staff shall determine the scope of this special analysis.

Trip ends shall be defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Trip Generation Manual, latest edition, or trip generation studies of comparable uses prepared by an engineer and approved by the public works department staff. “Trip ends” are trips that either begin or end at the proposed land use.

Level of Service (LOS). The level of service standard to determine what is acceptable or unacceptable traffic flow on streets shall be based on a volume-to-capacity ratio. City streets shall maintain a LOS of “D” during the p.m. peak hour of the day. However, the developer will be responsible for making appropriate safety improvements should warrants for turn lanes, traffic signals, and/or other traffic safety improvements be met.

Mitigation. Where a development causes traffic impacts that bring a road below acceptable levels of service, or impacts a road that is already operating below acceptable levels of service, or impacts a road that has a documented safety problem, the TIA shall identify traffic impacts attributable to the development and appropriate mitigation measures. The developer may be required to implement mitigation measures as a condition of approval.

Traffic Signals. Traffic signals may be required with development when traffic signal warrants are met, in conformance with the Highway Capacity Manual and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

This chapter is intended to be consistent with and a supplement to the following policies and standards:

	AASHTO	American Association of State and Transportation Officials

	ADA	Americans with Disabilities Act

	APWA	American Public Works Association

	ASTM	American Society for Testing and Materials

	MUTCD	Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices

	OAR	Oregon Administrative Rules

	ODOT	Oregon Department of Transportation

	OFC	Oregon Fire Code

	TSP	Coos Bay Transportation System Plan

	 	Coos Bay Development Code (CBMC Title 17)

	CBMC	Coos Bay Municipal Code

	 	Coos Bay Comprehensive Plan

Where conflict exists between these design standards and the above referenced documents, the most stringent requirements shall take precedence. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3), 2016].


18.15.010 City streets.

(1) Street Classifications. The city has adopted the following functional classification of streets based on the context of the surrounding land use:

(a) Principal arterial (state highway under ODOT jurisdiction);

(b) Arterial street;

(c) Collector street;

(d) Neighborhood route;

(e) Local street.

Refer to the city’s transportation system plan (TSP) for a map showing the city’s functional classification street designations.

Public works will determine the classification of any new streets which are not indicated in the TSP prior to design.

(2) Vehicular Zone.

(a)(i) Vehicular Zone Cross-Section. The vehicular zone width is defined as the horizontal distance from face of curb to face of curb, measured perpendicular to the centerline. The vehicular zone includes paved travel lanes for motorized vehicles and bicycles, and may also include median spaces and paved areas for on-street parking. The width of the vehicular zone shall be sufficient to allow for the safe passage of normal multi-modal traffic and emergency vehicles.

Required lane widths and configuration are shown in the standard details. Streets should be centered within the right-of-way; however, design exceptions may be considered due to topography or other physical constraints. The city’s design exception process in CBMC 18.10.060 will apply.

Table 3-1. Lane Widths and Configuration in the Vehicular Zone 

	 	 	Minimum Paving Width Curb-to-Curb	 	Max Grade

	Type of Street	Min RoW Width	Vehicle Travel Lane	Median or Center Turn Lane	On-Street Parking	Bike Lane (a)	Sidewalk Curb (b)

	Arterial/Collector	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	5-lane (c)	100'	12'/11'	14'	–	2 @ 6'(g)	2 @ 6'/5'	8%

	3-lane (c)	76'	12'	14' (Optional)	–	2 @ 6'(g)	2 @ 6'/5'	8%

	2-lane	50'	12'	–	–	2 @ 6'(g)	2 @ 6'/5'	8%

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	28' Standard Residential	50	10'	 	1 @ 8'	 	2 @ 5'	 

	36' Neighborhood Residential	50'	10'	–	2 @ 8'	–	2 @ 5'	16%

	40' Standard Commercial/ Industrial	60'	12'	–	2 @ 8'	–	2 @ 5'	16%

	Dead End (d)	50'	10'	–	2 @ 8'	–	2 @ 5'	16%

	Cul-de-Sac (e)	50'	10'	–	(d)	–	1 @ 5' (f)	16% (d)

	Alley	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	1-way	20'	12'	–	–	–	–	–

	2-way	20'	16'	–	–	–	–	–

(A) New construction: six feet; reconstruction: five feet.

(B) Wider sidewalks may be required in commercial areas.

(C) The minimum right-of-way width includes the option of two six-foot-wide landscape strips for arterials or two four-foot-wide strips for local commercial/industrial.

(D) A dead end must be less than 400 feet in length and terminate with a circular or hammerhead turnaround with a maximum grade of eight percent.

(E) No parking is permitted at the end of a cul-de-sac which must have adequate space for emergency equipment turnaround, usually a 45-foot unobstructed radius.

(F) At the end of the cul-de-sac, a five-foot sidewalk is required along the perimeter adjacent to the development.

(G) Bike lanes allowed to be reduced to five feet in width if the project is reconstruction.

(ii) Design Speed. The design speeds listed in Table 3-2 have been selected for the various street classifications. Posted speed may differ and will be designated by public works or ODOT. Designers shall use the design speed to select horizontal and vertical alignments.

Table 3-2. Design Speed 

	City TSP Street Classification	Design Speed (mph)

	Residential Local Street	25

	Collector	35

	Commercial/Industrial Local Street	25

	Arterial	40

(b) Pavement Section. The minimum allowable section is as shown on standard details.

The pavement section may vary depending on soil conditions. Minimum asphalt section shall be four inches. If, in the opinion of public works, soil subgrade conditions are potentially unsuitable, soil testing and pavement design will be required. The design engineer will have the responsibility for obtaining traffic data necessary for pavement design. The ODOT Pavement Design Guide and the Asphalt Institute method are acceptable pavement design references. Concrete streets shall be designed using the guidelines and requirements of the Oregon Department of Transportation and ASTM International Standards. The creation of new, or the replacement of existing, concrete streets shall be at the discretion and approval of public works.

At a minimum, asphalt thickness shall consist of two two-inch lifts or, in the case of existing streets, match the existing thickness of thicker pavements. Lifts shall not exceed three inches. Refer to standard details for further notes and subgrade requirements.

(c) Crown. A minimum crown slope of two percent shall be provided. A standard center crown section is recommended, but a super elevated section and/or an offset crown or a curb crown (shed) configuration may be permitted with approval of public works. Maximum crown slope shall be four percent. An inverted crown section is typically not allowed, but may be considered for alleys with public works approval.

(d) Vertical Clearance. Vertical, unobstructed clearance over the traveled roadway width must be a minimum of 14 feet.

(e) On-Street Parking. On-street parking shall be provided as required in Table 3-1. The minimum dimension of a standard parallel on-street parking stall is eight feet wide all areas, by 20 feet long. Disabled on-street parking stalls may be required and must meet current ADA standards.

Where parking is restricted on one or both sides of the street, no-parking signs shall be installed by the developer. A minimum of three no-parking signs, equally spaced, are required per block. The city will maintain no-parking signs after the street is accepted by city council.

(f) Signing and Striping. Street signing and pavement markings shall be designed in accordance with the current MUTCD. Where required, the developer shall install signing and striping. The city will maintain signing and striping after acceptance of the street by city council. A sign and striping plan prepared by a qualified engineer and approved by public works is required for any new sign or pavement marking on existing facilities.

(3) Walking Zone. The “walking zone” is defined as the portion of a city street behind the face of curb that provides sidewalk, roadside landscaping, and other pedestrian travel amenities.

(a) Walking Zone Cross-Section. Improvements required within the walking zone are shown in Table 3-3. Walking zone improvements are required on both sides of the street except for infill developments of three units or less, where walking zone improvements may be omitted from one side of the street with public works approval. Sidewalk and landscaped areas within the walking zone shall have a maximum cross-slope of two percent, draining towards the street. New sidewalks shall meet all ADA requirements.

Table 3-3. Required Walking Zone Improvements and Widths 

	Street Classification	Curb/Edge Width (Measured from Face of Curb)	Planting Strip Configuration and Width	Sidewalk Width	Minimum Total Walking Zone Width

	28' Standard Residential and 36' Neighborhood Residential	0.5' with 1' hardscaped edge area behind curb	optional	4.5'	6'

	40' Standard Commercial/ Industrial	0.5' with 1' hardscaped edge area behind curb	4' planting strip	4.5'	10'

	Collector	0.5' with 1' hardscaped edge area behind curb	optional	4.5'	7'

	Arterial 2-lane	0.5' with 1' hardscaped edge area behind curb	 	5.5'	7'

	Arterial 3- or 5-lane	0.5' with 1' hardscaped edge area behind curb	6' planting strip	5.5'	13'

(b) Curb, Gutter and Edge Area. Standard curb is required on both sides of streets within the city of Coos Bay. Rolled curb is not allowed unless approved through the design exception process described in CBMC 18.10.060.

(c) Sidewalk. Sidewalks are required on both sides of the street. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. Curb ramps meeting ADA requirements are required at all intersections and commercial driveways.

Placement of utility poles, hydrants and other obstructions should avoid sidewalk areas. Any sidewalk obstruction requires the prior approval of public works and a minimum unobstructed clear passage width of 36 inches must be maintained around any obstruction.

The standard sidewalk longitudinal grade and cross slope shall comply with current ADA standards. The back of sidewalk grade shall be maintained parallel to the gutter grade at driveways. In some locations where the elevation of the adjacent property is much lower than the street, a dip in the sidewalk may be permitted. In this case, the driveway shall have the standard one-half-inch lip and slope at a two percent (maximum) grade towards the street. The transition from the driveway back to the normal sidewalk grade shall be in accordance with ADA slope requirements.

(d) Grading Adjacent to Sidewalks. Chapter 18.30 CBMC applies to grading activities. Slopes behind the sidewalk shall start one foot beyond the edge of the sidewalk or curb and shall not be steeper than 1.5:1 (horizontal: vertical) in a cut condition and 2:1 for a fill condition with cohesive soils. Sand or other noncohesive soils shall be sloped no steeper than 3:1. It is the owner’s responsibility to grade responsibly and the owner is ultimately responsible for any damage to a public sidewalk.

If a grading plan is required, the design professional’s recommendations may replace the above slope requirements with the approval of public works.

A pedestrian guardrail or barrier shall be installed when the slope within two feet of the back of a sidewalk exceeds 2:1 for a height of 30 inches or greater. Protection for pedestrians is recommended when slopes are vertical and exceed 18 inches in height. Pedestrian guardrail shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the current edition of ODOT Standards.

(4) Horizontal Alignment of Streets. The centerline of street improvements shall coincide with the centerline of the public right-of-way unless approved by public works.

Minimum centerline curve radius shall be as follows:

Table 3-4. Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius 

	Design Speed (mph)	Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius (ft)

	25	200

	30	300

	35	480

Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than 200 feet on collectors, or 100 feet on local streets, and shall be designed to an even 10 feet.

Super-elevation may be allowed for the purpose of reducing minimum required radius providing that it can be shown that there are no adverse impacts on access to adjacent property, storm drainage and intersections.

Sufficient sight distance must be provided to allow drivers time to avoid obstacles, other vehicles or people in their path. Sight distance shall be considered in horizontal alignment design. Stopping sight distances shall be provided in accordance with the following table:

Table 3-5. Stopping Sight Distance 

	Design Speed (mph)	Required Stopping Sight Distance (ft)

	25	155

	30	200

	35	250

	Adapted from AASHTO Table 3-1

(5) Vertical Alignment of Streets. Minimum longitudinal grade of streets shall be one percent. Maximum street grades are shown in the following table:

Table 3-6. Maximum Street Grades 

	Street Classification	Maximum Grade (%)

	Residential Local	12

	Collector	10

	Commercial/Industrial Local	10

	Arterial	8

Vertical curves shall be provided at changes of grade exceeding two percent and shall provide the stopping sight distance required in Table 3-5. The grade of the through street at intersections shall be maintained through the intersection. Intersecting streets shall match the curb flow line of the through street and be provided with a landing area. The landing shall extend 25 feet from the pavement edge of the through street and have a grade of five percent or less. Alternative geometry may be necessary at intersections on steep slopes and should be coordinated with public works.

Streets shall be graded to provide adequate stormwater drainage in accordance with subsection (11) of this section and Chapter 18.25 CBMC to minimize standing water. Special care should be taken in the design of vertical curves to avoid long flat grades at the crest or sag of curves.

Curb or gutter grade information shall be provided in design plans for curb returns at intersections and for cul-de-sacs.

Due to the challenging topography in parts of the city, consideration will be given to exceeding vertical alignment standards providing that it can be shown that there will be no adverse impacts on traffic safety and emergency vehicle access. Requests for modification of standards shall be submitted in accordance with the design exception process provided in CMBC 18.10.060. Design exception requests shall include numeric and graphical sight distance analyses showing existing topographic features that are proposed to remain after development of the street, as well as any future features anticipated. Road grade design exceptions require approval of both public works and the city’s fire code official.

(6) Roadway Intersections.

(a) Intersection Geometry. The interior angle between centerlines at intersecting streets shall be kept as near to 90 degrees as possible and in no case shall it be less than 75 degrees. As far as practical, all streets other than minor streets shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in “T” intersections shall wherever practical leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the centerlines of streets having approximately the same direction and otherwise the centerlines of intersecting streets shall be spaced at least 150 feet apart.

Horizontal point of curvature (PC) must be located a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way of intersecting streets.

An arterial or collector street intersecting with another street shall have at least 100 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. Other streets, except alleys, shall have at least 50 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection.

The curb radius at the intersection of two streets shall be as shown in Table 3-7, unless otherwise approved by public works.

Table 3-7. Design Curb Radius 

	Approach/Entering Street at Intersection	⇨	No Parking or Bicycle Lane	With Bicycle Lane	With Parking Lane	Both Parking and Bicycle Lane

	Exiting Street	⇩	Design Curb Radius (ft)

	No Parking or Bicycle Lane	30	25	20	10

	With Bicycle Lane	25	12	8	5

	With Parking Lane	20	8	5	5

	Both Parking and Bicycle Lane	10	5	5	5

The intersection of more than two streets at any one point is not allowed.

Bulbed-out intersections for improved pedestrian crossings may be required at intersections specified by public works. Additional traffic calming measures may be required by public works.

(b) Clear-Vision Area. It is intended to ensure that all intersections and nonresidential driveways shall have an unobstructed sight distance along any approach not protected by a traffic signal. A vision clearance triangle shall be created sufficient to avoid vehicle conflicts for all approaching or departing vehicles traveling at or less than the maximum speed limit. Right-turning vehicles shall not be considered protected by a traffic signal.

The required vision clearance triangle shall be a sight distance as specified in Chapter 9, Intersections, of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Edition of “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets” in the minimum dimensions listed in Table 3-8, Vision Clearance Triangle – Minimum Dimensions (also see Standard Detail T-19 for an example). At signalized intersections, Dimension B shall be as provided in Table 3-8, and Dimension C shall be 50 feet. The minimum standard in Table 3-8 may be increased by public works for locations where it has been determined by an engineering report that the minimum standards listed do not provide a safe sight distance.

 

Table 3-8. Vision Clearance Triangle – Minimum Dimensions 

	MPH	Street Width	Vision Clearance Triangle Distance (Feet)

	A	B	C

	25	30	140	95

	36	125	90

	40	115	85

	48	165	85

	56	145	80

	30	30	170	115

	36	155	110

	40	145	105

	48	200	105

	56	180	100

	35	30	205	135

	36	185	130

	40	175	125

	48	240	125

	56	215	120

	40	30	235	160

	36	215	150

	40	205	145

	48	275	145

	56	250	135


[IMAGE]


Requirements for the establishment of a vision clearance triangle are as follows. Between a height of two feet and 10 feet, as measured from the edge of the adjoining roadway, a required vision clearance triangle shall be free of all structures, fences, vegetation, signs, retaining walls, cut slopes and any other sight obstruction, which either individually or collectively obscure an area in excess of 18 inches in width. Legally parked vehicles shall not be considered sight obstructions in the vision clearance triangle.

Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by public works if an item proposed to be located within the vision clearance triangle is determined not to constitute a sight obstruction; however, no exceptions may be granted within the first 50 feet of the vision clearance triangle as measured along distances B or C as set forth in Table 3-8.

(7) Illumination and Signalization. Public works will consider factors such as traffic, crash data, and roadway characteristics to support lighting installation decisions. AASHTO provides the threshold or minimum conditions of when to consider lighting. Refer to the ODOT Lighting Policy and Guidelines.

Due to limited resources, the city will not install, pay for power, or maintain new street lights in existing improved right-of-way. The city may consider paying for power and maintenance of new street lights installed in dedicated street right-of-way as part of the acceptance of new subdivision infrastructure. Where specialty light fixtures are desired, financial responsibility for monthly power and maintenance costs shall be determined prior to design approval.

Signals shall be designed by a professional engineer in accordance with the ODOT Traffic Signal Design Manual.

(8) Access to City Streets. Proposed driveway or private street access to a city street requires a permit from the city. State highway access requires a permit from ODOT.

(a) Driveway Access. Driveways/access shall meet the requirements of CBMC Title 17. Driveways greater than 150 feet in length shall meet the design requirements for private streets provided in CBMC 18.15.020.

Maximum and minimum driveway dimensions are detailed in Table 3-9.

Table 3-9. Driveway Apron Width 

	Property Frontage	Minimum width (ft)	Maximum width for single driveway (ft)	Maximum width each for two driveways (ft)

	Less than 50 feet	12	20	N/A

	50 to 75 feet	12	25	20

	More than 75 feet	12	30	20

	Widths in this table do not include sloped wings.

Design and construction of the driveway apron shall conform to details in Chapter 18.35 CMC. Driveways shall meet applicable ADA guidelines.

Requests for additional or wider driveways other than those allowed above must be approved through the design exception process (see CBMC 18.10.060).

Restrictions may be imposed on additional driveways, such as limited turn movements, shared access between uses, closure of existing driveways or other access management actions.

(i) The following will be considered for requests to install additional residential driveways on local streets:

(A) Residentially zoned lots having a single-family residential use (does not apply to nonconforming uses, e.g., commercial use on residential zoned property) accessing a paved local street (per the transportation system plan). The intent of this policy is to allow public works staff to consider permitting a second driveway access to a single-family residence with a lot having adequate frontage to meet sight visibility standards and to maintain space for on-street parking. Multiple driveways associated with unpaved streets shall be handled on a case-by-case basis.

For consideration of a second driveway access to a single-family residential lot:

1. Lot must be residentially zoned.

2. Lot must have an existing single-family residential use.

3. Second driveway access must be at least five feet (measured flair edge to property line) from lot property line.

4. Not more than 50 percent (not including the flairs for the second driveway) of any side of any residential lot may be used for driveway accesses.

5. At least 20 (measured flair edge to flair edge or property line) continuous feet of non-driveway access area must remain on any one side of any residential lot after construction of a second driveway for on-street parking.

6. Adequate sight distance shall be required and it shall be measured where the driveway access meets the sidewalk or paved street (as appropriate).

7. Second driveway must be paved.

8. Second driveway access, which must be a minimum of 10 feet in width, with five-foot-wide flair on each side of the driveway, must be at least 20 feet from the existing driveway.

(B) Joint usage (shared) driveways may be considered where sufficient spacing is not available. This may be from a driveway connected to an adjoining property that has direct access to a public street or where the access straddles property lines. An access easement covering the driveway shall be recorded in this case to assure access to the closest public street for all users of the driveway. The easement agreement shall also address construction and maintenance responsibilities along with other items that may be worthy of consideration on a case-by-case basis.

For consideration of a joint usage (shared) driveway as a second driveway access to a single-family residential lot:

1. Lots must be residentially zoned.

2. Lots must have a single-family residential use.

3. When new access is being constructed for a joint usage driveway, the access must be at least 20 feet (measured flair edge to flair edge) from any existing driveway.

4. Not more than 50 percent (not including the flairs for second driveway) of any side of any residential lot may be used for driveway accesses.

5. At least 20 (measured flair edge to flair edge or property line) continuous feet of non-driveway access area must remain on any one side of any residential lot after construction of a second driveway for on-street parking.

6. Minimum secondary driveway width is 10 feet.

7. Adequate sight distance shall be required and it shall be measured where the driveway access meets the sidewalk or paved street (as appropriate).

8. Reciprocal easements must be recorded in the deed records of all properties involved in a shared driveway. All parties must sign the service driveway/access permit application.

(ii) The following will be considered for requests to install additional residential driveways on collector and arterial streets.

(A) Residentially zoned lots having a single-family residential use (does not apply to nonconforming uses, e.g., commercial use on residential zoned property) accessing a collector or an arterial street (per the transportation system plan). Generally, second driveway access from the same parcel onto a collector or an arterial street will be denied (however, a second driveway access may be considered for the purposes of constructing a circular driveway). The applicant’s request for the additional access shall be accompanied by a site drawing indicating the dimensions, radius, distance between existing driveways and property lines, and other information necessary for staff to determine the feasibility and safety of the proposed driveway.

(b) Access from Alleys and Private Streets. Alley and private street connections to the public street shall be designed in accordance with guidance to be provided by public works or standard details in Chapter 18.35 CMC.

(c) Controlled Access. Controlled or gated access is not permitted on public or private streets except as approved for emergency-only access or public utility access. Gated communities and gated neighborhoods may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Any proposed controlled access devices will be evaluated through the design exception process.

(9) Cul-de-Sacs. Dead-end streets over 150 feet in length shall terminate in an approved turnaround acceptable to the fire marshal and public works to provide adequate emergency vehicle access. The maximum length of a dead-end street shall be 400 feet unless approved through the design exception process (see CBMC 18.10.060). This length shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting street along the centerline of the dead end street to the center of the turnaround.

No islands or other obstructions are allowed in the centers of cul-de-sacs.

The entire cul-de-sac or hammerhead must be contained within the public right-of-way and signed appropriately to restrict parking. Refer to subsection (2)(f) of this section for information regarding sign installation responsibilities.

(10) Alleys. Alleys must be a minimum of 20 feet wide with a five-foot curb radius at the intersection of the public road. Alleys shall be constructed using the pavement section required for residential local streets.

(11) Roadway Drainage. Stormwater disposal from streets requires a collection and piping system. Roadway storm drain facilities shall be separate from the city’s sanitary sewer lines. Discharge points for all roadway storm drains shall be approved by public works. Refer to Chapter 18.25 CBMC for stormwater system design standards.

Bioswales and other stormwater infiltration systems shall be employed only in streets in areas designated by public works. Bioswales (where allowed) shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 14, Appendix B of the ODOT Hydraulics Manual. Landscaping of bioswales (where allowed) shall meet the standards provided in CBMC 18.15.050. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3.1), 2016].


18.15.020 Privately maintained streets.

The city will not construct or add to its existing inventory of city maintained streets or access roads unless they meet all standards provided in CBMC 18.15.010. However, in cases where public street standards cannot be met, the developer may elect, with concurrence by public works, to construct a privately maintained access road to serve an infill development. Said privately maintained access road shall be constructed on private property.

Privately maintained streets and access roads may be developed exclusively within private property and the following conditions shall apply:

(1) The maximum number of dwelling units potentially served by the access road shall be three. Streets having the potential to serve more than three dwelling units must meet the requirements in CBMC 18.15.010.

(2) Sidewalks are not required.

(3) The street or access road surface must be constructed of an all-weather surface, as approved by public works and the city fire code official.

(4) The first 25 feet linear feet of the intersection/access point to the city street shall be paved.

(5) Any new development on a private street shall have a fire suppression system approved by the city fire code official.

(6) The traveled way of a private road shall be designated as a fire lane under the Oregon Fire Code. Private streets must have a minimum of 20 feet unobstructed width with 14 feet of vertical clearance.

(7) With the approval of the city fire code official, the travel surface of the access road may be reduced to 16 feet if two or three dwelling units will be served, or 14 feet if only one dwelling unit will be served. The total length of any access road with a reduced pavement width must be 400 feet or less. Access roads in excess of 400 feet must have a paved surface at least 20 feet wide.

(8) A standard turnaround shall be required at any dead end. (See CBMC 18.15.010(9).)

(9) A maximum profile grade of 12 percent is allowed.

(10) All runoff from new access roads must be controlled and directed to appropriate storm drains, or existing natural drainage channels. Connection to a natural drainage requires public works approval.

(11) Construction of privately maintained improvements within existing public rights-of-way must not obstruct or reduce access to existing homes.

(12) The developer shall arrange for future maintenance and repair of the access road, through a recorded road maintenance agreement or other legal mechanism to ensure perpetual maintenance. The maintenance agreement shall be binding upon all subsequent property owners and shall clearly specify that the city may remove any road improvements as needed to construct, repair or maintain city utilities in the right-of-way or easements. Restoration or repair of any roadway damage caused by city utility work will be the responsibility of the parties to the maintenance agreement.

(13) Street improvements constructed in the public right-of-way shall be positioned to allow for future widening, if additional development is anticipated.

(14) Developers shall install their own signs in accordance with the MUTCD and city standards, including a street identification sign at all intersections. Public works approval is required when installing signs at intersections with public roads. Once installed, the city will assume maintenance responsibility for traffic control signs and devices and street name signs located at the intersection with a city street. The city will not furnish, install or maintain other signs for private streets. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3.2), 2016].


18.15.030 Nonmotorized facilities.

(1) Sidewalks. Sidewalks in city street corridors shall be designed in accordance with CBMC 18.15.010(3).

(2) Bicycle Facilities. Bicycle facilities in city street corridors shall be designed in accordance with CBMC 18.15.010(2)(a).

(3) Multi-Use Pathways. Multi-use pathways within the city are intended for nonmotorized use by bicycles and pedestrians. As land is developed, publicly accessible multi-use pathways may be required by the city’s community development department to facilitate nonmotorized circulation and connectivity. ADA requirements apply to these facilities. Design of new multi-use pathways shall include logical connections to existing or planned pedestrian and bicycle facilities in street corridors.

General requirements for multi-use pathways are provided in Table 3-10. For additional design guidance, refer to the AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, and the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide.

Table 3-10. Multi-Use Pathway Design Elements 

	Pathway Element	Requirements

	Surfacing	Stable, firm and slip resistant. Asphalt or concrete are preferred. Other materials require public works approval.

	Maximum Longitudinal Slope	5%

	Maximum Cross Slope	2%

	Clear Width	10' minimum; 12' preferred; in areas of significant walking or biking demand the clear width should be 16'.

(4) Public Stairways. New pedestrian facilities and alterations to existing pedestrian facilities within the public right-of-way shall conform to ADA standards. Due to the city’s topographical setting however, hillside conditions may constrain modification or addition of pedestrian features in full and strict compliance with minimum ADA standards. In cases where ADA compliance is technically infeasible, stairway access for pedestrians may be considered by public works. Where allowed, public stairways shall conform to ADA requirements for general site and building elements.

(5) Street Crossings. Developers are required to provide enhanced street crossings on roadways with high traffic volumes and/or speeds in areas with nearby transit stops, residential uses, schools, parks, shopping and employment destinations. These crossings shall include treatments such as marked crosswalks, high visibility crossings, and/or curb extensions as determined by public works. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3.3), 2016].


18.15.040 Transit facilities.

Developers shall provide documented coordination with Coos County Area Transit, the local transit provider, with regard for design of street and other transportation facilities that are located within 100 feet of existing or planned transit routes and stops. ADA-accessible transit stop improvements, pedestrian connections to transit stop locations and furnishings such as shelters, benches, bicycle racks and/or other amenities may be required by public works. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3.4), 2016].


18.15.050 Landscaping within the right-of-way.

In addition to the guidelines in this section, landscaping within the right-of-way must meet the requirements of Coos Bay Municipal Code.

(1) General Requirements. Landscaping within the right-of-way may be a requirement of a development or installed at the request of property owners. If landscaping is a requirement of a development, it may only be removed if it is replaced elsewhere and approved by the public works and community development director, or their designee.

Landscaping within the right-of-way must be maintained by the adjacent property owner. Irrigation in the right-of-way must comply with the OPSC and also be maintained by the adjacent property owner.

(2) Clearance. Landscaping within the right-of-way must meet the clear-vision area requirements found in CBMC 18.15.010(6)(b). Vegetation must be maintained so all branches and foliage are removed to a height of seven feet above the sidewalk and 14 feet above the roadway.

(3) Street Tree Installation and Types. Street tree installation and types shall be in conformance with Chapter 8.30 CBMC and the city’s urban forestry plan. [Ord. 503 § 1 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3.5), 2016].


18.15.060 Transportation facility construction and maintenance responsibilities.

Developers are responsible for constructing, signing and striping new street facilities and improving existing roadways as required for developments such as subdivisions and commercial buildings. Maintenance of roadway improvements within dedicated right-of-way is the responsibility of the developer (or designated private parties) until formal acceptance of the roadway by city council. Any nonstandard roadway within the right-of-way that is not accepted by the city council must be maintained by the developer (or designated private parties) in perpetuity or until the roadway is improved and accepted by city council. Maintenance responsibility needs to be documented, recorded and a copy provided to the city prior to any final inspections or occupancy of the associated development.

Transportation facilities within the vehicular zone of street corridors that are located within the public right-of-way and that are formally accepted by city council are maintained by the city. This includes pavement, gutter, signing, striping and signalization. State highways are maintained by ODOT.

Transportation facilities within the walking zone of street corridors are maintained by adjacent property owners.

Private roads and alleys must be maintained in perpetuity by the developer, adjacent property owners, homeowners association or other designated party. A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the city with any new development project.

Table 3-11. Maintenance Responsibilities 

	Facility	Location	Accepted by City Council?	Maintenance Responsibility

	Standard street vehicular zone improvements	Public right-of-way (ROW)	Yes	City

	Standard street walking zone improvements	Public ROW	Yes	Private1

	Substandard street, private street or alley	Public ROW	No	Private1

	Multi-use pathway	Public ROW, easement or tract	TBD2	TBD2

	State highway	State ROW	N/A	ODOT

	1Adjacent property owners for sidewalk, owners of properties served by the substandard street, private street or alley, or other designated parties

	2To be determined prior to design approval

[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 3.6), 2016].


18.15.070 Formal acceptance of transportation facilities.

Approval of the final plat or map shall not constitute an offer by the applicant or acceptance by the city of any public improvements or monumentation. Upon completion of the improvements and post-monumentation, the applicant shall submit all items identified in CBMC Title 17. The following minimum record drawings shall be submitted to public works:

(1) One copy of street and sanitary/storm sewer plan profiles.

(2) One mylar of the certified post-monumentation plan.

Public works department staff shall review the material and indicate approval of the post-monumentation by signing the affidavit on the final plat or map.

Only improvements that have been constructed in accordance with city standard specifications (latest edition of Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction) and inspected and approved by public works shall be recommended for council acceptance by public works (also see CBMC 18.10.090). Upon city council passing a resolution confirming acceptance of the public improvements, the city will provide a formal letter of acceptance. The city will not maintain or repair any facilities until they have been formally accepted. [Ord. 479 § 3.7 (EDS § 1), 2016].


Chapter 18.20 SANITARY SEWERS

Sections:

18.20.005    Generally.

18.20.010    Design flows.

18.20.020    Sanitary sewer pipes.

18.20.030    Manholes and cleanouts.

18.20.040    Sanitary sewer alignment.

18.20.050    Sanitary sewer connections.

18.20.060    Wastewater pump stations.

18.20.070    Sanitary sewer system testing.


18.20.005 Generally.

This chapter provides information for the design of public sanitary sewers. Public sanitary sewer design plans are reviewed and approved by the engineering division.

Private sanitary sewers constructed on private property must be designed according to the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code.

The following sanitary sewer design standards have been developed with the goals of proper sizing for current and future flows, correct installation for long life, ease of access for maintenance and repair while taking into account construction costs.

Compliance with these standards does not relieve the design professional of the responsibility to apply conservative and sound professional judgment. These are minimum standards and are intended to assist, but not substitute for, competent work by design professionals. The city may at its sole discretion, due to special conditions and/or environmental constraints, require more stringent requirements than would normally be required under these standards.

This chapter is intended to be consistent with and a supplement to the following documents:

	APWA	American Public Works Association

	ASTM	American Society for Testing and Materials

	OAR	Oregon Administrative Rules

	CBMC	City of Coos Bay Municipal Code

	OPSC	Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code

	DEQ	Oregon Department of Environmental Quality Water Quality Program Rules1

1    Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Water Quality Program Rules – Division 052

http://www.deq.state.or.us/regulations/rules.htm

Where conflict exists between these design standards and the above referenced documents, the most stringent requirements shall take precedence. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4), 2016].


18.20.010 Design flows.

The entire basin to be served by a sanitary sewer must be taken into account when developing design flows for new or replacement sanitary sewers.

Flow calculations prepared by a professional engineer are required for all lines serving 10 or more residences and all commercial or industrial facilities with flows in excess of 3,600 gallons per day (gpd). Engineer prepared calculations for lesser thresholds may be required by public works staff based on known existing conditions in the downstream collection system. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.1), 2016].


18.20.020 Sanitary sewer pipes.

(1) Sanitary Sewer Pipe Material. The standard pipe material to be used for gravity sanitary sewers is green PVC meeting the requirements of ASTM D3034 SDR35. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe with fused joints is also acceptable. All HDPE pipe shall be de-beaded. Minimum wall thickness class of HDPE pipe is SDR 26. Other pipe materials may be considered where appropriate and must be approved by public works. Tracer wire shall be a minimum 18-gauge minimum, solid copper wire with green 30-mil-thick HDPE insulation rated for direct burial, and shall be installed with all sanitary sewer pipes. Use waterproof splice at all connections.

Sanitary and storm sewer lines must have warning tape. The tape shall be six inches wide, four-mil-thick, APWA green, and reading “Caution Sewer Line Buried Below.”

(2) Sanitary Sewer Pipe Size. Sanitary sewers shall be sized to adequately handle the expected flows. The minimum sanitary sewer diameter is eight inches. For dead-end lines up to a maximum length of 250 feet, that have no possibility of future extension and serve less than six houses or have limited flow, six-inch lines will be allowed providing that they can be shown to have sufficient capacity and flow velocity. Manholes will be required at upstream end for maintenance purposes.

(3) Sanitary Sewer Pipe Slope. Sanitary sewers shall be sloped to provide a minimum velocity of two feet per second (fps) for the average daily flow using a Manning’s roughness coefficient of 0.013 or greater. In no case, unless approved by public works, shall the slope be less than shown in Table 4-1.

Table 4-1. Minimum Pipe Slopes 

	Pipe Diameter (inches)	Minimum Slope (%)

	6	0.75

	8	0.40

	10	0.40

	12	0.40

Slopes shown are an absolute minimum. Calculations shall be provided to show that minimum flow velocity requirements can be met. Sizing pipes larger than needed for the anticipated flow to allow installation at a reduced slope is not acceptable. Sanitary sewer diameters may not be reduced in a downstream direction even if steeper slopes allow a smaller diameter pipe to have sufficient capacity for the design flow.

Flow velocities greater than 15 fps under daily peak flows should be avoided. A velocity over 15 fps in sanitary sewer pipes requires special consideration for pipe scour control (and manhole scour; see CBMC 18.20.030(4)). Pipe restraints or anchors may be required for pipe slopes in excess of 20 percent.

(4) Sanitary Sewer Depth. Sanitary sewers shall be installed with a minimum of 36 inches of cover from the top of the pipe to the finish surface. The depth should be sufficient to provide for access by gravity from all adjacent properties in the area whether proposed or existing. Sanitary sewer main depth shall be designed to avoid conflict with other existing and proposed utilities as provided in CBMC 18.20.040(2). Conflicts between sanitary sewer laterals and other utilities must also be taken into account in the design. All design must be in conformance with OAR 333-061-0050.

(5) Sanitary Sewer Laterals. Sanitary sewer laterals shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.2), 2016].


18.20.030 Manholes and cleanouts.

(1) Location. Manholes shall be installed at the following locations:

(a) All changes of pipe size, direction, alignment and grade;

(b) At the upstream end of the pipe;

(c) Maximum spacing of 300 feet;

(d) Each intersection or junction of sanitary sewer mains;

(e) Any intersection of a service or private sewer of eight inches or larger;

(f) Manholes shall not be placed in the wheel path.

Manhole placement within the street right-of-way should allow easy access without blocking both traffic lanes. Manhole covers shall not be located in the normal wheel path for the street nor within a crosswalk. Place manholes to avoid surface runoff or stormwater ponding.

(2) Standard Manhole. Manholes shall be 48 inches in diameter for main sizes up to 24 inches. For line sizes in excess of 24 inches, the design engineer shall submit manhole designs. A minimum 0.1-foot drop in inverts across the manhole is required where the angle between the upstream and downstream pipe is less than 90 degrees. Provide at least a 0.2-foot drop in inverts where the outlet pipe is 90 degrees from the inlet pipe, or where manholes larger than 48 inches have been approved for use by public works. Designs for connections to existing manholes shall show the location of the cover and ladder and the elevations of all pipe inverts, channels, ledge and rim. When different size pipes enter/exit a manhole, the elevation of the crowns of the pipe shall match.

Flat top manholes should be used when there is less than six feet from the pipe invert to the top of the manhole.

(3) Drop Manhole. The maximum permitted channelized drop across a manhole is 24 inches. For drops in excess of 24 inches, a drop manhole is required. Inside drops are only permitted when adequate room is available within the manhole and when site conditions make an outside drop extremely difficult to construct. Only one inside drop is permitted in each manhole. Inside drops require approval by public works.

(4) Manhole Scour Protection. Internal manhole scour protection, such as HDPE flat plate (one-quarter inch thick), epoxy coating or energy dissipation mechanisms shall be provided whenever entering flows exceed 15 feet per second. Scour protection treatments require approval by the engineering division.

(5) Connections to Existing Manholes. When connecting new lines to existing manholes, the manhole wall must be core drilled cleanly, and grouted or otherwise sealed to prevent groundwater inflow and infiltration. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.3), 2016].


18.20.040 Sanitary sewer alignment.

Sanitary sewer lines shall have a straight alignment with a constant grade between manholes. Curved alignment will not be allowed unless there are no reasonable alternatives and must be approved by public works. Sanitary sewer alignment shall be in a street right-of-way whenever possible.

(1) Sanitary Sewer Easements. The minimum easement width for installations of storm and sewer with depths of cover of five feet or less (measured at the top of pipe) is 15 feet. The minimum easement width will be increased by 10 feet for each additional five feet of cover over five feet (rounded up). Easements shall be centered over the utility.

If due to topographic constraints the sanitary sewer must run along the alignment of a property line, adequate access must be provided. A minimum 15-foot-wide sanitary sewer easement is required for access and an adequate surface is required for physical access. The sanitary sewer alignment must be graded to permit travel by utility trucks and backhoes. The sanitary sewer alignment should be offset from the property line to avoid conflicts with survey monuments. The easement description must hold the city harmless for any damage to or removal of fences, retaining walls, trees or other improvements constructed in the easement area. Easements need to be shown on the final plat or recorded easement document prior to city acceptance.

Sewers in easements will be allowed only after all reasonable attempts to place the mains in the right-of-way have been exhausted. All sewers shall be centered in the easements.

(2) Clearance from Other Utilities. Separation of parallel water and sanitary sewer lines shall meet the requirements of OAR 333-061-0050.

Adequate separation is required from other utilities. All clearances listed in Table 4-2 are from edge of pipe to edge of pipe:

Table 4-2. Minimum Horizontal Clearance from Sanitary Sewer 

	Utility	Min. Distance (ft)

	Cable TV	5

	Gas	10

	Power	10

	Storm	5

	Telephone, Fiber Optic	10

 

Table 4-3. Minimum Vertical Clearance from Sanitary Sewer 

	Utility	Min. Distance (ft)

	Cable TV	2

	Gas	2

	Power	2

	Storm	2

	Telephone, Fiber Optic	2

[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.4), 2016].


18.20.050 Sanitary sewer connections.

In accordance with the Coos Bay Municipal Code, each residential, commercial or industrial building is required to have a separate connection to the public sanitary sewer. Exceptions are allowed per CBMC 13.15.170.

(1) Connection of Sanitary Sewer Laterals. Connection of sanitary sewer laterals to the public sanitary sewer main must conform to the standard details. The cost of new lateral connections or extensions is the responsibility of the property owner.

City responsibility for sanitary sewer maintenance is limited to public sanitary sewer mains. Sanitary sewer laterals from the point of connection, including the connection at the sanitary sewer main, back to the building are the responsibility of the property owner.

(2) Connection of New Sanitary Sewer Mains. Connections of new sanitary sewer mains to existing pipes must be done with a manhole. There is a possibility of surcharging in some existing sanitary sewer lines, particularly the interceptor. This must be taken into account when designing new connections and measures such as storage or backflow prevention constructed to avoid problems.

(3) Pretreatment Requirements for Sanitary Sewer Connections. Chapter 13.15 CBMC prohibits the introduction of mastics, oil, grease or petroleum products into the public sanitary sewer by any user connected to the sanitary sewer system. Industrial, commercial and/or retail operations, regardless of size, that generate petroleum/animal/vegetable fats, oils or grease (FOG) waste, must pretreat wastewater prior to discharging to the public sanitary sewer. Pretreatment systems are reviewed and approved by the State of Oregon Plumbing Official. Ongoing maintenance and repair of pretreatment systems to ensure proper function is the responsibility of the property owner. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.5), 2016].


18.20.060 Wastewater pump stations.

Pump stations will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by public works. Pump station design plans require DEQ approval in addition to city approval.

Wastewater pump stations must be designed by an Oregon registered professional engineer and must meet DEQ standards for design and construction of wastewater pump stations. Operation and maintenance manuals meeting DEQ guidelines must also be provided. Contact public works for additional specifications on pump station controls and appurtenances required by the city. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.6), 2016].


18.20.070 Sanitary sewer system testing.

All new sanitary sewer pipes and manholes must be tested for water tightness prior to city acceptance, using a DEQ-approved method. (Refer to Appendix A of OAR 340-052.)

In addition, new sewer pipes must be thoroughly flushed and inspected by video, after trench backfilling is complete and prior to city acceptance. This includes video confirmation that the line is free from sags, irregular joints and connections, obstructions, restrictions or other anomalies that may cause solids to accumulate.

Pump station inspection and testing shall be performed to manufacturer’s specifications in the presence of public works personnel or designated representative. Testing documentation must be provided to public works for approval prior to city acceptance. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 4.7), 2016].


Chapter 18.25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

Sections:

18.25.010    General guidelines.

18.25.020    Stormwater design documentation.

18.25.030    Temporary stormwater and erosion control.

18.25.040    Permanent stormwater management systems.


18.25.010 General guidelines.

Plans for temporary and permanent stormwater management shall be provided for every street improvement and land development proposal that disturb 1,000 square feet or more.

In addition to adhering to the standards provided below, stormwater designs should identify the potential overland flow path in the event the stormwater infrastructure becomes plugged or fails, and provide safeguards to minimize property damage.

Runoff from streets and other impervious surfaces may not be directed to a natural drainage channel, without prior approval of public works. If approved, runoff directed to natural drainage channels shall be pretreated using a pollution control structure or biofiltration method. Riprap or other energy dissipation facilities may be required at stormwater discharge points to prevent erosion. It is the responsibility of the owner to obtain all necessary regulatory permits. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 5.1), 2016].


18.25.020 Stormwater design documentation.

Hydraulic and hydrologic reports and other stormwater design documentation documents shall be prepared in accordance with this section. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 5.2), 2016].


18.25.030 Temporary stormwater and erosion control.

Management of stormwater during construction shall adhere to the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality’s Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.

A plan for temporary slope stability and erosion control, along with a plan for permanent slope stability, erosion control and plant establishment, is required as part of the construction submittal. A site design permit must be obtained from public works before any site work, including clearing and grubbing, begins.

A geological study, prepared by an Oregon licensed geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, or geologist, is required to be submitted to and approved by public works prior to grading and/or proposed new development on slopes exceeding 25 percent. The study shall address overall slope stability, before, during, and after disturbance and/or development. Geological recommendations shall include methods for maintaining slope stability and managing stormwater during construction. All geological recommendations shall be incorporated in the applicant or developer’s grading permit application, and approved by the geologist or engineer upon completion of construction. It is the responsibility of the owner to obtain all other necessary regulatory permits. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 5.3), 2016].


18.25.040 Permanent stormwater management systems.

(1) Flow Calculations and Sizing Methodology. Runoff calculations and pipe sizing performed by a registered engineer are required, and should be based on anticipated build-out. All future anticipated impervious surfaces in the development such as streets, walkways, driveways, roofs, patios, etc., should be accommodated when designing stormwater improvements.

Hydrologic calculations for drainage basins/watersheds less than 200 acres shall utilize the rational method. Hydrologic calculations for drainage basins/watersheds greater than 200 acres shall utilize the unit hydrograph method. Storm drain design shall utilize a 25-year, 24-hour duration return interval. Design for storm drain improvements for state highways (improvements associated with state highways must have ODOT approvals) or arterial roads shall utilize the 50-year, 24-hour duration return interval. In cases where roadway overtopping is likely, a 100-year, 24-hour return interval shall be utilized for design. Refer to the city of Coos Bay stormwater master plan and the ODOT Hydraulics Manual for calculating peak flows utilizing the rational method and unit hydrograph method. Selection of methodology is at the discretion of the design engineer. Calculations should be confirmed using a second analysis method, also selected at the discretion of the designer.

(2) Inlets, Catch Basins and Stormwater Pretreatment. Inlets and catch basins in the public right-of-way shall be constructed per standard details. Inlets and catch basins on private property shall comply with plumbing code requirements.

Pretreatment of stormwater destined for conveyance in a public storm drain system is recommended. Pretreatment may be accomplished through the use of biofiltration swales, catch basin inserts, or other methods approved by public works which are designed to remove oil and grease, trash, debris, sediment, and other pollutants associated with development. Any catch basin inserts proposed for use on public facilities or located within public right-of-way will require approval of public works.

(3) Storm Drain Manholes. Manhole design shall conform to the following:

(a) Storm drain manholes shall be provided at least every 500 feet, at each change in pipe grade or alignment, and at each junction of two or more lines. Manhole lids shall have a minimum of six inches of clearance from the edge of curbs and shall not be in wheel paths of the traveled way.

(b) All manholes shall be a minimum of 48 inches in diameter.

(c) Inside drop and water quality manholes shall be at least 60 inches in diameter with at least 42 inches of clear space.

(d) Storm drain manholes shall meet the requirements of standard details in Chapter 18.35 CMC. Channelization is required in storm drain manholes.

(4) Storm Drain Pipes. The city allows the use of the following materials for storm drain piping:

(a) Pipe meeting ASTM D3034 SDR 35 specifications.

(b) High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe with fused joints. Joints shall be de-beaded.

(c) Dual wall corrugated HDPE pipe with smooth interior wall (for example, ADS N-12 piping for diameters of 24 inches and less; and ADS SaniTite for diameters of 30 inches and larger).

Storm drain piping shall otherwise meet the requirements of CBMC 18.20.020, except that the minimum storm drain pipe size shall be eight inches.

Green locate wire and tracer tape shall be installed as shown in standard details.

(5) Connection of Private Drains to the Public Storm Drain. Private drains may be connected directly to the public stormwater system, if approved by public works. Public storm drain pipes six-inch diameter and larger shall be connected at a nearby manhole or catch basin rather than directly to public stormwater pipelines. All connection points shall be approved by public works.

For private developments adjacent to residential streets, small private drains for individual lots may be piped under the sidewalk and through the curb, for discharge to the street gutter; provided, that there is two inches of freeboard from the water surface elevation (25-year, 24-hour storm event) to the top of curb and eight feet of the traveled way is dry. For highways and arterials, drainage under the sidewalk will be allowed on a case-by-case basis. Owner is responsible for any damage that occurs to sidewalk as a result of the drain. Gutter discharge points shall be approved by public works. Discharge points cannot adversely impact adjacent neighbors or cause flooding/ponding within the public right-of-way. The owner may be required to employ low impact development devices to capture runoff and reduce the volume and duration of runoff that enters into the gutter as a result of the private development. Public works may require connection to the public stormwater system where gutter discharge has the potential for detrimental effects.

(6) Retention and Detention Facilities. Proposed improvements cannot adversely impact downstream drainages. If there are adverse impacts, the downstream system shall be mitigated or the increase in volume and durations on site shall be mitigated.

(a) Detention Flow Control Structures. Structural detention facilities such as tanks, vaults and oversized pipes shall be designed to prevent surcharge of downstream piping systems during storm events.

(i) The following criteria apply to detention basins:

(A) When required, on-site stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to capture runoff so the post-development runoff rates from the site do not exceed the predevelopment conditions, based upon a two-year through 25-year, 24-hour return storm. Volume and duration of predevelopment conditions will be considered.

(B) Detention basin shall have an emergency spillway designed to pass the 100-year storm event.

(C) In soils where groundwater may induce flotation and buoyancy, measures shall be taken to counteract these forces with concrete ballast, earth backfill, concrete anchors, or other counteractive measures. Calculations demonstrating stability shall be submitted to public works.

(ii) Flow control structures must be approved by public works and must meet the following design criteria:

(A) Refer to the ODOT Hydraulics Manual for orifice and weir flow control equations.

(B) Weir must be accessible (e.g., for backhoe, dump truck, and personnel) for maintenance.

(C) The control structure shall be designed to pass the 100-year storm event as overflow (emergency spillway), without causing flooding of the contributing drainage area.

(7) Operation and Maintenance Plans. A plan outlining the scope of activities, schedule and responsible parties for periodic inspection and maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities shall be prepared and included with the construction submittal. This plan shall cover vegetation management, structural repairs, sediment removal and other activities necessary for the continued long-term function of the stormwater facilities.

(8) Storm Drain System Testing. All new storm drain pipes and manholes must be tested for water tightness prior to city acceptance using a water exfiltration test procedure.

In addition, new storm drain pipes must be thoroughly flushed and inspected by video, after trench backfilling is complete and prior to city acceptance. This includes video confirmation that the line is free from sags, irregular joints and connections, obstructions, restrictions or other anomalies that may cause solids to accumulate. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 5.4), 2016].


Chapter 18.30 SITE GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL

Sections:

18.30.010    Purpose.

18.30.020    Site development permits.

18.30.030    Grading and fill requirements.

18.30.040    Other requirements.

18.30.050    Temporary erosion and sediment control policies and criteria.


18.30.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to protect existing public and private improvements against damage that may occur as a result of grading activities on private properties within the city of Coos Bay. In addition, minimum erosion control measures are identified which are intended to prevent or minimize sediment discharge from sites where grading is planned.

(2) Depending on the location and nature of the work, permits may also be required. This can include but is not limited to the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), Oregon Division of State Lands (DSL), the Army Corps of Engineers, the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW), or U.S. Fish and Wildlife. If such permits are required, the applicant shall provide evidence to the city that a permit has been obtained prior to any clearing, grading, or excavation activities. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 6.1), 2016].


18.30.020 Site development permits.

(1)(a) Site development permit is required for all proposed grading (excavation or fill) activity within the city of Coos Bay, including but not limited to lot leveling, slope grading, site drainage, retaining wall excavation and fill, and other grading activities associated with site development.

(b) Site development permits are not required for sites on which excavation is limited to footing or foundation excavations and utility trenches. These items shall be covered under the building permit. This does not exempt these activities from installing the appropriate temporary sediment and erosion control measures during the construction activity.

(c) Site development permits, when required, shall be obtained from the city of Coos Bay public works department. The permit application form is available on the city’s website or from the public works department.

(d) A bond shall be required to ensure that the work is done to city standards. The bond will be forfeited if the work is not inspected and approved by public works.

(2) Grading Plan.

(a) Each application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by a plan which clearly shows the nature and extent of the work proposed.

(b) A geological study prepared by an Oregon licensed geotechnical engineer or (depending upon the nature of the project) a certified engineering geologist is required to be submitted to and approved by public works prior to grading and/or proposed new development on slopes exceeding 25 percent. The study shall address overall slope stability, before, during, and after disturbance and/or development. Geological recommendations shall include methods for maintaining slope stability and managing stormwater during construction. All geological recommendations shall be incorporated in the applicant or developer’s grading permit application, and approved by the engineer upon completion of construction. It is the responsibility of the owner to obtain all other necessary regulatory permits.

(c) Grading plans as described herein are intended for proposed grading, excavation, or fill projects on existing platted parcels within the city of Coos Bay. Grading plans for land division projects shall be included with plans submitted for development review as specified in Chapter 18.10 CBMC, General Requirements.

(d) The following items shall be included on each proposed grading plan:

(i) Name of the property owner and the person or firm that prepared the plan.

(ii) Site address and map parcel number.

(iii) Property lines and any easements on or across the property.

(iv) Limits of clearing.

(v) Extents of proposed grading, including depth of cut and fill.

(vi) Location of all existing and proposed buildings or structures and location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet of the proposed grading.

(vii) Location of any existing or proposed retaining walls (label wall height).

(viii) Location of any existing or proposed drainage courses or piping.

(ix) Configuration of all proposed cut and fill slopes (i.e., 2H:1V).

(x) Existing and proposed topography with two-foot contour intervals. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 6.2), 2016].


18.30.030 Grading and fill requirements.

(1) Fill slopes shall not exceed two feet horizontal to one foot vertical (2:1) unless approved by a qualified Oregon licensed geotechnical engineer or (depending upon the nature of the project) a certified engineering geologist. The toe of fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries at least one-half the height of the fill with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of 20 feet. Where a fill slope is to be located near the property boundary, precautions shall be taken to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include but are not limited to:

(a) Additional setbacks.

(b) Provision for retaining or slough walls.

(c) Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion.

(d) Provisions for the control of runoff.

(2) Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical (2:1) unless a geological study prepared by an Oregon licensed geotechnical engineer or (depending upon the nature of the project) a certified engineering geologist is submitted which justifies that a steeper slope can be safely constructed and will not create a hazard to adjoining public or private property. The top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth the height of cut, with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of 10 feet.

(3) Surface vegetation and topsoil must be grubbed to a depth of at least six inches prior to placement of fill material. All existing vegetation must be removed from areas designated to receive fill prior to placement.

(4) Fill material shall be free of all rubbish, organic material, and other deleterious substances which could be detrimental to the stability of the fill.

(5) Fill shall be compacted to at least 90 percent of maximum density as determined by the ASTM D1557 (Modified Proctor) test method. Fill material shall be placed in lifts not exceeding 12 inches compacted depth.

(6) A report prepared by an Oregon licensed geotechnical engineer, or (depending upon the nature of the project) a certified engineering geologist is required when fills in excess of 12 inches are planned within future building areas. The specified fill material shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the recommendations of the report. Any required testing shall be as recommended in the report.

(7) Disturbed areas not scheduled for construction of buildings or other improvements shall be stabilized with permanent erosion control to prevent erosion once grading is complete. Stabilization shall be completed within 30 days of the date all grading is finished. Temporary stabilization measures may also be required prior to completion of the project if the city determines it is necessary due to windblown dust or erosion at the site. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 6.3), 2016].


18.30.040 Other requirements.

(1) For sites located partially or entirely within a special flood hazard area as identified on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the project must meet the requirements of Chapter 17.318 CBDC, Flood Damage Prevention. An engineering evaluation to determine the impact of fill on floodwater elevation may be required.

(2) A biological evaluation may also be required to determine impact to endangered species and/or their habitat.

(3) The disturbance of one or more acres requires application for a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit 1200-C as administered by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). The application form is available online or can be obtained from the local DEQ office. Issuance of a site development permit from the city of Coos Bay does not meet or negate the requirement to obtain an NPDES General Permit 1200-C.

(4) Excavations exceeding 5,000 cubic yards within a 12-month period require an operating permit from the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI). Application forms are available online or by contacting DOGAMI at (971) 673-1555.

(5) If the proposed grading includes import or export of materials, a heavy hauling permit may be required by the city of Coos Bay. Heavy hauling permits require bonding to insure against damage to existing infrastructure within the right-of-way (see Chapter 12.05 CBMC). The amount of bonding required is based on the volume of import/export and will be determined by public works. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 6.4), 2016].


18.30.050 Temporary erosion and sediment control policies and criteria.

(1) General. Submission of an erosion and sediment control plan is required in conjunction with each site development permit application. The best management practices (BMPs) listed in subsection (3) of this section are the required minimum measures but may not be appropriate for every site. The city will review erosion and sediment control plans for completeness and compliance with requirements. However, it is the responsibility of the applicant to install proper and adequate sediment and erosion control measures such that the site is adequately stabilized and the downstream properties and receiving waters are protected for the duration of the construction.

(2) Referenced Standards. For erosion control best management practices (BMPs) refer to the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality Erosion and Sediment Control Manual.

(3) Required Best Management Practices (BMPs). The BMPs listed below are required, where applicable, for grading projects within the city of Coos Bay. Additional measures may be required depending on project scope or as a condition of other required permits such as the NPDES General Permit 1200-C.

(a) Mark Clearing Limits. Clearing and grading of the site should be planned properly. It is important to clear only the areas needed, thus keeping exposed areas to a minimum. Clearing should be phased so that only those areas that are actively being worked are uncovered. Clearing limits shall be flagged prior to the initiation of clearing.

(b) Stabilized Construction Entrance. A stabilized construction entrance must be constructed prior to initiating grading. The stabilized construction entrance shall be the sole entrance or egress from the site. Do not install gravel on paved surfaces. Stabilized construction entrances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Appendix F – Part SC-10 of the DEQ Erosion and Sediment Control Manual.

(c) Protect Stockpiles and Staging Areas. Soil and material stockpiles shall be situated so that the material does not erode into the street or adjoining properties. Excavated soil and material stockpiles should be located at least 10 feet behind the curb, such as in the backyard or side yard area. This practice will increase the distance eroded soil and stockpiled material must travel to reach the stormwater conveyance system. If applicable to the site, concentrated flows shall be diverted away from staging areas and stockpiles using BMPs from the DEQ Erosion and Sediment Control Manual. Soil and material stockpiles shall be covered when not in use (e.g., when not accessed for 48 hours or more) during the period of October 1st to May 31st. This requirement may be waived for soil and gravel stockpiles on flat (less than five percent) slopes if, in the opinion of the city inspector, the risk of erosion is minimal.

(d) Sediment Fence. Install sediment fence along a level contour, with the last six feet of fence turned up slope. Except for the ends, the difference in elevation between the highest and lowest points along the top of the sediment fence shall not exceed one-third the fence height. Sediment fence shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Appendix F – Part SC-1 of the DEQ Erosion and Sediment Control Manual.

(e) Storm Drain Inlet Protection. Protect storm drain inlets immediately downstream from the site using BMPs from Appendix F – Part SC-8 of the DEQ Erosion and Sediment Control Manual.

(f) Slope Protection and Temporary Cover. Slope stabilization measures (for slopes 3:1 and steeper) must be initiated within 14 calendar days between June 1st and September 30th and within seven days between October 1st and May 31st in portions of the site where grading activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Slopes shall be stabilized using mulch, erosion control matting, or other methods as approved. Methods for slope protection shall be as recommended in Appendices E and F of the DEQ Erosion and Sediment Control Manual.

(g) Establish Permanent Cover. Prior to removal of erosion control and temporary slope protection measures, permanent cover must be established on the site. Permanent cover shall be installed within 30 days of the date all grading and other site work is finished. Permanent cover shall include seeding, vegetative plantings, and other methods as approved. Refer to Appendices E and F of the DEQ Erosion and Sediment Control Manual.

(4) Inspection – Final Inspection. Final inspection of permanent cover is required for closeout of each site development permit. A final inspection should be scheduled when the site is 75 percent stabilized. [Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS § 6.5), 2016].


Chapter 18.35 STANDARD DETAILS

Sections:

18.35.010    General standard details.

18.35.020    Sewer system standard details.

18.35.030    Street and transportation systems standard details.


18.35.010 General standard details.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS Appendix A), 2016].


18.35.020 Sewer system standard details.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS Appendix A), 2016].


18.35.030 Street and transportation systems standard details.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS Appendix A), 2016].


Chapter 18.40 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.40.010    Traffic impact analysis requirements.

18.40.020    Traffic impact analysis guidelines.


18.40.010 Traffic impact analysis requirements.

Applicants for development and redevelopment projects expected to create 20 or more residential units (e.g., single family residential lots, apartment/condo units) or 20,000 square feet or more of commercial/industrial space shall evaluate the project’s transportation system impacts in a transportation impact analysis (TIA). The TIA is used to determine a project’s impacts to the City’s transportation system. The City requires that the TIA be prepared by a licensed transportation engineer in the State of Oregon and follow the City’s current TIA guidelines. The recommended general format is as follows and pertains to City of Coos Bay facilities. Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) facilities should be addressed with ODOT using ODOT criteria.

1. A TIA shall analyze the ultimate build out of the project.

2. Any intersection where the proposed development can be expected to contribute 25 or more trips during the analysis, peak hour shall be included in the study area and evaluated operationally to determine compliance with City performance standards.

3. Development trip generations shall utilize the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation to estimate daily and peak hour trips to/from the development. All assumptions and adjustments regarding pass-by, diverted link, and internal trips shall be calculated in accordance with ITE methodology and documented in the analysis.

4. Trip distributions into and out of the transportation system must either follow existing traffic patterns or use a current transportation model. If alternate splits are used to distribute development trips, then justification must be provided and approved by the City prior to submittal of the TIA.

5. Turning movement counts where signal modifications or signals are being proposed shall be a minimum of 12-hours long, with 15-minute breakdowns in the A.M. and P.M. peak hours, unless pre-approved for a lesser time. For all other intersections, counts shall be at least 2-hours long and taken during the A.M. and P.M. peak periods, with 15-minute breakdowns. Counts must be no longer than two years old to be applicable.

6. All traffic volumes shall be seasonally adjusted to represent peak conditions in accordance with ODOT’s Analysis Procedures Manual (APM).

7. Level of service analyses shall follow operational procedures per the current Highway Capacity Manual (HCM). Ideal saturation flow rates greater than 1800 vehicles per hour per lane shall be justified by field measurements. Queue lengths reported in the analysis shall be 95th percentile lengths and rounded to the nearest 25' increment, in accordance with ODOT’s APM. Actual peak hour factors shall be used for existing conditions and calculated for each intersection or approach depending upon the peaking characteristics of an intersection. For new intersections, default peak hour factors shall be used in accordance with ODOT’s APM.

8. Intersection sight distance shall be evaluated at all site driveways and proposed new approaches in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on Geometric Design methodologies. Right and left turn lane criterion shall be evaluated at site driveways and proposed new approaches in accordance with ODOT’s APM.

9. Stop-controlled intersections shall be evaluated for signal warrants per the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) if the level of service is determined to be below performance standards. Left and right turn lanes shall also be evaluated where failing facilities are identified and none are currently provided.

10. Analyses shall include existing, design, and future year (City’s Transportation System Plan future year) scenarios. For phased developments, analyses shall be evaluated for each phase of development.

11. The TIA shall determine all improvements and/or mitigation measures necessary to meet City performance standards. For each phase of development, improvements shall be identified to accommodate additional traffic generated by this project.

The TIA format shall follow the City’s Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines provided on the following pages of this Appendix.

[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS Appendix B), 2016].


18.40.020 Traffic impact analysis guidelines.

STUDY AND REPORT FORMAT

1) Introduction and Summary

a) Purpose of the report and study objectives

b) Executive summary

(1) Site location and study area

(2) Development description

(3) Principal findings

(4) Conclusions

(5) Recommendations

2) Proposed Development

a) Site location

b) Land use and intensity

c) Site plan (readable version shall be provided)

(1) Access geometrics

d) Development phasing and timing

3) Study Area Conditions

a) Study area

(1) Area of significant traffic impact

(2) Influence area

b) Land use

(1) Existing land use

(2) Anticipated future development

c) Site accessibility

(1) Existing and future area roadway system

4) Analysis of Existing Conditions

a) Physical characteristics

(1) Roadway characteristics

(2) Traffic control devices

(3) Transit service

(4) Pedestrian/bicycle facilities

(5) Existing transportation demand management

b) Traffic volumes

(1) Daily, morning, and afternoon peak periods (two hours), and others as required

c) Level of service

(1) Morning peak hour, afternoon peak hour, and other as required

d) Safety

e) Data sources

5) Projected Traffic

a) Site traffic forecasting (each horizon year)

(1) Trip generations

(2) Mode split

(3) Pass-by traffic (if applicable)

(4) Trip distribution

(5) Trip assignment

b) Non-site traffic forecasting (each horizon year)

(1) Projections of non-site traffic by ODOT or other source. For larger developments and study areas, a more comprehensive method may be required which includes: trip generation, trip distribution, modal split and trip assignment.

c) Total traffic (each horizon year)

6) Traffic and Improvement Analysis

a) Site access

b) Level of service analysis

(1) Without project including programmed improvements (each horizon year)

(2) With project including programmed improvements (each horizon year)

c) Roadway improvements

(1) Improvements programmed by the City of Coos Bay, ODOT or others to accommodate non-site traffic

(2) Additional alternative improvements to accommodate site traffic

d) Traffic Safety

(1) Sight distance

(2) Acceleration/deceleration lanes, left-turn lanes

(3) Adequacy of location and design of driveway or site access

e) Pedestrian considerations

f) Speed considerations

g) Traffic control needs

h) Traffic signal needs (base plus each year in five-year horizon)

i) Conformance with the City of Coos Bay Transportation System Plan

7) Conclusions

8) Recommendations

a) Site access

b) Roadway improvements

(1) Phasing

c) Conformance with the City of Coos Bay Transportation System Plan

d) Other

9) Appendices

a) Traffic counts

b) Capacity analyses worksheets

c) Traffic signal needs studies

d) Accident data and summaries

The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared under the supervision of a Professional Traffic Engineer or qualified Civil Engineer registered in the State of Oregon. The report shall be sealed and signed by the engineer.

The latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ “Trip Generation” shall be used for selecting trip generation rates.

All assumptions shall be discussed in the study narrative. All data sources shall be referenced and all supporting data will accompany the study.

[Ord. 479 § 1 (EDS Appendix B), 2016].



-----------------------------

The Coos Bay Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 524, passed May 19, 2020.

Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the Coos Bay Municipal Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.coosbay.org/ City Telephone: (541) 269-8912

Code Publishing Company