


CITY OF CORNELIUS CITY CHARTER 


PREAMBLE 

We, the voters of Cornelius, Oregon exercise our power to the fullest extent possible under the Oregon Constitution and laws of the state, and enact this Home Rule Charter. 


Chapter I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES

Section 1. Title. This charter may be referred to as the 2008 City of Cornelius Charter. 

Section 2. Name. The City of Cornelius, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the name City of Cornelius. 

Section 3. Boundaries. The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or are legally modified. The city will maintain an accurate and current description of the boundaries as a public record. 


Chapter II POWERS

Section 4. Powers. The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers. 

Section 5. Construction. The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law. 

Section 6. Distribution. The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has legislative, administrative and quasi-judicial authority. The council exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority to adopt ordinances. 


Chapter III COUNCIL

Section 7. Council. The council consists of a mayor and four councilors nominated and elected by the city at large. 

Section 8. Mayor.

(a) The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council procedures, and determines the order of council business. 

(b) With the consent of council, the mayor appoints members of commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution. 

(c) The mayor must sign all records of council decisions. 

(d) The mayor serves as the political head of the city government. 

Section 9. Council President. At its first meeting of each odd numbered year, the council must elect a president from its membership. The president presides in the absence of the mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform duties. 

Section 10. Rules. The council must by resolution adopt rules to govern its meetings. 

Section 11. Meetings. The council must meet at least once a month at a time and place designated by its rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules. 

Section 12. Quorum. The mayor and two councilors or three councilors is a quorum to conduct business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed by rule. 

Section 13. Vote Required. The express approval of a majority of a quorum of the council is necessary for any council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority of the council. 

Section 14. Record. A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by rule. 


Chapter IV LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY

Section 15. Ordinances. The council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances. The enacting clause for all ordinances must state “The City of Cornelius ordains as follows:” 

Section 16. Ordinance Adoption.

(a) Except as authorized by subsection (b), the council must adopt an ordinance with the approval of a majority of the council at two meetings. 

(b) The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of at least three members of the council, provided the proposed ordinance is available to the public at least one week before the meeting. 

(c) Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud or made available to the public before the council adopts the ordinance at that meeting. 

(d) After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes. 

(e) After adoption of an ordinance, the city recorder must attest to the adoption and the date of adoption. 

Section 17. Effective Date of Ordinances. Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as adopted or other date less than 30 days after adoption if it contains an emergency clause. 


Chapter V COUNCIL ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY

Section 18. Resolutions. The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving resolutions. The approving clause for resolutions may state “The City of Cornelius resolves as follows:” 

Section 19. Resolution Approval.

(a) A resolution or any other council administrative decision may be approved by the council at one meeting. 

(b) Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made available to the public before the council adopts the resolution at that meeting. 

(c) After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes. 

(d) After approval of a resolution, the mayor must sign it and the city recorder must attest to the date of approval. 

Section 20. Effective Date of Resolutions. Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution. 


Chapter VI QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY

Section 21. Orders. The council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving orders. The approving clause for orders may state “The City of Cornelius orders as follows:” 

Section 22. Order Approval. 

(a) An order or any other council quasi-judicial decision may be approved by the council at one meeting. 

(b) Any substantive amendment to an order must be read aloud or made available to the public at the meeting before the council adopts the order. 

(c) After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision, the vote of each member must be entered in the council minutes. 

(d) After approval of an order, the mayor must sign it and the city recorder must attest to the date of approval. 

Section 23. Effective Date of Orders. Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final approval, or on a later day provided in the order or by ordinance. 


Chapter VII ELECTIONS

Section 24. Councilors. At each general election after the adoption of this charter, two councilors will be elected for four-year terms by position. The terms of councilors in office when this charter is adopted are the terms for which they were elected. 

Section 25. Mayor. At every general election after the adoption of this charter, a mayor will be elected for a two-year term. The term of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the mayor was elected. 

Section 26. State Law. City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan. 

Section 27. Qualifications. 

(a) To hold a city elective position, each person must be a qualified elector under state law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before election or appointment to office. 

(b) No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one city office. 

(c) Neither the mayor nor a councilor may be employed by the city. 

(d) The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members. 

Section 28. Nominations. The council must prescribe by ordinance other procedures for the nomination and election of persons for city elective positions. 

Section 29. Terms. The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the calendar year immediately after the election, and continues until the successor qualifies and assumes the office. 

Section 30. Oath. To hold a city elective position each person must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United States and Oregon. 

Section 31. Vacancies: A city elective position becomes vacant: 

(a) Upon the incumbent’s: 

(1) Death, 

(2) Adjudicated incompetence, or 

(3) Recall from the office. 

(b) Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent’s: 

(1) Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin, 

(2) Absence from the city for 30 days without council consent, or from all council meetings within a 60-day period, 

(3) Ceasing to reside in the city, 

(4) Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law, 

(5) Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty, 

(6) Assuming another elected office, 

(7) Resignation from the office, or 

(8) Removal under Section 33(h). 

Section 32. Filling Vacancies. A vacant city elective position will be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining councilors. The appointee’s term of office runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. If a disability prevents a councilor from attending council meetings, a majority of the council may appoint a councilor pro tem. 


Chapter VIII APPOINTIVE OFFICERS 

Section 33. City Manager.

(a) The office of city manager is established as the chief administrative officer of the city government. The city manager is responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of all city business. The city manager will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies, and carry out policies established by ordinances and resolutions. 

(b) A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the manager. The appointment must be made without regard to political considerations and solely based on education and experience with local government management. 

(c) The manager may be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term, and may be removed at any time by a majority of the council. The council must fill the office by appointment as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs. 

(d) The manager must: 

(1) Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council; 

(2) Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the needs of the city; 

(3) Administer and enforce all city ordinances, resolutions, franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and other city decisions; 

(4) Appoint, supervise and remove city employees; 

(5) Organize city departments and administrative structure; 

(6) Prepare and administer the annual city budget; 

(7) Administer city utilities and property; 

(8) Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation; 

(9) Promote cooperation among the council, staff and citizens in developing city policies, and building a sense of community; 

(10) Perform other duties as directed by the council; 

(11) Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all subordinates. 

(e) The manager has no authority over the mayor or council or over the judicial functions of the municipal judge. 

(f) The manager and other employees designated by the council may sit at council meetings but have no vote. The manager may take part in all council discussions. 

(g) When the manager is temporarily disabled from acting as manager or when the office becomes vacant, the council must appoint a manager pro tem. The manager pro tem has the authority and duties of manager, except that a pro tem manager may appoint or remove employees only with council approval. 

(h) Neither the mayor nor a councilor may attempt directly or indirectly to coerce the manager or a candidate for the office of manager in the appointment or removal of any city employee, or in administrative decisions. Violation of this prohibition is grounds for removal from office by four councilors after a public hearing. In council meetings, the mayor and councilors may discuss or suggest any topic with the manager relating to city employees or administrative matters. 

Section 34. City Attorney. The office of city attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the city government. A majority of the mayor and councilors must appoint and may remove the attorney. 

Section 35. Municipal Court and Judge. 

(a) A majority of the council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. The municipal judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council directs. The court will be known as the municipal court. The municipal judge must be admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of Oregon. 

(b) All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing justices of the peace and justice courts. 

(c) All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. 

(d) The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by city ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created by such ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction under state law unless limited by city ordinance. 

(e) The municipal judge may: 

(1) Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property; 

(2) Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city; 

(3) Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense; 

(4) Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas; 

(5) Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for trials; 

(6) Penalize contempt of court; 

(7) Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the court; 

(8) Issue search warrants; and 

(9) Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by ordinance. 

(f) The council may appoint and may remove municipal judges pro tem. 

(g) The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court. 


Chapter IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Section 36 Procedure. The council must provide by ordinance for procedures governing the making, altering, vacating, or abandoning of a public improvement. A proposed public improvement may be suspended for six months upon remonstrance by the owners of real property to be specially assessed for the improvement. The numbers of owners necessary to suspend the action must be determined by ordinance. 

Section 37. Special Assessments. The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing special assessments for public improvements or other services charged against real property must be governed by ordinance. 


Chapter X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 38. Debt. City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness. 

Section 39. Ordinance Continuation. All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed. 

Section 40. Repeal. All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are repealed. 

Section 41. Severability. The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter. 

Section 42. Time of Effect. This charter takes effect July 1, 2008.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adopted

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    Short Form Uniform Complaint and Citation Method and Code Enforcement Procedures

1.15    Violation Procedures

1.20    Hearing Procedures and Remedial Action

1.25    Enforcement and Penalties

1.30    Review of Applications for Compensation Under Article I, Section 18 of the Constitution of Oregon


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTED

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption, amendment and repeal.

1.01.020    Reservation of prosecutions.

1.01.030    Severability.


1.01.010 Adoption, amendment and repeal. 

(A) There is hereby adopted the Cornelius Municipal Code which consists of the ordinances of the city that have ongoing effect and which have not expired according to their own terms. 

(B) This code may be cited as the Cornelius Municipal Code. 

(C) This code may be amended by reference to code section without the necessity of referring to the underlying ordinance. 

(D) New ordinances may be added to the code, and if an ordinance is enacted with a numbering system that is inconsistent with the code numbering system, the city recorder is authorized to assign an appropriate code number and to codify the ordinance accordingly. 

(E) The repeal of any code section does not revive the original text of the code section, but rather, repeal of an existing section repeals the underlying ordinance section and all of its amendments. [Ord. 900 § 1, 2008.]


1.01.020 Reservation of prosecutions. 

The adoption of this code shall not affect any prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the adoption of the municipal code, nor shall the adoption of the municipal code be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and owing at the effective date of the code adoption, nor shall adoption affect the validity of any bond or cash deposited with the city pursuant to the terms of any ordinance, upon its codification; but rather, all rights and obligations pertaining under ordinances in effect prior to codification shall remain in full force and effect. [Ord. 900 § 1, 2008.]


1.01.030 Severability. 

If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city declares that it would have enacted this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional. [Ord. 900 § 1, 2008.]


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.05.010    Code designated.

1.05.020    Definitions and rules of construction.

1.05.030    Acts of substitute officers.

1.05.040    Service and proof of notice.

1.05.050    Uniform appeal and hearing procedure.

1.05.060    Construction.

1.05.070    Continuation of existing ordinances.

1.05.080    Effect of repeal of ordinances.

1.05.090    Severability of parts of code.

1.05.100    Catchlines of sections.

1.05.110    Amendment and repeal of code sections.

1.05.120    General penalties.

1.05.130    Property liens for municipal services.

1.05.140    Attorneys’ fees.


1.05.010 Code designated.

All ordinances included in this and the following titles shall constitute and be designated “The Cornelius Municipal Code” and will hereafter be referred to as “code.” [Code 2000 § 1.005.]


1.05.020 Definitions and rules of construction.

The following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise.

(1) “City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(2) Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done, including the giving of advance notice of a general or special election of the city, is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last falls on a legal holiday as defined in ORS 187.010 or 187.020 or on Sunday, in which case the last day is also excluded.

(3) “Council” means the city council of the city of Cornelius.

(4) “County” means Washington County, Oregon.

(5) “Day” means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

(6) Daytime; Nighttime. “Daytime” is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

(7) Department; Board; Commission; Office; Officer or Employee. A department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the city.

(8) “Gender” means the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter, and the feminine includes the masculine and neuter.

(9) “In the city” means all territory over which the city now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its regulatory powers.

(10) Joint Authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

(11) “Law” means applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of Oregon, the code and ordinances of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

(12) “Manager” means the city manager.

(13) “Minor” means a person under the age of 18 years, unless otherwise stated.

(14) “Month” means a calendar month, except where otherwise provided.

(15) Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

(16) “Oath” includes affirmation.

(17) Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean the standard of time as set out in ORS 187.110.

(18) Or; And. “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.

(19) “ORS” means Oregon Revised Statutes.

(20) “Owner” means a part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of the building or land, or vendee in possession under a land sale contract.

(21) “Peace officer” means a city police officer or other officer specified in ORS 133.170.

(22) “Person” means individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, and similar entities.

(23) “Personal property” means every species of property, except real property, as herein defined.

(24) “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

(25) “Process” means a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

(26) “Property” means both real and personal property.

(27) “Real property” means lands, tenements and hereditaments.

(28) “Recorder” means the city recorder.

(29) Shall; May. “Shall” is mandatory, and “may” is permissive.

(30) Signature or Subscription by Mark. “Signature” or “subscription” includes “mark” when the signer or subscriber cannot write, the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

(31) “State” means the state of Oregon.

(32) “Tenant” or “occupant” means a person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of the building or land, either alone or with others.

(33) Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

(34) “To” means “to and including” when used in reference to a series of sections of this code or when reference is made to the Oregon Revised Statutes.

(35) “Week” means seven consecutive days.

(36) “Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

(37) “Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. [Code 2000 § 1.010.]


1.05.030 Acts of substitute officers.

Unless this code provides to the contrary, the manager and city department heads, or their authorized representatives or deputies, may exercise any power granted by this code to the manager or department head. The manager and department heads remain responsible for the performance of acts. [Code 2000 § 1.015.]


1.05.040 Service and proof of notice.

(A) Except when this code provides a specific procedure for giving notice, whenever oral or written notice is required by this code, the notice may be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in an official mailbox in a sealed, postage-prepaid envelope, addressed to the last known business or residence address of the person to be notified. The time when the notice is deposited in a mailbox is considered to be the time when the notice is given.

(B) Proof of giving notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person 18 years of age or older. [Code 2000 § 1.020.]


1.05.050 Uniform appeal and hearing procedure.

In this section, the word “appellant” means a person appealing from an administrative decision. Except as otherwise provided in this code, a person who is authorized to appeal from an administrative decision under this code shall follow the procedure stated in this section.

(A) Within 10 days after the day on which he is notified of the administrative decision from which appeal is requested, the appellant shall file with the recorder a written notice of appeal, together with a written statement listing the reason for requesting the reversal, revocation or modification of the decision.

(B) If the council is to hear the appeal or if an authorized appellate board has a regularly scheduled meeting time, it shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the body; provided, that the recorder receives the notice and statement of appeal at least six days prior to the meeting.

(C) If an appellate board which does not hold a regularly scheduled meeting is to hear the appeal, it shall hold a hearing on the matter within 10 days after the recorder receives the notice and statement of appeal.

(D) The recorder shall notify the appellant of the time and place of the hearing and shall notify other persons who have an interest in the subject matter of the hearing.

(E) At the hearing, the appellant or other person may present witnesses and offer evidence in support of their case and, in the discretion of the council or appellate board, evidence may be heard to sustain the administrative decision.

(F) The council or appellate board shall make written findings, recommendations or orders on any matter heard by it, and the recorder shall send a copy thereof to the appellant. When the matter is heard by an appellate board, the appellant may further appeal to the council by following the procedure established in this section.

(G) The council may review the official action of a city official, city employee, city board, city commission or other official city body. A person requesting such council review shall follow the procedure established in this section, unless this code provides a special appeal procedure applicable to such an appeal. [Code 2000 § 1.025.]


1.05.060 Construction.

The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objectives and to promote justice. [Code 2000 § 1.030.]


1.05.070 Continuation of existing ordinances.

The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances or prior code sections existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. [Code 2000 § 1.035.]


1.05.080 Effect of repeal of ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive an ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect a punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor a suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. [Code 2000 § 1.040.]


1.05.090 Severability of parts of code.

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, provisions, clauses, phrases and words of this code are severable; and if any section, subsection, paragraph, provision, clause, phrase or word of this code is adjudged or declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code; and it is hereby expressly declared that every other section, subsection, paragraph, provision, clause, phrase or word of this code enacted, irrespective of the enactment or validity of the portion hereof declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, is valid. [Code 2000 § 1.045.]


1.05.100 Catchlines of sections.

The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed to be a part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. [Code 2000 § 1.050.]


1.05.110 Amendment and repeal of code sections.

This code is the general and permanent law of the city. The council may enact three types of general ordinances to affect this code. Such ordinances may (A) amend existing provisions; (B) add new provisions; or (C) repeal existing provisions. A general ordinance shall specifically amend or repeal a particular section of this code, and a general ordinance creating a new code section shall integrate the new section into the numbering system and organization of this code. [Code 2000 § 1.055.]


1.05.120 General penalties.

(A) Any person violating the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code, except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by this code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00.

(B) Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the code is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person. [Ord. 745 § 2, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.060.]


1.05.130 Property liens for municipal services.

(A) In the event the city provides services or benefits to property which property (or its owner and/or occupant thereof) uses or otherwise may make some benefit of, the city shall have the right, in addition to any other right or remedy lawfully available to it, to assess said property for the costs of said services and make said assessment a lien thereon. The assessment shall be recorded in the docket of city liens which docket shall be a public record; from the date of entry of said assessment, the sum entered is a lien upon the land against which it is entered. These assessment liens shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances except as may otherwise be provided by state statute and shall accrue interest at the legal interest rate.

(B) Before any charge may be made an assessment lien under the terms of this section, the city recorder shall cause written notice of the proposed assessment to be mailed or given to the owner of the property as said ownership is shown in the Washington County tax records. Notice shall be sent or given not less than 30 days prior to recordation in the city lien docket. If the notice is mailed, it shall be certified, return receipt requested. Failure of an owner to receive actual notice of the proposed assessment shall not in any way affect the validity of the underlying charge or the lien resulting therefrom.

(C) If the owner wishes to challenge the validity or amount of the proposed assessment, they may do so by filing a written objection with the city council setting out with particularity the basis for the objection. The objection must be received by the city not more than 20 days after the date of the notice referred to in subsection (B) of this section, unless the council waives said timing requirement for good cause shown. The council will then cause the objection to be scheduled for a hearing at which time the owner may present such evidence as he/she deems necessary to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the amount or validity of the assessment is in error. The council shall then adjust the assessment to the extent necessary and direct the city recorder to record the corrected assessment in the city lien docket. While an objection is pending before council, no assessment shall be made a lien on the city’s lien docket. [Ord. 802 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 1.070.]


1.05.140 Attorneys’ fees.

In the event the city brings an action in either law or equity in any of the courts of this state (including U.S. District Court for the District of Oregon) other than its municipal court for the enforcement of its ordinances, resolutions or any right(s) afforded it by its charter, state statute, or city laws, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorneys’ fees in the event it is the prevailing party. [Ord. 833 § 1, 2002; Code 2000 § 1.080.]


Chapter 1.10 SHORT FORM UNIFORM COMPLAINT AND CITATION METHOD AND CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

1.10.010    Title.

1.10.020    Purpose.

1.10.030    Definitions.

1.10.040    Use of language.

1.10.050    Reference to state law.

1.10.060    Culpability – Chapter provisions are not exclusive.

1.10.070    Severability.


1.10.010 Title.

The ordinance codified as Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC shall be known as the “short form complaint and citation method and code enforcement procedure ordinance.” [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.100.]


1.10.020 Purpose.

(A) Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC authorize the use of a short form uniform complaint and citation in certain cases by certain city employees and describes the content of the form.

(B) This title describes the procedures for use of complainant, court, or defendant. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.105.]


1.10.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC, the following definitions shall apply:

(A) “Code enforcement officer” means the individual or individuals appointed by the director of each department to enforce those sections of the code administered by that department, as specified in CMC 1.15.130.

(B) “Defendant” means a person charged with a code violation.

(C) “Voluntary compliance agreement” means a written agreement between the code enforcement officer and the defendant which is intended to resolve the alleged civil violation. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.110.]


1.10.040 Use of language.

As used in Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC, pronouns indicating the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender; singular pronouns shall include the plural; and “person” shall, where appropriate, include any partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, the state of Oregon, or other entity. [Code 2000 § 1.115.]


1.10.050 Reference to state law.

Any reference to a state statute incorporates into Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC by reference the statute in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.120.]


1.10.060 Culpability – Chapter provisions are not exclusive.

(A) Acts or omissions to act which are designated as a violation by any city ordinance do not require a culpable mental state as an element of the violation.

(B) The procedures prescribed by Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC shall be the exclusive procedures for imposing civil penalties; however, this section shall not be read to prohibit in any way alternative remedies set out in the Cornelius Municipal Code which are intended to abate or alleviate code violations, nor shall the city be prevented from recovering, in any manner prescribed by law, any expense incurred by it in abating or removing ordinance violations pursuant to any code provision. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.125.]


1.10.070 Severability.

The provisions of Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC are severable. If any sentence, clause, or phrase of Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.130.]


Chapter 1.15 VIOLATION PROCEDURES

Sections:

1.15.010    Reports of violations.

1.15.020    Review of reports – Sufficiency of evidence.

1.15.030    Warning.

1.15.040    Time to remedy violation after warning.

1.15.050    Immediate remedial action required when.

1.15.060    Remedial action by city – Costs.

1.15.070    Warning methods.

1.15.080    Warning – Computation of time period.

1.15.090    Failure to respond to warning.

1.15.100    Informal conference.

1.15.110    Voluntary compliance agreement.

1.15.120    Uniform violation summons and citation.

1.15.130    Use of citation.

1.15.140    Contents.

1.15.150    Use of other complaint forms.

1.15.160    Summons issuance – Required information.

1.15.170    Alleged violation – Required information.


1.15.010 Reports of violations.

All reports of complaints of violations covered by Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC shall be made to the code enforcement officer within the department responsible for administering the section of the code alleged to have been violated. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.150.]


1.15.020 Review of reports – Sufficiency of evidence.

(A) Statement of Facts. When an alleged violation is reported to the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer may prepare a statement of the facts and may review the facts and circumstances surrounding the alleged violation.

(B) Sufficiency of Evidence. The code enforcement officer shall not proceed further with the matter if the officer determines that there is not sufficient evidence to support the allegation, or if the department head determines that it is not in the best interest of the city to proceed. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.155.]


1.15.030 Warning.

Warning of the alleged violation may be given to the defendant before a uniform violation summons and complaint is issued. It is not a prerequisite to the issuance of the summons and complaint, and the giving of notice is at the sole discretion of the code enforcement officer. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.160.]


1.15.040 Time to remedy violation after warning.

If a warning is given, the code enforcement officer shall give the defendant a reasonable time to cure or remedy the alleged violation. The time allowed shall not be less than seven days, nor more than 30 days. Where there is an extreme hardship, as determined by the code enforcement officer, the officer may grant additional time to the defendant. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.165.]


1.15.050 Immediate remedial action required when.

Notwithstanding the remedial time period contained in CMC 1.15.040, if the code enforcement officer determines that the alleged violation presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the officer may require immediate remedial action pursuant to CMC 8.10.160. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.170.]


1.15.060 Remedial action by city – Costs.

(A) Search Procedures.

(1) The code enforcement officer is authorized at all reasonable times to enter upon private property and examine any possible code enforcement violation. However, before entering upon private property, the officer shall obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection.

(2) No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this code until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court, showing probable cause for the inspection, by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing this code as the basis for the inspection, whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint, or other specific or general information concerning the code enforcement violation in question or the property on which it is situated.

(3) No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent the code enforcement officer from entering upon private premises and inspecting any property when the officer exhibits a warrant authorizing entry.

(B) If the defendant fails or refuses to remedy the violation and the city incurs costs in remedying the violation, the city recorder/treasurer shall keep an accurate record of the costs incurred by the city. The city recorder/treasurer shall notify the defendant by certified mail, return receipt requested, of these costs and advise the defendant that the costs will be assessed to and become a lien against the defendant’s property, if not paid within 30 days of the notice, and shall further notify the defendant that the defendant is entitled to a hearing to contest the amount of the costs to be assessed.

(C) The defendant shall be entitled to request that the code enforcement officer schedule a hearing to consider the amount of the costs assessed to remedy the alleged violation. That hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures established in Chapters 1.20 through 1.25 CMC.

(D) If the remedial costs are not paid, the finance director shall follow the procedures set forth for lien filing and docketing as contained in CMC 1.25.030. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.175.]


1.15.070 Warning methods.

(A) A warning of the alleged violation may be given to the defendant in person by the code enforcement officer.

(B) Warning of the alleged violation may be by a telephone call to the defendant. If a warning is given in this manner, the defendant shall also be provided with a warning of violation by first class mail sent to his last known address as soon as possible after the initial notice by telephone.

(C) A warning of the alleged violation may be given by mailing to the defendant at his last known address a warning of violation by registered mail, return receipt requested. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.180.]


1.15.080 Warning – Computation of time period.

(A) Where the warning of violation is delivered in person, the time period shall begin to run immediately upon such delivery.

(B) Where the warning of violation is mailed to the defendant, for the purposes of computing any time period prescribed by this title, notice shall be considered complete three days after such mailing, if the address to which it is mailed is within the state, and seven days after mailing, if the address to which it is mailed is outside the state. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.185.]


1.15.090 Failure to respond to warning.

When the defendant either receives or rejects the warning of violation and fails to remedy or cure the alleged violation within the time specified in the warning, the code enforcement officer may serve the defendant with a uniform citation. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.190.]


1.15.100 Informal conference.

At the city’s discretion an informal conference may be held to allow for the resolution of the code violation without resort to a formal court proceeding. In the presence of a conference mediator, to be appointed by the city manager, the facts and proposed solutions will be discussed. If an agreement is reached a written voluntary compliance agreement will be entered into and will be binding. If all the terms of the agreement are satisfied, the city will take no further action concerning the violation. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.191.]


1.15.110 Voluntary compliance agreement.

(A) Effect of Agreement.

(1) The code enforcement officer may enter into a written voluntary compliance agreement with the defendant. The agreement shall include time limits for compliance and shall be binding on the defendant.

(2) The fact that a person alleged to have committed a violation enters into a voluntary compliance agreement shall not be considered an admission of having committed the violation for any purpose.

(3) The city shall abate further processing of the alleged violation during the time allowed in the voluntary compliance agreement for the completion of the necessary corrective action. The city shall take no further action concerning the alleged violation if all terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are satisfied, other than steps necessary to terminate the waiver.

(B) Failure to Comply with Agreement. The failure to comply with any term of the voluntary compliance agreement constitutes a separate violation and shall be handled in accordance with the procedures established by this code, except no further notice after the voluntary compliance agreement has been signed need be given before the city may also proceed on the alleged violation that gave rise to the voluntary compliance agreement. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.195.]


1.15.120 Uniform violation summons and citation.

(A) Service of the uniform summons and citation may be by personal service on the defendant or an agent of the defendant authorized to receive process; by substitute service at the defendant’s dwelling or office; or by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the defendant at his last known address. In the event of substitute service at the defendant’s dwelling, the person served must be at least 18 years of age and residing in the defendant’s place of abode. Service at the defendant’s office must be made during regular business hours to the person who is apparently in charge. If substitute service is used, a true copy of the summons and complaint, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which service was made, must be mailed to the defendant at the defendant’s last known address. Service will be considered complete upon such a mailing. Service by any other method reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise the defendant of the existence and pendency of the violation and to afford a reasonable opportunity to respond shall be acceptable.

(B) Service on particular defendants, such as minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the state of Oregon, other public bodies, and general partnerships, shall be as prescribed for the service of a civil summons and complaint by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

(C) No default shall be entered against any defendant without proof that the defendant had notice of the uniform violation summons and complaint. Either a sworn affidavit of the code enforcement officer outlining the method of service, including the date, time, and place of service a return receipt of registered mailing which indicates delivery of the summons and complaint to defendant’s last known address or a registered letter returned as “unclaimed” which indicates attempt of the same, shall create a rebuttable presumption that the defendant had such notice. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.200.]


1.15.130 Use of citation.

A citation conforming to the requirements of Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC may be used by employees of the following departments: the fire department, the police department, the library department, the public works department, the building department, the planning department and the administration department, for violations of city ordinances. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.205; amended during 2007 recodification.]


1.15.140 Contents.

(A) Citation used shall consist of at least three parts: the complaint, record, and the summons. Additional parts may be inserted for administrative purposes by departments charged with the enforcement of the ordinances. The form shall contain the following information or blanks in which such information may be entered:

(1) The name of the court and the court’s docket or file number;

(2) The name of the person or persons cited;

(3) The offense charged, the time and place, the date on which the citation was issued, the name of the complainant, and, in the case of zoning violations, the designation of the zone in which the violation occurred;

(4) The hour and date when the person cited is to appear in court;

(5) The bail, if any, fixed for the offense.

(B) The form may also contain such identifying and additional information as may be necessary or appropriate for administrative departments of the city. In the case of an appropriate violation, it may include an indication of whether a written warning was previously issued to defendant for the same violation if it is a continuing one.

(C) The complaint shall contain a form of verification by the complainant to the effect that he swears that he has reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person committed the offense contrary to this code. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.210.]


1.15.150 Use of other complaint forms.

Nothing in Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC shall be construed to prevent the use of a complaint charging a violation of ordinance in a form or manner otherwise prescribed by law for criminal complaints; further, as provided by law, two or more persons may be charged jointly on such a complaint. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.215.]


1.15.160 Summons issuance – Required information.

A summons issued pursuant to Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC is sufficient if it contains the following information:

(A) The name of the court, the name of the person or persons cited, the date on which the citation was issued, the name of the complainant, the time at which the person cited is to appear in court;

(B) A statement or designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the date and place of offense alleged to have occurred;

(C) The amount of bail, if any, fixed for the offense. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.220.]


1.15.170 Alleged violation – Required information.

A complaint of an alleged violation or an offense under Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC is sufficient if it contains the following:

(A) The name of the court, the name of the city in whose name action is brought, and the name of the defendant or defendants;

(B) A statement or designation of offense in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the date and a place of the alleged offense. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.225.]


Chapter 1.20 HEARING PROCEDURES AND REMEDIAL ACTION

Sections:

1.20.010    Appearance of defendant in court.

1.20.020    Hearing request or waiver – Payment of bail.

1.20.030    Civil penalty – Assessment of fees.

1.20.040    Default judgment.


1.20.010 Appearance of defendant in court.

The defendant shall either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons, or prior to such time, deliver to the court the summons, together with the bail amount set forth in the summons, enclosing therewith a request for a hearing, or statement of matters and explanation or mitigation of the offense, or an executed appearance, waiver of hearing, and a plea of “guilty” appearing on the summons. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.250.]


1.20.020 Hearing request or waiver – Payment of bail.

(A) If the defendant has submitted to the court a written statement with his bail, as provided in Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC, it constitutes a waiver of hearing and a consent to judgment by court declaring a forfeiture of bail on the basis of such statement and any testimony or written statement of the code enforcement officer, or other witness, or city employee, as provided in Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC, which may be presented to the court. If the defendant requests a hearing, or, if the court directs that hearing be had, the court shall fix the date and time of hearing and, unless notice is waived, mail to the defendant notice of the date and time so set at least five days prior to the trial date.

(B) In any case, the court may direct that a hearing be held; otherwise, the court may enter the appropriate judgment, impose a fine, direct that the fine be paid out of the bail deposited by the defendant, and remit to the defendant any amount by which the bail exceeds the fine. No fine may be imposed in excess of the bail deposited by the defendant, unless a hearing is held. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.255.]


1.20.030 Civil penalty – Assessment of fees.

(A) Upon a finding that the violation was committed by the defendant, the court may:

(1) Assess a penalty pursuant to the applicable code penalty section;

(2) Assess hearing costs and witness fees, if any;

(3) Order the defendant to abate the code violation;

(4) Order the defendant to appear at a subsequent hearing for the presentation of evidence of abatement.

(B) Upon subsequent receipt of proof of abatement, the court may reduce any penalty assessed under this section.

(C) An amount equal to 25 percent of each penalty assessed and collected pursuant to this section shall be dedicated to payment of the city’s costs in abating properties and other costs directly related to enforcement of the code. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.260.]


1.20.040 Default judgment.

Subject to the limitations set forth in CMC 1.15.110, a default judgment shall be entered for the maximum civil penalty applicable to the charged violation if the defendant fails to appear at the scheduled hearing. If the defendant fails to appear for the hearing, any security fees posted shall be forfeited to the city. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.265.]


Chapter 1.25 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections:

1.25.010    Enforcement – Rules and regulations.

1.25.020    Failure to comply and failure to appear – Penalty.

1.25.030    Lien filing and docketing.

1.25.040    Continuous violations.

1.25.050    Penalty – Payment due when.

1.25.060    Delinquent civil penalties.


1.25.010 Enforcement – Rules and regulations.

The municipal court judge is authorized to promulgate any procedural rules he considers necessary to enforce Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC and to punish for contempt of court. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.300.]


1.25.020 Failure to comply and failure to appear – Penalty.

(A) The failure to comply with the provisions of Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC constitutes a violation.

(B) If any person knowingly fails to comply with an order of the court, the person is in contempt of court.

(C) If any person knowingly fails to appear before the municipal court, pursuant to a citation issued and served under authority of CMC 1.15.120 through 1.15.170, or, pursuant to an order of the court, the person is in contempt of court.

(D) Contempt of court shall be punishable in the same manner prescribed by state law for justice courts. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.305.]


1.25.030 Lien filing and docketing.

(A) When a judgment is rendered by the municipal court judge in favor of the city for the sum of $10.00 or more, exclusive of costs and disbursements, the code enforcement officer shall, at any time thereafter while the judgment is enforceable, file with the city recorder/treasurer a certified transcript of all those entries made in the docket of the hearings officer with respect to the action in which the judgment was entered.

(B) Upon receipt of this transcript, the city recorder/treasurer shall enter the judgment of the hearings officer on the city’s lien docket.

(C) From the time of entry of the judgment on the city’s lien docket, the judgment shall be a lien upon the real property of the person against whom the judgment was entered in the trial. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, entry of the judgment in the city’s lien docket shall not thereby extend the lien of the judgment more than 10 years from the original entry of the judgment at the hearing.

(D) Whenever a judgment of the municipal court judge which has been entered pursuant to this subsection is renewed by the judge, the lien established by subsection (C) of this section is automatically extended 10 years from the date of the renewal order.

(E) The city recorder/treasurer shall file the transcript of the judgment with the Washington County clerk for entry in the judgment docket of the circuit court. All costs associated with the filing of the transcript shall be added to the amount of the judgment. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.310.]


1.25.040 Continuous violations.

When a violation is of a continuous nature, unless otherwise specifically provided, a separate violation shall be deemed to occur on each calendar day the violation continues to exist. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.315.]


1.25.050 Penalty – Payment due when.

Any penalty assessed shall be paid no later than 30 days after the final order. Such period may be extended upon order of the court. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.320.]


1.25.060 Delinquent civil penalties.

Delinquent civil penalties and those imposed by default judgment which were assessed for violations may, in addition to any other method, be collected or enforced pursuant to ORS 30.310. [Ord. 745 § 1, 1994; Code 2000 § 1.325.]


Chapter 1.30 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR COMPENSATION UNDER ARTICLE I, SECTION 18 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF OREGON

Sections:

1.30.010    Definitions.

1.30.020    Application for variance or compensation.

1.30.030    Form and contents of application.

1.30.040    Application completeness.

1.30.050    Review of application – Appraisal by city – Report to city council.

1.30.060    City council hearing – Notice.

1.30.070    City council action.

1.30.080    Conditions of decision – Revocation of decision – Transfer of approval rights.

1.30.090    Judicial review of council decision – Attorneys’ fees.

1.30.100    Availability of funds to pay claims.


1.30.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(A) “Affiliated owner” means any person who shares ownership, control, lease or management of the property.

(B) “Appraisal” means a written statement as to reduction in value of the property prepared by an appraiser licensed by the Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon pursuant to ORS Chapter 674. In the case of commercial or industrial property, the term “appraisal” means a written statement prepared by an appraiser holding the MAI qualification, as demonstrated by written certificate.

(C) “City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(D) “Exempt regulation” means: (1) a regulation which imposes requirements under federal law, to the minimum extent required by federal law; (2) a regulation prohibiting the use of a property for the purpose of selling pornography, performing nude dancing, selling alcoholic beverages or other controlled substances, or operating a casino or gaming parlor; or (3) a regulation governing historically and commonly recognized nuisance laws, including but not limited to Chapters 8.10. 8.15, 8.20, 9.05 through 9.20, 15.25, and 15.30 CMC, as amended from time to time, and the criminal laws of the state of Oregon and the city of Cornelius.

(E) “Person” means any natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in real property in the city.

(F) “Property” means any real property including any structure built or sited on the property, aggregate and other removable minerals, and any forest product or other crop grown on the property. It includes only a single parcel or contiguous parcels in single ownership. It does not include contiguous parcels or parcels not contiguous that are under different ownerships.

(G) “Property owner” or “owner” means a person or persons who are the sole fee simple owner of the property, or all affiliated owners whose interests add up to a fee simple interest in property, comprising all recorded interests in property, including co-owners, holders of less than fee simple interests, leasehold holders and security interest holders.

(H) “Regulation” means any law, rule, ordinance, resolution, goal or other enforceable enactment of the city of Cornelius.

(I) “Restricts the use of property” means prohibiting a particular use of the property or making that use only permissible under certain conditions. Standards that regulate the form of development, how a structure must be constructed, or how grading or fill is to be conducted, such as yard setback requirements, height limitations, erosion control measures and building code standards are not restrictions on the use of property. Regulations requiring the payment of or setting fees are not restrictions on the use of property. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.400.]


1.30.020 Application for variance or compensation.

(A) An owner of private real property in the city may apply for a variance from a regulation, if the owner believes that without such a variance the owner will be entitled to compensation under Oregon Constitution Article I, Section 18, subsections (a) through (f) (2000).

(B) Alternatively, owners of private real property who believe they are or will be entitled to compensation under Oregon Constitution Article I, Section 18, subsections (a) through (f), as the result of the enactment or enforcement of a regulation, may apply for that compensation. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.410.]


1.30.030 Form and contents of application.

(A) Application. An application for a variance or compensation under CMC 1.30.020 shall be in writing and filed with the city manager on a completed application form established by the manager. An application must include the following:

(1) A legal description of the private real property as to which the owner(s) are applying for a variance or compensation, including the common address and either a legal metes and bounds description or a county assessor’s description of the property;

(2) The name, address, and telephone number of each owner, affiliated owner and security interest holder (if any) in the private real property, together with the signature of each such owner or the signature of an authorized representative thereof. If all owners and affiliated owners do not sign the application, they shall sign waivers of the right to compensation;

(3) The date the owner(s) acquired ownership of the private real property;

(4) A title report from a title insurer in the state of Oregon, current within 30 days prior to the application date, verifying the ownership of the private real property;

(5) A reference to the specific regulation as to which the owner is applying for a variance or for compensation, including the date the regulation was adopted, enforced or applied, and why the regulation is not a requirement of federal law;

(6) A description of the manner in which the regulation in question reduces the fair market value of the property for which compensation or a variance is sought;

(7) A statement of the use of private real property that is proposed by the applicant. Compliance with this provision requires submission of a copy of any land use or development permit application which is presently pending or has previously been filed before the city and denied;

(8) The amount the owner claims as compensation due under Oregon Constitution, Article I, Section 18, subsections (a) through (f), in the event a variance from the regulation is not granted;

(9) An application fee, in an amount established by the city council, to reasonably compensate the city for actual costs involved in the processing, evaluation and review of the application; and

(10) An appraisal report meeting the requirements set forth below. If the claim is for more than $50,000, two appraisal reports must be submitted.

(B) Appraisal Report Requirements. Any appraisal report offered to support an application for compensation pursuant to this chapter shall meet the following specific requirements:

(1) The appraisal must expressly note all existing infrastructure limitations and value the property without an assumption that any public infrastructure or services are present or that any such infrastructure will be improved or sustained at governmental or taxpayer expense or through discretionary governmental action;

(2) The appraisal’s consideration of the reduction in fair market value shall be limited to the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after the adoption, enforcement or application of the regulation including the net cost to the landowner of an affirmative obligation to protect, provide, or preserve wildlife habitat, natural areas, wetlands, ecosystems, scenery, open space, historical, archeological or cultural resources, or low-income housing but shall not include consideration of any other damage that the regulation may have upon the property in question or any other property owned by the applicant;

(3) The appraisal must expressly consider the effect of Article I, Section 18, subsections (a) through (f) on the availability of other real property, including the extent to which the supply of such other real property is or will be increased thereby;

(4) The appraisal must be in writing and signed by an appraiser with the qualifications established in this chapter. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.420.]


1.30.040 Application completeness.

(A) An application submitted to the city shall not be deemed filed therewith until it is complete in accordance with all the provisions of CMC 1.30.030. Within 15 business days following tender of an application to the city, the city manager or his/her designee shall review the application to determine whether it is complete and ready for filing.

(B) In the event that the city manager determines that the application is incomplete, the applicant will be notified of the deficiencies not later than the fifteenth business day after its initial submission. The tendered application shall not be deemed filed until such time as the deficiencies have been corrected.

(C) The application shall have noted upon it the date when it was deemed complete and accepted for filing. If the city manager fails to advise the applicant of any deficiencies within the time required, the application shall be deemed complete on the date of its original tender to the city. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.430.]


1.30.050 Review of application – Appraisal by city – Report to city council.

(A) The city manager, following filing of a complete application under this chapter, shall review the application and shall make a recommendation to the city council as to the disposition of the application. The recommendation may include a determination as to whether a variance or waiver of the application of a regulation would avoid the owner’s being entitled to compensation. Any such written report shall not be deemed a decision of the manager with respect to the property which is the subject of the application.

(B) The city manager may, in his/her discretion, retain the services of an appraiser to independently appraise the property, evaluate the application or to provide an independent analysis of the appraisal(s) accompanying the application. The cost of such appraisal or independent analysis shall be paid by the applicant(s) and be assessed at the time of the submission of the application. In the event such appraisal or independent analysis is not performed by the city, any assessment of a portion of the application fee to cover the cost of such appraisal or analysis shall be refunded to the applicant(s). [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.440.]


1.30.060 City council hearing – Notice.

(A) At or about the time the city manager prepares the report required by this chapter, he/she shall schedule a public hearing before the city council on the application.

(B) Written notice of the city council hearing shall be provided at least 10 days in advance of the hearing date, to: (1) the applicant(s); (2) the owners of record of property within 100 feet from the exterior boundary of the private real property which is the subject of the application, as set forth on the most recent property tax assessment roll; and (3) any neighborhood association recognized by the city and whose boundaries include the private real property which is the subject of the application.

(C) The notice shall include the following information:

(1) The date, time and place of the city council hearing;

(2) The name of the applicant(s);

(3) The common address or other easily understood geographic reference to the property;

(4) The regulation in relation to which the applicant is applying for either a variance or compensation;

(5) The amount of compensation claimed by the applicant;

(6) The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

(7) A description of how testimony may be submitted for consideration by the city council.

The failure of the city to give notice as provided in this section or the failure of any person to receive said notice shall not invalidate any action of the city council under this chapter.

(D) Conduct of Hearing. The city council shall conduct a hearing on the application. The hearing shall provide the applicant and persons entitled to notice of the hearing the opportunity to present evidence on the matter which evidence may be presented either orally or in writing. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. No rebuttal by any person offering testimony, either testifying at the hearing is allowed. The council, through its presiding officer, may set such time limits or other reasonable restrictions on the submission of testimony and evidence as it deems necessary or appropriate.

(E) Criteria for Decision on Application. In determining whether to grant a variance, waive enforcement of the regulation or award compensation, the city council shall consider: (1) the restriction imposed by the regulation on the applicant’s property and the reduction in fair market value of the property when compared to the applicant’s proposed use; (2) the benefit(s) accruing to the public arising as a result of application of the regulation; and (3) the burden to the public of paying compensation to the applicant(s), taking into consideration the available financial resources of the city. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.450.]


1.30.070 City council action.

(A) The city council shall, by majority vote of those present, determine whether compensation is to be awarded, the amount of the compensation if so awarded, whether any variance or waiver of enforcement will fully or partially eliminate an award of compensation and/or whether to grant a waiver of enforcement. The city council may also impose conditions to the approval of any compensation awarded.

(B) The city council may take one or more of the following actions:

(1) Deny the claim based on any one or more of the following findings:

(a) The regulation does not restrict the use of the private real property;

(b) The fair market value of the property is not reduced by the adoption, enforcement or application of the regulation;

(c) The claim was not timely filed;

(d) The claimant is not the current property owner, or was not the property owner at the time the regulation was first adopted, enforced or applied;

(e) The regulation is an exempt regulation as defined in this chapter;

(f) The regulation in question is not an enactment of the city;

(g) The city has not taken final action to adopt, enforce or apply the regulation to the property;

(h) The claimant is not entitled to compensation under Article I, Section 18, for a reason other than those provided herein.

(2) Award compensation, either in the amount requested, or in some other amount supported by the evidence.

(3) Waive or suspend enforcement of the regulation.

(4) Grant a variance from the application of the regulation.

(5) Modify the regulation.

(6) Take such other actions as the council deems appropriate consistent with Article I, Section 18, Oregon Constitution.

(C) The city council’s decision shall be reduced to writing and signed by the presiding officer. Not more than seven business days following the council hearing, a copy of the city council decision shall be sent, via first class mail, to the applicant(s) and to each person who participated in the city council hearing; provided, that person provided a mailing address to the city as part of the hearing process. The failure of the city to provide a copy of its decision to any person under this section shall not invalidate any action of the city council. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.460.]


1.30.080 Conditions of decision – Revocation of decision – Transfer of approval rights.

(A) Failure to comply with any condition of approval imposed as a condition for receipt of compensation is grounds for revocation of the award of compensation. In the event an owner/applicant, or their successor-in-interest, fails to comply with all conditions of approval or otherwise fails, refuses or neglects to comply fully with the council’s decision, the city may institute a revocation or modification proceeding under this chapter.

(B) Unless otherwise stated in the city’s decision, any claim approved under this chapter runs with the property and is transferred with ownership of the property. Any conditions, time limits or other restrictions imposed with a claim decision bind all subsequent owners of the property.

(C) Any variance or enforcement waiver granted pursuant to this chapter shall be automatically deemed void and of no further force and effect from and after the date of the city council decision, without any action on the part of the city in the event of subsequent modifications to or court interpretations of Oregon Constitution, Article I, Section 18.

(D) Any variance or enforcement waiver granted an owner(s) under this chapter shall not be deemed to nor will it create any protectable property interest or “investment-backed expectation” on the part of an applicant in its continuation. The city shall have the right to compel the property owner(s) or their successors-in-interest to comply with any regulation in effect at the time of the city’s decision on the application, in the event of any subsequent modification or interpretation of Oregon Constitution, Article I, Section 18 occurs as a result of court decision, legislative action or initiative.

(E) Any city payment of compensation to an owner under this chapter is subject to immediate repayment by the owner(s) in the event that an appellate court invalidates the amendments to Oregon Constitution Article I, Section 18, occurring as a result of Ballot Measure 7 (2000) in whole or in part via a final, nonappealable judgment. Liability for such repayment shall be a joint and several obligation of all owners and/or affiliated owners. Any repayment not made within 30 days of the entry of said appellate judgment, the obligation shall begin to accrue interest at the legal rate of interest until fully paid. In addition, the city manager may file a lien for the repayment of the compensation on the property in question.

(F) If the city council has granted a variance or waiver and the owner nevertheless files a court action seeking compensation and if a final court decision determines that the extent of the waiver was not sufficient to avoid the owner’s being entitled to compensation, then the extent of the variance or waiver shall be deemed to be the extent necessary to avoid the owner’s being entitled to compensation for purposes of the award of attorneys’ fees and expenses, effective as of the date of the city council’s decision. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.470.]


1.30.090 Judicial review of council decision – Attorneys’ fees.

(A) Any judicial review of the city council’s action under this chapter shall be taken consistent with the terms of ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (writ of review), and not otherwise.

(B) If a claim for compensation under Oregon Constitution Article I, Section 18 is denied or not fully paid within 90 days of the date of filing of a complete application, applicants’ reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses necessary to collect compensation shall be added as additional compensation provided compensation is awarded to applicant(s). If a claim for compensation is denied or not fully paid within 90 days of a complete application, and the applicant(s) commence suit or action to collect compensation, if the city is the prevailing party in such action, then city shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.480.]


1.30.100 Availability of funds to pay claims.

Compensation can only be paid based on the availability and appropriation of funds for this purpose. [Ord. 819 § 1 (Exh. A), 2000; Code 2000 § 1.490.]

 


Title 2 GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

Chapters:

2.05    Meetings

2.10    Elections Code

2.20    Personnel System

2.25    Municipal Court

2.30    Traffic Violations Bureau

2.35    Failure to Appear

2.40    Hearings

2.45    City Library

2.50    Contract Review Process

2.55    Personal Property

2.60    State of Emergency

2.65    Planning Commission

2.68    Urban Renewal

2.70    Measure 37 Claims Procedure

2.75    Police Advisory Board

2.80    Public Works Advisory Board

2.85    Economic Development Commission

2.90    Parks Advisory Board

2.95    Municipal Police Authority


Chapter 2.05 MEETINGS

Sections:

2.05.010    Regular council meetings.

2.05.020    Planning commission meetings.


2.05.010 Regular council meetings.

The regular monthly meeting of the council shall commence at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday of each month at a location designated by the city manager. If the meeting date falls on a legal holiday established by state law, then the meeting shall be held on the day following that holiday. The council or city manager may establish other times to hold meetings and conduct city council business for other than regular council meetings as either deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with Oregon’s public meetings law (ORS 192.610 through 192.690 (2010)). [Code 2000 § 2.005; Ord. 915 § 1, 2010.]


2.05.020 Planning commission meetings.

Commencing with the month of November 1995, the regular meeting of the planning commission shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday of each month at a location to be designated by the city manager. If a meeting date falls on a legal holiday as established by state law, then the meeting shall be held on the day following the legal holiday. [Code 2000 § 2.010.]


Chapter 2.10 ELECTIONS CODE

Sections:

Article I. Introduction

2.10.010    State law applies.

2.10.020    Definitions.

Article II. Candidates

2.10.030    Eligibility.

2.10.040    Nomination petition or declaration of candidacy.

2.10.050    Petition or declaration contents.

2.10.060    Filing.

2.10.070    Deficient petitions.

2.10.080    Withdrawal of candidacy – Refund of filing fee.

2.10.090    Certificate of nomination.

Article III. Vacancies in Office

2.10.100    Vacancy in office.

2.10.110    Filling of vacancy.

2.10.120    Appointment by council.

Article IV. Initiative and Referendum

2.10.130    Prospective petition.

2.10.140    Ballot title – Appeal.

2.10.150    Petition and circulation requirements.

2.10.160    Filing and percentage requirements – Verification.

2.10.170    Measure referred by council.

2.10.180    Withdrawal, adoption or election.

2.10.190    Election notice and results.

Article I. Introduction


2.10.010 State law applies.

As provided by City Charter Section 27, state elections laws apply to matters not regulated by this chapter. The City Charter and this code chapter prevail over any conflicting state laws. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.020 Definitions.

Words or phrases have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:

“Candidate” means an individual whose name appears or is expected to appear on an official ballot.

“City legislation” means an ordinance or proposed ordinance, or a proposed amendment, revision or repeal of the City Charter.

“Elective city position” means the office of mayor or councilor.

“Elector” means an individual eligible under state and city law to vote in a city election.

“Initiative” means proposed city legislation submitted to electors by a petition of qualified electors.

“Measure” means city legislation, or a proposition or question for city electors.

“Prospective petition” means information required for a completed petition, except for signatures and other identification of petition signers.

“Qualified elector” means an individual qualified to vote under Article II, Section 2 of the Oregon Constitution.

“Recorder” means the city recorder or authorized representative.

“Referendum” means city legislation submitted to electors by the council or by a petition of qualified electors, or a proposition or question submitted to city electors by the council.

“Regular election” means a city election held at the same time as a general biennial election for electing federal, state or county officers.

“Special election” means a city election not held on the date of a regular election.

“Term of office” means the term of office of the last person elected to the office. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]

Article II. Candidates


2.10.030 Eligibility.

A qualified elector who has resided in the city during the 12 months immediately preceding the election may be a candidate for an elective city position. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.040 Nomination petition or declaration of candidacy.

(A) An eligible elector may become a candidate for an elective city position by filing a nomination petition or a declaration of candidacy in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State and available from the recorder.

(B) A declaration of candidacy must be accompanied by the filing fee established by council resolution.

(C) A nomination petition must contain signatures of not fewer than 20 city-qualified electors as follows:

(1) No elector may sign more than three petitions. If more than three are signed, the signature is valid only on the first three valid petitions filed.

(2) The signatures need not all be attached to one paper, but each separate paper of the petition must be attached to an affidavit of the circulator showing the number of signers and stating that each signature is the genuine signature of the person.

(3) Each signature must have next to it the signer’s residence, by its street and number or other description.

(4) The recorder must certify the signatures in the nomination petition for genuineness by comparing them and the other required information with the elector registration cards on file with the county clerk.

(5) After the petition is filed with the recorder, the recorder has 10 days to verify the signatures, and attach to the petition a certificate stating the number of signatures believed genuine. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.050 Petition or declaration contents.

(A) A nomination petition or declaration of candidacy must contain:

(1) The name by which the candidate is commonly known. A candidate may use a nickname in parentheses in addition to the candidate’s full name;

(2) The residence address of the candidate;

(3) The office or position number for which the candidate seeks nomination;

(4) A statement that the candidate is willing to accept the office if elected;

(5) A statement that the candidate will qualify if elected;

(6) A statement of the candidate’s occupation, educational and occupational background, and prior governmental experience; and

(7) The signature of the candidate.

(B) A declaration of candidacy must include a statement that the required fee is included with the declaration. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.060 Filing.

(A) A nomination petition or declaration of candidacy must be filed with the recorder.

(B) The recorder will date and time stamp immediately upon filing a nominating petition, declaration of candidacy, withdrawal or other document required to be filed.

(C) A nomination petition or declaration of candidacy will be filed not sooner than 120 days nor later than 70 days before the election date. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.070 Deficient petitions.

If a nomination petition is not signed by the required number of qualified electors or the declaration of candidacy is not complete, the recorder will notify the candidate within five days after the filing. The recorder will return it immediately to the candidate, and state in writing how the petition is deficient. The deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed within the time requirements for filing petitions. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.080 Withdrawal of candidacy – Refund of filing fee.

(A) A candidate who has filed a nomination petition or declaration of candidacy may withdraw not later than the sixty-seventh day before the election date by filing a statement of withdrawal with the recorder. The withdrawal must be made under oath and state the reasons for the withdrawal.

(B) If requested not later than 67 days before the election date, the recorder will refund the filing fee of a candidate who dies, withdraws or becomes ineligible for the nomination. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.090 Certificate of nomination.

The recorder will certify the nominations to the county clerk in accordance with the time requirements of state law stating the offices and the terms of office for which the candidates are nominated. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]

Article III. Vacancies in Office


2.10.100 Vacancy in office.

A city elective office becomes vacant as provided by City Charter Section 32. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.110 Filling of vacancy.

(A) Upon becoming aware of a vacancy in an elective office, the council must promptly determine and declare the date of vacancy.

(B) A vacancy in an elective office must be filled as provided by City Charter Section 33. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.120 Appointment by council.

(A) In filling a vacancy, the council may make inquiries and hold interviews as it considers necessary for the appointment. The appointment may be made at a regular or special council meeting.

(B) The council will use the following procedures in the appointment process:

(1) Public notice to appropriate neighborhood organizations, civic groups, a newspaper of general circulation and other recognized groups.

(2) Deadline for submitting applications at least two weeks after the notice.

(3) Appointment from those applicants nominated and seconded for consideration by members of the council. The recorder will announce the results of each ballot and will record each councilor’s ballot. An applicant who receives a majority of the votes by the current council members will be appointed to the vacant position. If no applicant receives a majority vote on the first ballot, the council will continue to vote on the two applicants who receive the most votes until an applicant receives a majority of the councilors voting. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]

Article IV. Initiative and Referendum


2.10.130 Prospective petition.

(A) Before circulating a petition proposing an initiative or referendum for city legislation, the chief petitioners must file a prospective petition with the recorder. The recorder will provide the form showing:

(1) The signatures, printed names and mailing addresses of at least two and not more than three chief petitioners, all of whom must be city electors;

(2) For initiative petitions, the text of the city legislation proposed for adoption, and, where applicable, the title, ordinance number, and charter or code section numbers proposed for amendment, revision or repeal;

(3) For referendum petitions, the text of the city legislation proposed for referral, and where applicable, the title, ordinance number or code section numbers of the city legislation proposed for referral; and

(4) Whether one or more persons will be paid for obtaining signatures on the petition.

(B) The recorder must date and time stamp any prospective petition filed.

(C) After the recorder determines that the prospective petition complies with this chapter and state law, the recorder will certify to one of the chief petitioners that petitions may be circulated among city electors in accordance with CMC 2.10.150. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.140 Ballot title – Appeal.

(A) Prior to the end of the fifth business day after a prospective initiative petition is filed and meets all legal requirements, the recorder will review the text of the proposed initiative to determine if it complies with the single subject requirement and if it proposes city legislation.

(B) If the proposed text does not meet the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, the recorder will notify a chief petitioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the prospective petition does not meet the single subject or city legislation requirement.

(C) Any city elector dissatisfied with the recorder’s determination may file a petition for review in circuit court. The petition for review must be filed not later than the seventh business day after the written determination by the recorder.

(D) If the proposed initiative meets the requirements of subsection (A) of this section or a referendum petition is certified for circulation, the recorder will send two copies of the prospective petition to the city attorney. The city attorney has five business days after receipt to prepare a ballot title for the proposed measure for the voter’s pamphlet. The ballot title must conform to the requirements of state law. The city attorney or the city administrator will prepare an explanatory statement for the voter’s pamphlet.

(1) The explanatory statement must consist of an impartial, simple and understandable statement of not more than 500 words explaining the measure and its effect.

(2) After preparing the ballot title, the city attorney will return one copy of the prospective petition and ballot title to the recorder and one copy to one of the chief petitioners.

(E) After receiving a ballot title from the city attorney, the recorder must publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of receipt of the ballot title. The notice must state that a city elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title not later than the date referred to in subsection (F) of this section.

(F) After receiving the prospective petition and ballot title from the city attorney, the recorder must write the date of receipt on it. Within seven business days after that date, any city elector may petition in circuit court to challenge the ballot title prepared by the city attorney. After the seven-day period, or following the final adjudication of any legal review, the recorder must certify the ballot title as prepared by the city attorney or as prescribed by the court to a chief petitioner.

(G) Any city elector filing a petition of review with the circuit court must file a copy of the challenge with the recorder not later than the end of the business day next following the date the petition is filed with the circuit court. This requirement does not invalidate a petition that is timely filed with the circuit court.

(H) The procedures in subsections (A) through (G) of this section also apply to referendum measures. However, the completion of these procedures is not a prerequisite to the circulation of petitions for referendum measures under CMC 2.10.150. Ballot titles need not be stated on petitions circulated to propose referendum measures. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.150 Petition and circulation requirements.

(A) After the requirements of CMC 2.10.130(C) are met for referendum petitions and after the requirements of CMC 2.10.140(F) are met for initiative petitions, the chief petitioners may circulate a petition for the measure among city electors. The petition (cover sheet and signature sheet) must conform to the requirements of state law.

(B) The petition identification number will be assigned by the recorder.

(C) Each signature sheet of a referendum petition must contain the title, ordinance number or code section numbers of the city legislation proposed by referral and the date it was adopted by the council.

(D) No signature sheet may be circulated by more than one person. Each signature sheet must contain a statement signed by the circulator that each elector who signed the sheet did so in the circulator’s presence and, to the best of the circulator’s knowledge, each such elector is a legal elector of the city and that the information placed on the sheet by each elector is correct. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.160 Filing and percentage requirements – Verification.

(A) The recorder will accept for signature verification only petitions that comply with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable law.

(B) No petition may be accepted for filing unless it contains at least the required number of verified signatures to submit the measure to the electors, as prescribed by subsections (G), (H) or (I) of this section.

(C) No initiative petition may be accepted for signature verification more than six months after the date of the recorder’s certification under CMC 2.10.140(F).

(D) Any petition to refer legislation adopted by the council must be submitted for signature verification not more than 30 days after the council’s adoption of the legislation.

(E) An initiative or referendum petition may not be accepted for signature verification if it contains less than 100 percent of the required number of signatures.

(F) Upon the acceptance of a petition, the recorder must verify the signatures. The verification may be performed by random sampling in a manner approved by the Secretary of State. Within 30 days after the recorder’s acceptance of a petition, the recorder must certify to the council whether the petition contains a sufficient number of qualified signatures to require the submission of the proposed measure to city electors. The recorder must state in the certificate the number of qualified signatures prescribed by subsections (G), (H) or (I) of this section to require the proposed city legislation to be submitted to city electors. The petition is considered filed as of the date of the recorder’s certification.

(G) An initiative measure proposing the amendment, revision or repeal of the City Charter will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds 15 percent of the total number of registered voters in the city on January 1st of the calendar year the petition is filed.

(H) An initiative measure proposing the adoption, amendment or repeal of any other city legislation will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds 15 percent of the total number of registered voters in the city on January 1st of the calendar year the petition is filed.

(I) A referendum measure will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds 10 percent of the total number of registered voters in the city on January 1st of the calendar year the petition is filed. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.170 Measure referred by council.

(A) The council may directly refer to the electors any ordinance or any proposed ordinance, property tax, bond or other proposition or question. It may also directly refer to the electors any proposed amendment, revision or the repeal of the City Charter.

(B) The city attorney will prepare a ballot title that conforms to the requirements of state law. The council will certify and file the ballot title and explanatory statement with the recorder. The explanatory statement will be prepared by the city attorney or the city manager.

(C) The recorder will publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of receipt of the ballot title including notice that an elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title not later than the date set in subsection (D) of this section.

(D) Any city elector may petition the circuit court to challenge the ballot title certified by the council. Such petition must be filed with the circuit court within seven business days of council filing of the ballot title. Any person filing a petition of review with the circuit court must file a copy of the challenge with the recorder not later than the end of the business day next following the date the petition is filed with the circuit court. This requirement does not invalidate a petition that is timely filed with the circuit court.

(E) A measure will be considered filed under this section as of the date the council delivers its certified ballot title to the recorder. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.180 Withdrawal, adoption or election.

(A) The chief petitioners may withdraw a verified petition at any time before council action to adopt the proposed legislation or submit it to the electors. Any withdrawal must be either by written or oral declaration made at a council meeting and entered in the minutes of that meeting.

(B) Unless a petition is withdrawn, after receiving a certification from the recorder that a petition has sufficient signatures to require the proposed city legislation to be submitted to the electors under CMC 2.10.160(F), the council may either adopt the proposed legislation by ordinance, or call an election to submit the legislation to the electors. The council may also call an election to submit matters to the electors upon referral under CMC 2.10.170.

(C) The council may call the election on the next election date available under state law that is not sooner than the ninetieth day after the date of the recorder’s certificate of sufficient signatures, and must call the election no later than the next regular election. For a council referral, the election on the measure may be held on the next election date available under state law. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.10.190 Election notice and results.

(A) Notice of elections on measures submitted to city electors on regular or special election dates must be given in accordance with state law.

(B) Measures referred by the council will be designated on the ballot: “Referred to the Voters by the City Council.”

(C) Measures proposed by referendum petition will be designated on the ballot: “Referred by Petition.”

(D) Measures proposed by initiative petition will be designated on the ballot: “Proposed by Initiative Petition.”

(E) The recorder must certify the election results to the council at the first council meeting after the results are certified by the county clerk.

(F) A measure adopted by the electors takes effect 30 days after the election, unless the measure expressly provides a later effective date. [Ord. 879 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


Chapter 2.20 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Sections:

2.20.010    Title.

2.20.020    Purpose.

2.20.030    Adoption and amendment of rules.

2.20.040    Administration of the rules.

2.20.050    Background checks.


2.20.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the personnel code of the city. [Code 2000 § 2.225.]


2.20.020 Purpose.

CMC 2.20.030 and 2.20.040 are adopted to establish as equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service, and to retain, the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of job security for qualified employees. [Code 2000 § 2.230.]


2.20.030 Adoption and amendment of rules.

Personnel rules shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the council. The rules shall provide means to recruit, select, develop and maintain an effective and responsible work force, and shall include policies and procedures for employee hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classification, salary administration, retirement, fringe benefits, discipline, discharge, and other related activities. All actions shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules without regard to sex, race, color, national origin, age, religion or political affiliation; and, furthermore, shall be based on merit and fitness. [Code 2000 § 2.235.]


2.20.040 Administration of the rules.

The city manager shall be responsible for:

(A) Administering all the provisions of CMC 2.20.020 to this section and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the council.

(B) Preparing or causing to be prepared and recommending to the council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules. [Code 2000 § 2.240.]


2.20.050 Background checks.

The purpose of this section is to authorize the city of Cornelius police department to access criminal offender and driver history information through the LEDS for applicants for positions of employment, voluntary public service, or licensing applicants operating within the city of Cornelius, in accordance with OAR 257-010-0025, to ensure the highest degree of citizen trust and confidence.

All proceedings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with ORS 181.555 and OAR 257-010-0025, which establish procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon State Police through LEDS, and as supplemented in this section.

(A) Parties subject to a background check under the provisions of this section will be required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal and/or driver history check through the OSP LEDS system.

(B) The human resources department will maintain criminal history authorization forms and all such requests and forms will be in accordance with the city’s personnel policies.

(C) The city of Cornelius police department will conduct the criminal and driver history checks on the applicants for positions of employment, voluntary public service, or licensing. The police chief, or his designee, will report to the human resources department that the applicant’s record either meets or does not meet the standard set for that position or license. The city manager or designee’s determination to hire or not will be documented and retained in accordance with the city of Cornelius personnel policies.

(D) The city of Cornelius will not retain written criminal or driving records. [Ord. 914 § 1, 2010.]


Chapter 2.25 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

2.25.010    Powers of the municipal judge.


2.25.010 Powers of the municipal judge.

(A) The municipal judge shall have all inherent and statutory powers and duties of a justice of the peace within the jurisdictional limits of the city. The chief of police shall assist the judge in the serving of subpoenas.

(B) In addition to the city council’s ability to create, set, modify or eliminate fees and charges for the administration or necessity of the municipal court by way of resolution, the municipal judge may also create, set, modify or eliminate fees or costs deemed by the judge to be necessary or appropriate for the operation of the court. In the event the municipal judge exercises the authority granted by this subsection, he/she shall do so in writing by way of general order or court rule. [Ord. 791 § 1, 1998; Code 2000 § 2.355; Ord. 2013-001 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013. Formerly 2.25.110.]


Chapter 2.30 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU

Sections:

2.30.010    Traffic violations bureau authorized.

2.30.020    Violations clerk duties.

2.30.030    Designation of offenses.

2.30.040    Schedule of fines.

2.30.050    Procedure.

2.30.060    Parking violations.

2.30.070    Multiple offenses.


2.30.010 Traffic violations bureau authorized.

The municipal court, when it determines that the efficient disposition of its business and the convenience of 40 persons charged so required, may establish a traffic court violations bureau and constitute the clerk or deputy clerk of the court or any other appropriate official within the jurisdiction in which the court is held as a violations clerk for the traffic court violations bureau. [Code 2000 § 2.405.]


2.30.020 Violations clerk duties.

The violations clerk shall accept written appearance, waiver of trial, plea of guilty and payment of fine and costs in traffic offense cases, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The violations clerk shall serve under the direction and control of the court. [Code 2000 § 2.410.]


2.30.030 Designation of offenses.

The court shall by order designate the traffic offenses within the authority of the violations clerk. Such offenses shall not include any major traffic offense. [Code 2000 § 2.415.]


2.30.040 Schedule of fines.

The court shall establish schedules, within the limits prescribed by law, of the amounts of fines to be imposed for first, second and subsequent offenses, designating each offense specifically. The order of the court establishing the schedules shall be prominently posted in the place where the fines are paid. Fines and costs shall be paid to, receipted by and accounted for by the violations clerk in the same manner as other fines and costs are received by the court. [Code 2000 § 2.420.]


2.30.050 Procedure.

Any person charged with any traffic offense within the authority of the violations clerk may, upon signing an appearance, plea of guilty and waiver of trial, pay the clerk the fine established for the offense charged, and costs. [Code 2000 § 2.425.]


2.30.060 Parking violations.

The court may by rule provide for the disposition of violations of ordinances and this code relating to parking by the violations clerk in the manner provided in CMC 2.30.040 and 2.30.050. [Code 2000 § 2.430.]


2.30.070 Multiple offenses.

A person who has been found guilty of, or who has signed a plea of guilty to, one or more previous traffic offenses in the preceding 12 months within the jurisdiction of the court shall not be permitted to appear before the violations clerk unless the court, by general order applying to certain specified offenses, permits such appearance. [Code 2000 § 2.435.]


Chapter 2.35 FAILURE TO APPEAR

Sections:

2.35.010    Failure to appear.


2.35.010 Failure to appear.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to intentionally fail to appear in the municipal court after first being ordered or cited to appear on a date and time certain. [Code 2000 § 2.455.]


Chapter 2.40 HEARINGS

Sections:

2.40.010    Definitions.

2.40.020    Rules and procedures.


2.40.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Interested persons” means all persons to whom notice of hearing is required to be sent by this code, ordinances or state law.

(B) “Public body” means the council and planning commission.

(C) “Public hearing” means any public hearing required to be held under this code, ordinances and resolutions applicable to the city.

(D) “Staff” means the staff personnel of the public body before whom the public hearing is being held.

(E) “Witnesses” means any persons offering or presenting testimony at a public hearing, whether the testimony be in person or in writing. [Code 2000 § 2.505.]


2.40.020 Rules and procedures.

The following rules and procedures shall be followed by the public body conducting a public hearing:

(A) The public hearing shall be conducted in such a manner as to allow all interested persons the opportunity to be heard, to present evidence in their own behalf, and to cross examine all witnesses who testify before the public body. The presiding officer of the public body may allow testimony to be presented from others than interested parties upon request. A representative of the staff shall be given the opportunity to present the staff report and its recommendations to the public body. The person or persons presenting the staff report and recommendations shall be considered witnesses and shall be subject to the same rules as a witness.

(B) All questions arising during a public hearing pertaining to procedure, evidence, time for presentation and the general conduct of the hearing, not expressly provided for in this section, shall be ruled upon by the presiding officer of the public body.

(C) A stenographic or electronic record shall be made of the public hearing. The record and all exhibits received in evidence by the presiding officer shall be retained by the public body for a period not less than six calendar months from and after the date of the hearing.

(D) The public body shall make and reduce to writing specific findings of fact regarding the following matters:

(1) Whether the requested special benefit, if allowed, is in conformance with the comprehensive plan or development of the city and other applicable ordinances and code provisions.

(2) Whether there is a public need for the requested special benefit, and, if so, will the need be best served by the proposed special benefit involving the land use of the subject property as compared with other available property presently allowing such land usage.

(3) Whether conditions have changed in the immediate area of the subject property proposed for the special benefit or there was a mistake in the original comprehensive plan of development. [Code 2000 § 2.510.]


Chapter 2.45 CITY LIBRARY

Sections:

2.45.010    Title.

2.45.020    Public library established.

2.45.030    Administration of library.

2.45.040    Establishment of board.

2.45.050    Membership of board.

2.45.060    Organization of board.

2.45.070    Meetings, rules and regulations of board.

2.45.080    Expenditure of funds.

2.45.090    Powers and duties of board.

2.45.100    Annual report of board.


2.45.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the city of Cornelius Library Ordinance.” [Code 2000 § 2.545.]


2.45.020 Public library established.

A public library is hereby established in and for the city of Cornelius, pursuant to and under the applicable provisions of Oregon laws relating to public libraries. [Code 2000 § 2.550.]


2.45.030 Administration of library.

The city manager shall exercise control and supervision of all activities, departments and offices of the library. He shall have authority to appoint to and remove from established positions subordinate employees, including the city librarian. [Code 2000 § 2.555.]


2.45.040 Establishment of board.

The Cornelius library board, hereinafter referred to as “board,” is hereby established and created for the purposes stated in CMC 2.45.090. [Code 2000 § 2.560.]


2.45.050 Membership of board.

(A) The membership of the board shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. Board members shall receive no compensation. The board shall consist of at least seven members and not more than eleven members. Appointed for three-year terms commencing January 1st, appointments shall be structured as to ensure that terms overlap. At the expiration of the term of any member of the board, the mayor, with the consent of the council, shall appoint a new member or may reappoint a member for a term of three years. No person shall hold appointment as a member of the board for more than two full consecutive terms, but any person may be appointed again to the board after an interval of one year. The mayor will, in selecting members for the board, consider individuals who reside inside and outside the city. 

The mayor, with the consent of the council, may also appoint city council advisory members to the committee who will serve on an ex officio basis and without vote.

(B) A member may be removed by the council, after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance. Unexcused absences from three consecutive meetings, including regular and special work sessions, or unexcused absences from more than 50 percent of such meetings held during the calendar year shall constitute nonperformance. An excused absence may be obtained by contacting the chairperson or secretary of the board at least 24 hours prior to any scheduled board meeting. No member of the board may be excused for more than three board meetings during any calendar year.

(C) Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the mayor with the approval of the council for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. [Ord. 921 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 782 § 1, 1997; Code 2000 § 2.565.]


2.45.060 Organization of board.

(A) The board shall meet within 30 days after it is established under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of electing a chairperson and vice chairperson, both of whom shall be voting members of the board. The city librarian shall serve as secretary to the board and keep the record of its actions. The chairperson and vice chairperson shall hold office until the first regular meeting of the board in January 1981. At the regular meeting of the board in January 1981, the board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson; and, at the first regular meeting of each and every January thereafter, the board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from its membership.

(B) The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all board proceedings. The board shall file a report of all its proceedings with the city recorder within 30 days of such proceedings. [Ord. 637 § 1, 1988; Code 2000 § 2.570.]


2.45.070 Meetings, rules and regulations of board.

A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. A quorum of the board may transact any business or conduct any proceedings before the board. The board may adopt and amend rules and regulations establishing the procedure for the conduct of proceedings before it. Any such rules and regulations shall be consistent with any ordinances, resolutions, or laws of the city regulating the board. The board shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties. However, it shall meet not less than six times within every calendar year. At the first regular meeting of the board in January, the board shall establish regular meeting dates and the place for the meetings. All meetings shall be open to the public. [Code 2000 § 2.575.]


2.45.080 Expenditure of funds.

The board shall have no authority to make any expenditure of funds on behalf of the city or to obligate the city for the payment of any funds without first obtaining the approval of the council by minute order or resolution stating the purpose of such expenditure. [Code 2000 § 2.580.]


2.45.090 Powers and duties of board.

The board shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those granted by resolution of the council from time to time:

(A) Consult with and advise the city librarian on all matters affecting operational policies of the library.

(B) Make recommendations to the council with respect to services, facilities, and all other matters pertaining to the maintenance and improvement of the public library. [Code 2000 § 2.585.]


2.45.100 Annual report of board.

Not later than July 1st of each year, commencing with the year 1985, the board shall file with the council its annual report of the activities of the board. The annual report shall include a survey and report of the activities of the board during the preceding year in addition to specific recommendations to the council not otherwise requested by the council. The report may include any other matters deemed appropriate by the board for recommendation and advice to the council. [Ord. 633 § 2, 1985; Code 2000 § 2.590.]


Chapter 2.50 CONTRACT REVIEW PROCESS

Sections:

2.50.010    Policy.

2.50.020    Definitions.

2.50.030    Local contract review board – Powers and authority to adopt rules.

2.50.040    Organization of the board.

2.50.050    Rules of procedures.

2.50.060    Meetings – Notice – Agenda.

2.50.070    Attendance – Quorum – Voting.

2.50.080    Decisions by the board.

2.50.090    Records.

2.50.100    Administrative authority to obligate city.

2.50.110    Delegation of authority to obligate city.

2.50.120    Limitation to expenditures.

2.50.130    Duties of the city manager.

2.50.140    Purchasing from city employees.


2.50.010 Policy.

(A) All public contracts shall be based upon competitive bidding except as expressly provided by state law, this chapter or the rules adopted by the board.

(B) If federal funds are involved in any contract subject to this chapter, federal laws, rules and regulations shall control in the event of conflict with state law or this chapter. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.600.]


2.50.020 Definitions.

As used in this section, unless the context requires otherwise:

(A) “Board” means the city of Cornelius local contract review board.

(B) “Competitive bidding” means the issuing of invitations to bid which follow the formal process for advertising, bid and bid opening.

(C) “ORS” means Oregon Revised Statutes as applicable and as amended.

(D) “Personal services” means a contract for services performed by an independent contractor in a professional capacity.

(E) “PCR” means city of Cornelius public contracting rules adopted by the board.

(F) “Public contract” means any purchase, lease or sale by the city of personal property, public improvements or services other than agreements, which are for personal services.

(G) “Public improvement” means projects for construction, reconstruction or major renovation on real property by or for a public agency. “Public improvement” does not include emergency work, minor alteration, ordinary repair or maintenance necessary in order to preserve a public improvement. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.610.]


2.50.030 Local contract review board – Powers and authority to adopt rules.

(A) The city council is designated as the local contract review board (LCRB) for contractual matters relating to the city.

(B) The board shall have all the powers granted by state law.

(C) The board shall adopt rules governing the awarding of public contracts and bidding procedures. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.620.]


2.50.040 Organization of the board.

(A) The mayor shall act as the chairperson of the board. The president of the council shall act as the vice-chairperson.

(B) The chairperson shall preside over the meetings and in the absence of the chairperson or in the event a vacancy occurs, the line of succession shall be the same as the line of succession which applies to the council. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.630.]


2.50.050 Rules of procedures.

Council rules will govern proceedings of the board where they do not conflict with these rules or statutory provisions. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.630.050.]


2.50.060 Meetings – Notice – Agenda.

(A) The applicable provisions of the Public Meetings Law shall control the notice and character of meetings of the board.

(B) Meetings of the board may be scheduled at any time including before, during, or after a regularly scheduled council meeting.

(C) Meetings shall be called in the same manner as a council meeting.

(D) Notice of the meeting shall be given as provided by state law.

(E) Meetings of the board may be held by conference telephone call after required public notice. The city shall make available to the public at least one place where the public can listen to the meeting by means of a speaker telephone.

(F) On urgent or perfunctory matters, the chairperson may, by telephone, poll the members of the board. Electronic transcripts of the polling calls will be made and retained. In the course of a poll, any member may request the matter be discussed by conference telephone call or deferred to a meeting.

(G) Prior to conference telephone calls or telephone polls, the press and public, including persons directly interested in the subject matter of the poll, shall be given reasonable notice of a place where they can listen to the meeting or poll at the time of the meeting or poll.

(H) The agenda shall be prepared by the city recorder.

(I) Routine board business may be conducted on the consent agenda of a regularly scheduled council meeting. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.630.060.]


2.50.070 Attendance – Quorum – Voting.

Attendance of at least three board members shall be required in order for the board to take any action. All actions of the board shall require a majority vote of the board members present and voting. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.630.070.]


2.50.080 Decisions by the board.

(A) The board shall exercise its rule making power in the same manner that it exercises its legislative power.

(B) The board shall exercise its adjudicative power in the manner provided by state law. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.630.080.]


2.50.090 Records.

(A) The city recorder or designee shall be present at all meetings and shall provide for the recording of all meetings and shall maintain minutes of all meetings as required by law including any vote taken.

(B) The city manager or designee shall maintain the records and prepare findings and reports as required by the board and the rules adopted by the board.

(C) Staff reports shall be provided to each board member in advance of the date the item is scheduled for review. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.630.090.]


2.50.100 Administrative authority to obligate city.

The board shall approve all public contracts, personal services contracts or any other type of contract let by the city except as otherwise provided by this chapter or the rules of the LCRB. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.640.]


2.50.110 Delegation of authority to obligate city.

The city manager or designee shall have the authority to obligate the city without specific board approval provided as follows:

(A) The obligation has been appropriated in an adopted budget.

(B) The rules adopted by the board have been complied with as indicated by written findings and records.

(C) The public contract, personal services contract or any other type of contract let by the city does not exceed $50,000 for contracts other than public improvement contracts and $75,000 for public improvement contracts.

(D) The obligation is for a single complete item or contract and not a part or component of a project.

The city manager or designee shall have the authority to approve advertising for all bids. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.650.]


2.50.120 Limitation to expenditures.

The delegated authority to obligate the city shall be subject to the following limitations when making a purchase:

(A) The expenditure shall be for a single complete item or contract; and

(B) The expenditure shall not be a component of a project with a total cost in excess of $50,000 for contracts other than public improvement contracts and $75,000 for public improvement contracts, except in the case of a project which involves a personal services contract and a public contract. If a project involves a personal service contract and a public contract, the two contracts shall be considered separate projects. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.660.]


2.50.130 Duties of the city manager.

(A) The city manager or designee shall establish and maintain a centralized system for the purchase, contract and sale of property and services.

(B) The city manager or designee shall prepare a manual which sets forth the procedures and forms to be used in the award of public contracts, personal service contracts, construction contracts and the sale of property for adoption by the board by resolution.

(C) The city manager or designee shall implement the procedures set forth in the manual and, as necessary, shall recommend amendments to the manual to the board. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.660.150.]


2.50.140 Purchasing from city employees.

The purchase of any supplies, materials, equipment, labor or services, including personal, professional, technical and expert services from any city employee, or any business with which a city employee is associated, shall be subject to prior written approval by the city manager and approval shall be based upon findings that:

(A) The purchase will result in the most efficient method to accomplish the city’s purpose;

(B) The purchase could not lead to any alleged violations of the personnel rules;

(C) The approval of the purchase could not lead to an adverse employer-employee relationship should the contract be unsatisfactorily performed; and

(D) All rules adopted by the board have been satisfied.

For the purposes of this section, “any business with which a city employee is associated” means any business of which the employee is a director, officer, owner or employee, or any business association in which the employee owns or has owned more than 10 percent of the business within the preceding calendar year. [Ord. 894 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.670.]


Chapter 2.55 PERSONAL PROPERTY

Sections:

2.55.010    Definitions.

2.55.020    Rights and duties of finder of personal property.

2.55.030    Custody of property.

2.55.040    Surrender to true owner.

2.55.050    Sale of property.

2.55.060    Certificate of sale.

2.55.070    Use of property by city.

2.55.080    Dangerous or perishable property.


2.55.010 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply to the provisions in this chapter:

(A) “Contraband” means the following:

(1) Controlled substances including any drug or its immediate precursor classified in Schedules I through V under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Sections 811 to 812;

(2) Drug paraphernalia including all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are marketed for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance.

(B) “Dangerous personal property” means any weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, which under the circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used or threatened to be used, is readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury.

(C) “Perishable personal property” means any personal property that is apt to spoil or decay easily, especially food. [Code 2000 § 2.700; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.55.020 Rights and duties of finder of personal property.

Any finder of personal property shall follow the provisions of ORS 98.005 to 98.050. If the property remains unclaimed, the provisions provided in this chapter shall be followed. [Code 2000 § 2.705; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.55.030 Custody of property.

Whenever any personal property other than a motor vehicle is taken into the custody of any department of the city by reason of its having been abandoned, found, seized, or for any other reason, the personal property shall be turned over to and held by the police department at the expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of it. [Code 2000 § 2.710; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.55.040 Surrender to true owner.

Except when the property in question has been confiscated or is being held as evidence, the police department shall give notice that the property is being held by the police department. Such notice need only be given when true ownership can be determined. The owner or person lawfully entitled to possession may reclaim it upon application to the police department. The department shall require satisfactory proof of ownership or right of possession, and the department shall further require the payment of any charges and expenses incurred in the storage, preservation and custody of the property. [Code 2000 § 2.715; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.55.050 Sale of property.

(A) At any time after the expiration of 90 days from the time the property comes into the possession of the police department, the chief of police may sell the property at public auction or via external auction service. The chief of police shall not sell any such property held in evidence in any court proceeding until the need for its use in that proceeding has passed. Notice of the sale shall be given once by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days before the date of sale. The notice shall give the time and place of the sale and shall describe generally the property to be sold at the sale.

(B) All sales of property under this chapter shall be made to the highest and best bidder; provided, however, that any person appearing at or prior to the sale and proving ownership or right of possession to the property in question shall be entitled to reclaim it upon the payment of the charges and expenses incurred by the city in the storage, preservation and custody of the property and a proportionate share of the costs of advertising for the sale.

(C) If no bids are entered for the property or if the highest bid is less than the costs incurred by the city, the chief of police may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs. If bid on by the city, the property shall become the property of the city as compensation for the costs incurred.

(D) The proceeds of the sale shall be applied first to payment of the costs of the sale and any expenses incurred in the preservation, storage and custody of the property, and any balance shall be credited to the general fund of the city.

(E) The sale of property pursuant to this chapter shall be without right of redemption. [Code 2000 § 2.720; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.55.060 Certificate of sale.

At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall sign a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the purchaser, and a copy to be kept on file in the office of the city recorder which certificate shall contain the date of sale, the consideration paid, a brief description of the property and a stipulation that the city does not warrant the condition or title of the property other than the return of the purchase price in the event the title should prove for any reason to be invalid. The certificate of sale shall be in substantially the form provided in Appendix 4.* [Code 2000 § 2.725; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]

* Code reviser’s note: Appendix 4 is on file in the city recorder’s office.


2.55.070 Use of property by city.

(A) In lieu of a sale of the property under CMC 2.55.010 through 2.55.040, at any time after the expiration of 90 days from the time the property comes into the possession of the police, the city manager may, at the request of the chief of police, convert the property to public use by entering it on the city’s fixed asset inventory.

(B) Notice of the transfer of the property to the city shall be given once by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days before the property is converted to city use. The notice shall describe the property and state that the described property shall be converted to city use if the property is not reclaimed within 10 days. Any claim of ownership shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 2.55.020.

(C) If the property is not reclaimed within 10 days after publication of the notice described in subsection (B) of this section, the property shall be entered on the city’s fixed asset inventory and shall not be subject to the right of redemption. [Code 2000 § 2.730; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


2.55.080 Dangerous or perishable property.

The chief of police may order the destruction or other disposal of any property coming into the city’s possession which is, in the chief’s judgment, dangerous or perishable. [Code 2000 § 2.730D; Ord. 880 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


Chapter 2.60 STATE OF EMERGENCY

Sections:

2.60.010    Purpose.

2.60.020    State of emergency.

2.60.030    Declaration of state of emergency.

2.60.040    Powers and authority in state of emergency.

2.60.050    Violation.

2.60.060    Controlling provisions.


2.60.010 Purpose.

This chapter provides a plan to minimize injury or damage to persons and property and to preserve the established civil authority in the event a state of emergency exists within the city. It sets out the authority and responsibilities of city personnel and departments in the event an emergency exists within the city. [Ord. 804 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 2.805.]


2.60.020 State of emergency.

A “state of emergency” includes any human made or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening to damage or injury to persons or property or the loss of human or animal life resulting from natural or human causes including flood, volcano, conflagration, tornado, earthquake, civil disturbance, unrest, sabotage or war. [Ord. 804 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 2.810.]


2.60.030 Declaration of state of emergency.

(A) When in the judgment of the mayor and/or city manager a state of emergency is thought to exist in the city, the mayor and/or city manager shall, subject to the terms of subsection (B) of this section, proclaim in writing the existence of the state of emergency and setting out the following:

(1) The nature of the emergency;

(2) The geographic boundaries of the area which is subject to the emergency controls; and

(3) The nature of any special regulations or controls to be imposed as a result of the state of emergency.

(B) Concurrent with the proclamation, the mayor shall call a special meeting of the city council to ratify the proclamation’s terms and scope. At the time of the special meeting, which shall be held not more than 24 hours after the issuance of the proclamation, the council shall, in addition to determining whether to ratify the decision of the mayor/city manager concerning the state of emergency, address the following:

(1) The duration during which the area designated in the proclamation shall remain an emergency area; and

(2) Those specific powers which the council deems necessary for addressing the emergency.

(C) Any action taken by the council pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be by resolution.

(D) The duration, scope of the powers exercisable in and geographic boundaries of the area subject to emergency controls may be expanded or contracted by the action of the city council. [Ord. 804 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 2.815.]


2.60.040 Powers and authority in state of emergency.

Upon the declaration of the state of emergency and thereafter if ratified by the council, the mayor and/or city manager are empowered to take any or all of the following measures in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare:

(A) Redirect city funds available for emergency use and suspend standard city procurement procedures;

(B) Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may be upon or in public streets or places;

(C) Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon or in any public street or place;

(D) Barricade streets, prohibit and/or regulate vehicular or pedestrian traffic in and around the area proclaimed to be subject to the state of emergency;

(E) Evacuate persons;

(F) Prohibit or regulate the sale, possession or use of any goods (including alcoholic beverages, gasoline, and weapons) within and around the area subject to the state of emergency;

(G) Curtail or suspend all commercial activity; and

(H) Order or take such other measures as are deemed necessary for the protection of life or property in and around the area during the period. [Ord. 804 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 2.820.]


2.60.050 Violation.

Any person who violates any emergency measure shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per occurrence per day. [Ord. 804 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 2.825.]


2.60.060 Controlling provisions.

In the event of an emergency, the provisions of this chapter shall control over any conflicting provisions in the city code. [Ord. 804 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 2.830.]


Chapter 2.65 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.65.010    Membership.

2.65.020    Term.

2.65.030    Vacancy.

2.65.040    Residency requirement.

2.65.050    Chairperson and vice chairperson.

2.65.060    Records.

2.65.070    Meetings.

2.65.080    Powers – Employment.

2.65.090    Powers – Recommendations.


2.65.010 Membership.

The planning commission (the commission) shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the mayor. Commission members shall receive no compensation. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 722 § 1, 1992; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.11.]


2.65.020 Term.

Planning commission members shall hold office for four years, except when filling the unexpired portion of a vacancy in office. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 722 § 2, 1992; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.12.]


2.65.030 Vacancy.

Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired portion of the term. If within any five-calendar-month period a commission member has three unexcused absences, or if a commission member has three consecutive unexcused absences in any period of time, the unexcused absences shall constitute grounds for removal by the mayor. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.13.]


2.65.040 Residency requirement.

In order to qualify for an appointment or reappointment to the planning commission, a person must have resided in the city one year immediately preceding that person’s appointment or reappointment and continue to be a resident of the city at all times during the term of that person’s office. No more than one person residing outside the city limits but within the city urban growth boundary may be appointed or reappointed to the planning commission if that person has resided within the city urban growth boundary one year immediately preceding that person’s appointment or reappointment and continues to reside within the city urban growth boundary at all times during the term of that person’s office. No more than one person located from outside of the city urban growth boundary may be appointed to the planning commission, provided that person owns property and/or owns a business within the community. [Ord. 580 § 2, 1981: Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 722 § 3, 1992; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.14; Ord. 2014-16 § 1, 2015.]


2.65.050 Chairperson and vice chairperson.

The commission at its first meeting shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission. The chairperson and vice chairperson shall be limited to those members who reside within the city of Cornelius. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.14; Ord. 2014-16 § 2, 2015.]


2.65.060 Records.

The community development director or designee shall keep an accurate record of all commission proceedings. The commission shall on October 1st of each year make and file a report of all its transactions with the council. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.15; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


2.65.070 Meetings.

A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and procedure consistent with laws of this state, with the City Charter and ordinances, and the code of the city. It shall meet at least once a month, at such times and places as may be fixed by the commission. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.16; Ord. 2019-03 § 1.]


2.65.080 Powers – Employment.

(A) The commission may employ consulting advice on municipal problems, a secretary and such clerks as may be necessary, and pay for their services, and for such other expenses as the commission may lawfully incur, including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of their duties as members of the commission, out of funds at the disposal of the commission, as authorized by the council.

(B) Expenditures. The commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of money, except as provided by this chapter, and then only after the council has first authorized such expenditures by appropriate resolution, which shall provide the administrative method by which the funds shall be drawn and expended. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.17.]


2.65.090 Powers – Recommendations.

The commission shall have all the powers, which are now or hereafter granted to it by the code of the city or by general laws of the state. The commission may make recommendations to the council, to public officials and to individuals regarding land uses, location of thoroughfares, public buildings, parks and other facilities; and regarding any other matter related to the planning and development of the city and the surrounding area. The commission may make studies, hold hearings and prepare reports and recommendations on its own initiative or at the request of the council.

(A) Recommendations Written. All recommendations and suggestions made to the council by the commission shall be in writing. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.18.]


Chapter 2.68 URBAN RENEWAL

Sections:

2.68.010    Creation of urban renewal agency.

2.68.020    Membership.

2.68.030    Term.

2.68.040    Vacancy.

2.68.050    Residency requirement.

2.68.060    Chairperson and vice chairperson.

2.68.070    Records.

2.68.080    Meetings.

2.68.090    Powers and duties.


2.68.010 Creation of urban renewal agency.

Pursuant to ORS 457.035, the Cornelius city council finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in ORS 457.010, exist within the city. Given the blighted conditions, the city council declares and recognizes that there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function within the city of Cornelius and hereby creates an urban renewal agency. The corporate name of the agency created by this chapter shall be known as the Cornelius urban renewal agency (“agency”). [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.020 Membership.

Agency membership shall be the same as that of the city council. Agency members shall receive no compensation, but may be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.030 Term.

The term of office of an agency member shall be the same as that of a member of the city council. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.040 Vacancy.

Vacancies shall be filled as city council vacancies are filled pursuant to the Cornelius City Charter and Chapter 2.10 CMC. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.050 Residency requirement.

Residency requirements for agency members shall be the same as the city council requirements. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.060 Chairperson and vice chairperson.

At its first meeting of each calendar year, the agency shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson to serve one-year terms. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.070 Records.

The city manager or other staff member designated by the city manager shall keep accurate records of all agency proceedings. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.080 Meetings.

As necessary to conduct agency business, meetings shall occur on the regularly scheduled city council meeting dates unless a special meeting is required. All meetings of the agency shall be public and shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with state law relating to public meetings. A majority of the members of the agency shall constitute a quorum. Special meetings will be duly noticed as required by state law relating to public meetings. The agency may adopt rules to govern its meetings. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


2.68.090 Powers and duties.

The city council further declares, pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon shall be exercised by and vested in the agency; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the urban renewal agency shall be and shall be considered the act of the agency only and not of the city council. [Ord. 2019-01 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019.]


Chapter 2.70 MEASURE 37 CLAIMS PROCEDURE

Sections:

2.70.010    Purpose.

2.70.020    Definitions.

2.70.030    Prefiling conference.

2.70.040    Claim requirements.

2.70.050    Claim review process.

2.70.060    Conditions, revocation and transfer.

2.70.070    Waiver of claims.

2.70.080    Costs and attorneys’ fees.

2.70.090    Availability of funds to pay claims.

2.70.100    Review of a decision.

2.70.110    Private cause of action.

2.70.120    Compensation by other.

2.70.130    Severability.

2.70.140    Applicable state law – No independent rights.


2.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish the following regarding claims for compensation under ORS Chapter 197, as amended by Ballot Measure 37, adopted November 2, 2004: process claims for compensation quickly, openly, thoroughly, and consistently with the law; enable present real property owners making claims for compensation to have an adequate and fair opportunity to present their claims to the city; provide the city with the factual and analytical information necessary to adequately and fairly consider claims for compensation and take appropriate action under the alternatives provided by law; preserve and protect limited public funds; preserve and protect the interests of the community by providing for public input into the process of reviewing claims; and establish a record of decisions capable of withstanding legal review. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9010.]


2.70.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

(A) “Appraisal” means a written statement prepared by an appraiser licensed by the Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the state of Oregon under ORS Chapter 674. For commercial or industrial property, the term “appraisal” also means a written statement prepared by an appraiser holding the MAI qualification and evidenced by written certificate.

(B) “Ballot Measure 37” means the provisions added to ORS Chapter 197 by Ballot Measure 37 as approved by Oregon voters on November 2, 2004.

(C) “Claim” means the written demand for compensation made by an owner of real property in accordance with Ballot Measure 37 and this chapter.

(D) Exceptions to Land Use Regulation. The following land use regulations are excluded from the application of this chapter:

(1) A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities commonly and historically recognized as public nuisances under common law, including Chapter 8.10 CMC, Nuisances, and the criminal laws of Oregon and the city;

(2) A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities for the protection of public health and safety such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations;

(3) A regulation required for compliance with federal law;

(4) A regulation restricting or prohibiting the use of a property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or

(5) A regulation enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the real property by the owner or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first.

(E) “Family member” means the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the owner of the real property, an estate of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or combination of these family members or the owner of the real property.

(F) “Land use regulation” means any city comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, land division ordinance or transportation ordinance. A land use regulation does not include any land use regulation excepted from this chapter, any city system development charge, or any other city development fees or charges.

(G) “Director of development and operations” means the city director of development and operations or designee.

(H) “Owner” means the present owner of real property that is the subject of the claim for compensation, or any interest therein. The owner must be a person who is the sole, fee simple owner of the real property or all joint owners whose interests add up to a fee simple interest in property including all persons who represent all recorded interests in property, such as co-owners, holders of less than fee simple interests, leasehold owners, and security interest holders.

(I) “Property” means any private real property or interest therein. It includes only a single parcel or contiguous parcels in single ownership. It does not include any parcels that are under different ownerships, regardless of contiguity.

(J) “Reduction in value” means the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after enactment, enforcement or application of a land use regulation as defined in this chapter. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9020.]


2.70.030 Prefiling conference.

Before submitting a claim for compensation, the owner may schedule and attend a prefiling conference with the development and operations director to discuss the claim. The prefiling conference will follow the procedure set forth by the development and operations director and may include a filing fee and notice to neighbors, other organizations and agencies. The filing fee will be set by city council resolution. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9030.]


2.70.040 Claim requirements.

(A) Form, Completeness and Review.

(1) A claim must be submitted and accepted for filing only using the forms provided by the director of development and operations. A claim must consist of all materials required by this chapter. A claim will not be considered filed under Ballot Measure 37 until the city accepts the claim after the requirements of this chapter are fulfilled by the owner of real property.

(2) The director of development and operations will conduct a completeness review within 15 days after submittal of the claim and will advise the owner in writing of any material remaining to be submitted. The owner must submit the material needed for completeness within 30 days of the written notice that additional material is required. If the owner fails to provide the additional materials within the 30-day period, the claim will not be accepted for filing.

(3) The 180-day period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation in circuit court under Ballot Measure 37 begins on the date the director of development and operations deems the claim complete, and accepts it for filing. The director of development and operations will mark the date of completeness and filing on the claim form and provide a copy to the claimant.

(4) The owner may request an extension for filing a complete claim. A request for an extension or continuance will be deemed a waiver of the beginning of the 180-day period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation.

(B) Claim Requirements. A claim will not be accepted for filing without all of the following information:

(1) Fee. An application fee must be paid in advance of acceptance for filing to cover the costs of completeness review and claim processing. This fee will be established by city council resolution.

(2) Claim Form. A completed claim on a form provided by the director of development and operations.

(3) Identification of Owner and Other Interest Holders. The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of all owners, and anyone with any interest in the property, including lien holders, trustees, renters, lessees, and a description of the ownership interest of each.

(4) Property Description. The address, tax lot number, and legal description of the real property that is the subject of the claim.

(5) Nearby Property Owner Information. The names and addresses of all owners of property within 300 feet of the property, as listed on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located.

(6) Listing of Nearby Owned Property. Identification of any other property owned by the owner within 300 feet of the boundary of the claim property.

(7) Title Report. A title report demonstrating the title history, the date the owner acquired ownership of the property, and the ownership interests of all owners. The title report must also specify any restrictions on use of the property unrelated to the land use regulation including, but not limited to, any restrictions established by covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), other private restrictions, or other regulations, easements or contracts.

(8) Copy of Existing Regulation. A copy of the land use regulation that the owner making the claim believes restricts the use of the property, or interest therein, and that the owner believes has had the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property, including the date the owner claims the land use regulation was first enacted, enforced or applied to the property.

(9) Copy of Prior Regulations. A copy of the land use regulation in existence, and applicable to the property, when the owner became the owner of the property, and a copy of the land use regulation in existence immediately before the regulation that was enacted or enforced or applied to the property, that the owner claims restricts the use of the property and, the owner claims, caused a reduction in fair market value due to the regulation described in subsection (B)(8) of this section being more restrictive.

(10) Appraisals. A written appraisal by an appraiser, qualified as such in the state of Oregon, stating the amount of the alleged reduction in the fair market value of the property by showing the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation described in subsection (B)(8) of this section, and explaining the rationale and factors leading to that conclusion. If the claim is for more than $10,000, copies of two appraisals by different appraisers must be included.

(11) Narrative. The owner must provide a narrative describing the history of the owner and any family member’s ownership of the property, the history of land use regulations applicable to the claim, and how the enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation restricts the use of the property, or any interest therein, and has the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property, or any interest therein.

(12) Statement Regarding Exceptions. A statement by the owner making the claim of why the following Ballot Measure 37 exceptions do not apply:

(a) Commonly and historically recognized public nuisances under common law;

(b) Protection of public health and safety;

(c) Regulations required under federal law;

(d) Use of property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or

(e) The subject land use regulation was enacted prior to the date of the acquisition of the property by the owner, or prior to acquisition by a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to the acquisition or inheritance by the owner. [If “family member” status is claimed it must also be addressed in the title report required by subsection (B)(7) of this section.]

(13) Owner Statement. A statement by the owner explaining the effect a modification, removal or nonapplication of the land use regulation would have on the potential development of the property, and stating the most extensive development the owner believes would be permitted on the property if the identified land use regulation were modified, removed or not applied.

(14) Copies of Documents. Copies of any land use actions, development applications or other applications for permits previously filed in connection with the property and the action taken. City “enforcement” or “application” of the land use regulation is a prerequisite to making a Measure 37 claim and must be described and identified by the claimant.

(15) Site Plan and Drawings. A copy of the site plan and drawings in a legible eight and one-half by 11-inch format that relate to the proposed use of the property if the land use regulation is modified, removed or not applied.

(16) Statement of Relief Sought. A statement of the relief sought by the owner. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9040.]


2.70.050 Claim review process.

(A) The director of development and operations will assess any claim for compensation and make a recommendation to the city council on the disposition of the claim. The recommendation will state that the claim be:

(1) Denied;

(2) Investigated further;

(3) Declared valid, in which case the recommendation will further state whether the land use regulation at issue should be removed, waived or modified, or that the claimant should be compensated; or

(4) Evaluated in another manner not inconsistent with this chapter or Ballot Measure 37.

(B) The city council will conduct a public hearing before taking final action on a recommendation from the director of development and operations.

(C) Notice of the public hearing will be provided to the claimant and to all record owners of the subject property, and to all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property. Additional notice may be sent to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, Metro and such others as the city may designate.

(D) The notice will state the date, time and location of the hearing and will be sent no later than 10 days before the hearing. The notice will describe the hearing process, and will state how evidence may be submitted.

(E) After the conclusion of the public hearing, and no later than 180 days from the date the claim was filed, the city council will:

(1) Determine that the claim does not meet the requirements of this chapter and Ballot Measure 37 and deny the claim; or

(2) Adopt an order with appropriate findings that supports a determination that the claim is valid and directs that the claimant be compensated in an amount set forth in the order or remove, waive or modify the challenged land use regulation as applied to the subject property.

(F) The city council’s decision to remove, waive or modify a land use regulation or to compensate the claimant will be based on whether the public interest would be better served by compensating the owner, or by removing, waiving or modifying a land use regulation with respect to the subject property; or any other factors deemed relevant by the city council.

(G) If the city council removes, waives or modifies a land use regulation, it may apply the land use regulations in effect at the time the claimant acquired the property.

(H) The owner will bear the burden of proof relating to the claim, the devaluation of the owner’s property and the owner’s entitlement to just compensation. The standard of proof will be by a preponderance of the evidence.

(I) A copy of the city council order will be sent by mail to the owner and to each individual or entity that participated in the city council review process if the city was provided with a mailing address.

(J) The city council may establish by resolution additional procedures related to the processing of Ballot Measure 37 claims. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9050.]


2.70.060 Conditions, revocation and transfer.

(A) The city council may establish any relevant conditions of approval for compensation, should compensation be granted, or for any other action taken under this chapter.

(B) Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the approval of the compensation for the claim, grounds for recovering any compensation paid and grounds for revocation of any other action taken under this chapter.

(C) If the owner, or the owner’s successor in interest, fails to fully comply with all conditions of approval, the city may institute a revocation or modification proceeding before the city council under the same process for city council review of a claim under this chapter.

(D) Unless otherwise stated in the city’s decision, any action taken under this chapter runs with the property and is transferred with ownership of the property. All conditions, time limits or other restrictions imposed with approval of a claim will bind all subsequent owners of the subject property. The city’s decision may prevent the transfer of a waiver to a subsequent property owner if the owner does not develop its property pursuant to the waiver.

(E) A use or structure established pursuant to a land use regulation waived under this chapter will create a Measure 37 nonconforming use or a Measure 37 nonconforming structure, as appropriate, on the property benefiting from the waiver. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9060.]


2.70.070 Waiver of claims.

All potential claims that an owner knew or should have known exist as of the date a claim is submitted must be included in that claim if they are to be preserved. Any potential claim not included is waived by the property owner. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9070.]


2.70.080 Costs and attorneys’ fees.

If an owner commences an action to collect compensation and the city prevails, the city is entitled to all fees and costs it incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any appellate court, may deem reasonable as attorneys’ fees. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9080.]


2.70.090 Availability of funds to pay claims.

Compensation can only be paid based on the availability and appropriation of funds for this purpose. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9090.]


2.70.100 Review of a decision.

A writ of review under ORS 34.010 to 34.102 is the exclusive means to contest a final decision of the city council under CMC 2.70.050, and must be filed within 60 days of the notice provided under CMC 2.70.050. The owner of the real property that is the subject of the claim under this chapter is a necessary party in such a proceeding. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9100.]


2.70.110 Private cause of action.

Property owners adjacent to a Measure 37 claimant who succeeds in getting land use regulations waived may suffer a diminution of their property values as a result of the waiver. The following language is intended to allow an adjacent owner to sue a claimant for any such diminution.

If the city council’s removal, modification, or waiver of a land use regulation reduces the value of other property adjacent to a property that is the subject of a claim under this chapter, the adjacent property owner(s) are granted a cause of action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the claimant the amount of the reduction. In any such action, the adjacent property owner(s) are entitled to all fees and costs incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any appellate court, may deem reasonable as attorney fees. This section does not create a cause of action against the city. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9110.]


2.70.120 Compensation by other.

An individual or entity other than the city may compensate the claimant for any diminution in value established under this chapter, in lieu of the city removing, modifying or waiving the land use regulation causing the diminution. A contract between the city, the claimant and the individual or entity providing the compensation is a condition precedent to compensating a claimant under this subsection, and must be approved by the city attorney. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9120.]


2.70.130 Severability.

If any phrase, clause, or other part or parts of this chapter are found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining phrases, clauses and other part or parts will remain in full force and effect. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9130.]


2.70.140 Applicable state law – No independent rights.

For all claims filed the applicable state law is those portions of ORS Chapter 197 added by Ballot Measure 37, or as amended, modified or clarified by subsequent amendments or rules adopted by the Oregon legislature or Oregon administrative agencies. Any claim that has not been processed completely under this chapter will be subject to any such amendments, modifications, clarifications or other state actions. This chapter is adopted solely to address claims filed under the ORS Chapter 197 provisions added by Ballot Measure 37. This chapter does not create any rights independent of those provisions. [Ord. 855 § 1, 2004; Code 2000 § 2.9140.]


Chapter 2.75 POLICE ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:

2.75.010    Police advisory board.

2.75.020    Composition of board.

2.75.030    Terms of office.

2.75.040    Ex officio members.

2.75.050    Meetings.

2.75.060    Duties of the board.

2.75.070    Compensation of members.

2.75.080    Quorum – Rules and regulations.


2.75.010 Police advisory board.

The police advisory board shall select the position of chairperson each January for a one-year term; provided, however, that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms as chairperson. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.9005; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.020 Composition of board.

The board will be composed of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. These members shall meet the following qualifications:

(A) Not less than three of the members shall be residents of the city of Cornelius, representing residential property owners and renters; and

(B) At least two members shall be owners or managers of businesses located within the city, regardless of place of residence; and

(C) One member shall represent the school district(s) within the city; and

(D) One member shall be a high school student who is a resident of the city. A duly authorized representative of student government shall occupy this position. If possible, the school district representative and the student representative shall not represent the same school district. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.9010; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.030 Terms of office.

The term of each member shall be for a period of three years, and the mayor shall, with the advice of the council, appoint successors to such offices for each term of three years thereafter. Appointments shall be structured so as to ensure that terms overlap. No member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. The city council may expand or contract the membership of the police advisory board to not more than 11 members, nor less than five members. The mayor may also appoint city council advisory members to the board who will serve on an ex officio basis and without vote.

Vacancies on the police advisory board shall be filled for the remaining term of the members ceasing to be members of the board in the same manner as the original appointment. It shall be the duty of the chairperson or the vice chairperson of the board to notify the city recorder, through staff, when a vacancy exists.

The mayor, with the consent of the council, may remove members at will at any time prior to the end of their term. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.915; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.040 Ex officio members.

A representative of the city’s police department shall serve as an ex officio member. The ex officio member may participate in the police advisory board meetings and deliberations, but will not be a voting member. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.920; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.050 Meetings.

The police advisory board shall meet at least bi-monthly on a specific schedule adopted for the year by the board members. Special meetings of the board may be called by the board chairperson, by and upon the concurrence of three members, or as scheduled by the Cornelius police department ex officio member. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.925; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.060 Duties of the board.

(A) The duties of the police advisory board shall include, but not be limited to, advising and making recommendations via the chief of police on issues concerning public safety and police services within the city, such as:

(1) To enhance police-community relations;

(2) To review and provide a community perspective and recommendations concerning procedures, programs, and the effectiveness of the police services;

(3) To promote public awareness of the city’s police services and programs, including, but not limited to, business and residential crime prevention programs, safety training, domestic violence intervention, and school district/police/ community programs;

(4) To hold public meetings, from time to time, to solicit public input regarding police services and programs;

(5) To serve as a liaison between the police department and the community;

(6) To encourage individuals and community groups to assist the police department in the implementation of police programs and services; and

(7) To review and make recommendations concerning such other and further matters as may be referred to the board by the mayor, the city council, or the chief of police.

(B) Notwithstanding the duties of the board as described within subsection (A) of this section, the board shall have no power or authority to investigate, review, or otherwise participate in matters involving specific police personnel or specific police-related incidents. The board shall in no way receive or stand in review of complaints initiated against personnel of the police department, nor have any role in civil or criminal litigation. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.930; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.070 Compensation of members.

The police advisory board members shall receive no compensation for their services. The police advisory board members shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city or to obligate the city for payment of any sums of money. However, they may make recommendations to city council from time to time regarding expenditures and/or obligations. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.935; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


2.75.080 Quorum – Rules and regulations.

A majority of the police advisory board shall constitute a quorum. The police advisory board shall adopt rules and regulations to conduct its affairs, which rules and regulations shall be consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, Cornelius City Charter, and city of Cornelius ordinances. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the board where the action is being taken. [Ord. 881 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.940; Ord. 2016-005 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 2.80 PUBLIC WORKS ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:

2.80.010    Public works board established.

2.80.020    Membership qualifications.

2.80.030    Terms of appointment.

2.80.040    Ex officio members.

2.80.050    Meetings.

2.80.060    Purpose.

2.80.070    Compensation of members.

2.80.080    Quorum – Rules and regulations.

2.80.090    Members – Prohibited acts.


2.80.010 Public works board established.

The public works advisory board composed of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council is hereby established. The public works advisory board members shall appoint, at their first regular meeting, a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary from their membership. The position of chairperson shall be selected each January for a one-year term; provided, however, that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms as chairperson. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.950.]


2.80.020 Membership qualifications.

Qualifications for appointment to membership on the public works advisory board include demonstration of positive interest in the development, operation and maintenance of public utilities and streets in Cornelius and status as a resident or representative of a property or business owner within the city limits. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.952.]


2.80.030 Terms of appointment.

The term of each of the initial members shall begin immediately upon their appointment to the board and shall expire as follows:

(A) Two of the members so appointed shall serve until December 31, 2007.

(B) Two of the members so appointed shall serve until December 31, 2008.

(C) The three remaining members so appointed shall serve until December 31, 2009.

Upon the expiration of the terms of each of the initial members, the mayor shall, with the advice of the council, appoint a successor to each member whose term shall have expired. Each succeeding term following the initial appointment shall be for a period of three years, and the mayor shall, with the advice of the council, appoint successors to such offices for each term of three years thereafter. Appointments shall be structured so as to ensure that terms overlap. No member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms.

The mayor, with the advice of the council, may, after the initial appointment, expand or contract the membership of the public works advisory board to not more than 11 members, nor less than five members.

Vacancies on the public works advisory board shall be filled for the remaining term of the members ceasing to be members of the board in the same manner as the original appointment. It shall be the duty of the chairperson or the vice chairperson of the board to notify the mayor and city council when a vacancy so exists. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.954.]


2.80.040 Ex officio members.

A representative of the city’s public works department shall serve as an ex officio member. The ex officio member may participate in the public works advisory board meetings and deliberations, but will not be a voting member. The mayor may also appoint city council advisory members to the board who will serve on an ex officio basis and without a vote. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.956.]


2.80.050 Meetings.

The public works advisory board shall meet at least bimonthly on a regular schedule adopted for the year by the board members. Special meetings of the board may be called by the board chairperson, or upon the concurrence of three members, or as scheduled by the public works department ex officio member. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.958.]


2.80.060 Purpose.

The purpose of the public works advisory board shall be to advise the mayor and city council regarding matters in the public works service area including, but not limited to, street construction and maintenance, and water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer line construction and maintenance. The board may also be requested to advise the council on utility rate analysis and recommendations on the budgets for operation and capital improvements.

In addition, the board may advise the council on any matter upon which the council requests guidance; provided, however, that the board shall not engage in any engineering practices as that term is defined in state law, nor shall it develop specifications covering public works projects unless such specifications are approved by a duly-registered professional engineer. The board shall not direct personnel nor investigate complaints regarding performance of personnel. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.960.]


2.80.070 Compensation of members.

Public works advisory board members shall receive no compensation for their services. The public works advisory board members shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city or obligate the city for payment of any sums of money. However, they will make recommendations to city council from time to time regarding expenditures and/or obligations. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.962.]


2.80.080 Quorum – Rules and regulations.

A majority of the public works advisory board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall adopt rules and regulations to conduct its affairs, which rules and regulations shall be consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, Cornelius City Charter and Cornelius Municipal Code. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.964.]


2.80.090 Members – Prohibited acts.

A public works advisory board member shall not participate in any board proceeding or action in which the following has a direct or substantial financial interest: a member or member’s spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member has been serving or has served in the previous two years as an officer, director, board member, manager or owner, or any business with which the member is negotiating for, or has an arrangement or understanding concerning, a prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the board where the action is being taken. [Ord. 883 § 1, 2007; Code 2000 § 2.966.]


Chapter 2.85 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION

Sections:

2.85.010    Economic development commission established.

2.85.020    Membership qualifications.

2.85.030    Terms of appointment.

2.85.040    Ex officio members.

2.85.050    Meetings.

2.85.060    Purpose and duties.

2.85.070    Compensation of members.

2.85.080    Quorum – Rules and regulations.

2.85.090    Members – Prohibited acts.


2.85.010 Economic development commission established.

The economic development commission composed of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council is hereby established. The economic development commission members shall appoint, at their first regular meeting, a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary from their membership. The position of chairperson shall be selected each January for a one-year term, provided, however, that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms as chairperson. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.970.]


2.85.020 Membership qualifications.

Qualifications for appointment to membership on the economic development commission include demonstration of positive interest in the development of Cornelius and creation of job opportunities and status as a resident or representative of a property or business owner within the city limits. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.972.]


2.85.030 Terms of appointment.

The term of each of the initial members shall begin immediately upon their appointment to the board and shall expire as follows:

(A) Five of the members so appointed shall serve until December 31, 2015.

(B) Five of the members so appointed shall serve until December 31, 2016.

(C) The five remaining members so appointed shall serve until December 31, 2017.

Upon the expiration of the terms of each of the initial members, the mayor shall, with the advice of the council, appoint a successor to each member whose term shall have expired. Each succeeding term following the initial appointment shall be for a period of three years, and the mayor shall, with the advice of the council, appoint successors to such offices for each term of three years thereafter. Appointments shall be structured so as to ensure that terms overlap. No member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms.

The mayor, with the advice of the council, may, after the initial appointment, expand or contract the membership of the economic development commission to not more than 15 members, nor less than nine members.

Vacancies on the economic development commission shall be filled for the remaining term of the members ceasing to be members of the board in the same manner as the original appointment. It shall be the duty of the chair or the vice chair of the board to notify the mayor and city council when a vacancy so exists. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.974; Ord. 2014-09, 2014.]


2.85.040 Ex officio members.

The city manager or designee shall serve as the secretary and as an ex officio member. The ex officio member may participate in the economic development commission meetings and deliberations, but will not be a voting member. The mayor may also appoint city council advisory members to the commission who will serve on an ex officio basis and without a vote. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.976.]


2.85.050 Meetings.

The economic development commission shall meet at least quarterly on a regular schedule adopted for the year by the board members. Special meetings of the board may be called by the chairperson, or upon the concurrence of three members, or as scheduled by the city manager. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.978.]


2.85.060 Purpose and duties.

(A) The purposes for the creation and continued existence of the commission are:

(1) To create an awareness both in the public and private sectors of the city of the need for and the encouragement of effective community and economic development.

(2) To encourage cooperation between the public and private sectors of the city and the region to provide an effective community economic development program, the goals of which shall include, but not be limited to:

(a) The upgrading and physical renewal of housing facilities, neighborhood and business area;

(b) The attraction to the city and its environs not only of new job-producing businesses and enterprises, but the retention and enlargement of existing ones;

(c) To seek and obtain cooperation between the public and private sectors of the community and achievement of the purposes and goals outlined herein;

(d) Increasing the job and entrepreneurial skills of Cornelius residents;

(e) To serve in an advisory capacity to the council and the various departments which deal with development programs, particularly as to long-range programs which affect the economic interests of the city and its inhabitants.

(B) The duties and responsibilities of the commission shall include but not be limited to the following:

(1) Evaluate the city’s existing programs and improvement projects and make recommendations to the council and the city manager for the continuance, discontinuance or modification of the same.

(2) Receive input from the general public regarding the economic betterment and improvement of the city and make reports and recommendations thereof to the council and city manager.

(3) Recommend to the council and the city manager ways and means for improving the economic betterment and improvement of the city.

(4) Seek to develop, collaborate with and coordinate close communications and relationships between the city government, chamber of commerce, private businesses and industries, neighboring cities, regional/state economic development agencies and interested citizens regarding the economic betterment and improvement.

(5) When directed by the council and within the resources available to the commission, carry on a comprehensive program of economic betterment and improvement. The economic development commission members shall have no authority to make any direct expenditure on behalf of the city or obligate the city for payment of any sums of money except as expressly authorized. However, they will make recommendations to city council from time to time regarding expenditures and/or obligations.

(C) The board shall not direct personnel nor investigate complaints regarding performance of personnel. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.980.]


2.85.070 Compensation of members.

Economic development commission members shall receive no compensation for their services. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.982.]


2.85.080 Quorum – Rules and regulations.

A majority of the economic development commission shall constitute a quorum. The board shall adopt rules and regulations to conduct its affairs, which rules and regulations shall be consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, Cornelius City Charter and Cornelius Municipal Code. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.984.]


2.85.090 Members – Prohibited acts.

An economic development commission member shall not participate in any board proceeding or action in which the following has a direct or substantial financial interest: a member or member’s spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member has been serving or has served in the previous two years as an officer, director, board member, manager or owner, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning a prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the board where the action is being taken. [Ord. 893 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 2.986.]


Chapter 2.90 PARKS ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:

2.90.010    Parks advisory board established.

2.90.020    Membership qualifications.

2.90.030    Terms of office.

2.90.040    Meetings.

2.90.050    Purpose.

2.90.060    Compensation of members.

2.90.070    Quorum – Rules and regulations.

2.90.080    Members – Prohibited acts.


2.90.010 Parks advisory board established.

The parks advisory board composed of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council is hereby established. The parks advisory board members shall appoint, at their first regular meeting, a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary from their membership. The position of chairperson shall be selected each January for a one-year term; provided, however, that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms as chairperson. [Ord. 901 § 1, 2008.]


2.90.020 Membership qualifications.

Qualifications for appointment to membership on the parks advisory board include demonstration of positive interest in the development, operation and maintenance of public parks, open spaces and trails in Cornelius and status as a resident or representative of a property or business owner within the city limits. [Ord. 901 § 2, 2008.]


2.90.030 Terms of office.

The term of each of the initial members shall begin immediately upon their appointment to the committee and shall expire as follows: 

(A) Two of the members so appointed shall hold office until December 31, 2008.

(B) Two of the members so appointed shall hold office until December 31, 2009.

(C) The three remaining members so appointed shall hold office until December 31, 2010. 

Upon the expiration of the terms of each of the initial members, the mayor shall, with the consent of the council, appoint a successor to each member whose term shall have expired. Each succeeding term following the initial appointment shall be for a period of three years, and the mayor shall, with the consent of the council, appoint successors to such offices for each term of three years thereafter. Appointments shall be structured so as to ensure that terms overlap. No member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. 

The mayor, with the consent of the council, may also appoint city council advisory members to the committee who will serve on an ex officio basis and without vote. 

Vacancies of the parks advisory board shall be filled for the remaining term of the members ceasing to be members of the board in the same manner as the original appointment. It shall be the duty of the chairperson or the vice chairperson of the board to notify the mayor and city council when a vacancy so exists. [Ord. 901 § 3, 2008.]


2.90.040 Meetings.

The parks advisory board shall meet at least monthly on a specific schedule adopted for the year by the board members. The board chairperson may call, by and upon the concurrence of three members, special meetings of the board. [Ord. 901 § 4, 2008.]


2.90.050 Purpose.

The purpose of the parks advisory board shall be to advise the city council regarding matters in the parks and recreation service area, including parks and trails planning, acquisition, construction and maintenance, grants acquisition, volunteer coordination, improvements, and the following tasks: 

(A) Review and make recommendations on parks and recreation projects.

(B) Advise on parks systems development charge rate analysis and recommendations.

(C) Advise on city parks rental rates and use procedures.

(D) Advise on city budget for operation and capital improvements.

(E) Troubleshoot capital and maintenance projects.

(F) Park rules and policy recommendations.

In addition, the board may advise the council on any matter upon which the council requests guidance. [Ord. 901 § 5, 2008.]


2.90.060 Compensation of members.

The parks advisory board members shall receive no compensation for their services. The parks advisory board members shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city, or obligate the city for payment of any sums of money. However, they will make recommendations to the city council from time to time regarding expenditures and/or obligations. [Ord. 901 § 6, 2008.]


2.90.070 Quorum – Rules and regulations.

A majority of the parks advisory board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall adopt rules and regulations to conduct its affairs, which rules and regulations shall be consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, Cornelius City Charter and city of Cornelius ordinances. [Ord. 901 § 7, 2008.]


2.90.080 Members – Prohibited acts.

A parks advisory board member shall not participate in any board proceeding or action in which the following has a direct or substantial financial interest:

A member or member’s spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member has been serving or has served in the previous two years as an officer, director, board member, manager or owner, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning a prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the board where the action is being taken. [Ord. 901 § 8, 2008.]


Chapter 2.95 MUNICIPAL POLICE AUTHORITY

Sections:

2.95.010    Municipal police authority.


2.95.010 Municipal police authority.

The city hereby confers municipal police authority on any Washington County sheriff’s deputy who is performing police duties within the boundaries of the city to enforce any provisions of city code or city ordinances on or after July 1, 2014. This authority shall continue until affirmatively withdrawn by the city. Washington County deputies are specifically authorized to issue citations in the name of the city of Cornelius for municipal violations, to use city of Cornelius forms and citations, and to appear and prosecute violations of municipal ordinances in the city of Cornelius municipal court on behalf of the city of Cornelius. Any Washington County deputy assigned to be the city police chief is expressly authorized to perform any duty or obligation or exercise any authority granted to the chief of police under this code. [Ord. 2014-14 § 1, 2014.]


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    Finance

3.10    Construction Excise Tax

3.15    Motor Vehicle Fuel Tax

3.20    Competitive Bidding

3.25    In-Lieu-Of Franchise Fee

3.30    Marijuana Sales Tax

3.35    Nonprofit Corporation Low-Income Housing Tax Exemptions


Chapter 3.05 FINANCE

Sections:

3.05.010    Bonds as payment for liens or land.


3.05.010 Bonds as payment for liens or land.

In accordance with ORS 223.765 and 271.420, general obligation bonds or interest coupons attached, or both, of the city shall be accepted in payment for all or any part of special assessment liens, interest on special assessment liens or the purchase price of any land acquired and for sale by the city. [Code 2000 § 2.025.]


Chapter 3.10 CONSTRUCTION EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.10.010    Definition.

3.10.020    Construction excise tax imposed.

3.10.030    Rate.

3.10.040    Uses of revenue.


3.10.010 Definition.

As used in this chapter, “construction excise tax” or “tax” means a charge placed on all new construction and additions to existing structures, but does not include remodels of existing structures. [Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.505.]


3.10.020 Construction excise tax imposed.

(A) A construction excise tax is imposed on all applicants for building permits from the city. The construction excise tax is imposed by the city on all building permit applications for new construction and additions to existing structures. The construction excise tax is at a uniform rate and based on the average valuation per square foot for each type of construction.

(B) The person applying for a city building permit is responsible for payment of the construction excise tax. No lien will attach to the real property at the location where the construction takes place because of the nonpayment of the construction excise tax.

(C) The tax will be calculated and included with the building permit application fees as a separate and distinct charge and listed on the fees statement as the construction excise tax. It is due and payable at the same time as building permit fees. [Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.510.]


3.10.030 Rate.

The rate for the construction excise tax is 0.75 percent of the value of construction calculated for the basic building permit fee. The construction value is determined by multiplication of the state average valuation per square foot for each type of construction. Construction types are residential and commercial structures.

The city council may revise the amount of the fee imposed by the terms of this chapter by resolution at any time the council deems appropriate. The city council shall review the amount of the fee annually prior to the adoption of the annual budget. [Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.515.]


3.10.040 Uses of revenue.

All revenues generated by the tax will be used for city general public services including public safety and administration. [Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.520.]


Chapter 3.15 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX

Sections:

3.15.005    Definitions.

3.15.010    Tax imposed.

3.15.015    Amount and payment.

3.15.020    License requirements.

3.15.025    License applications and issuance.

3.15.030    Failure to secure license.

3.15.035    Cancellation of license.

3.15.040    Payment of tax and delinquency penalties.

3.15.045    Failure to file monthly statement.

3.15.050    Exemption of export fuel.

3.15.055    Sales to Armed Forces exempted.

3.15.060    Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

3.15.065    Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.

3.15.070    Examinations and investigations.

3.15.075    Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

3.15.080    Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

3.15.085    Records to be kept by dealers.

3.15.090    Use of tax revenues.


3.15.005 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

(A) “City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(B) “Dealer” means any person who:

(1) Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in the city, but not including anyone who imports motor vehicle fuel into the city in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased from a dealer licensed under this chapter if the dealer assumes liability for payment of the license tax to the city; or

(2) Acquires for sale, use or distribution in the city motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred.

(C) “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

(D) “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.

(E) “Motor vehicle fuel” means and includes gasoline, diesel, and any other flammable or combustible gas or liquid, by whatever name such gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles, except gas or liquid for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles.

(F) “Person” includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation.

(G) “Service station” means and includes any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.

(H) “Street” means every way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel within the jurisdiction of and under the authority of the city including curbs, sidewalks and planting strips adjacent thereto. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.010 Tax imposed.

A business license tax is imposed on every dealer. This business license tax is in addition to the business license fee required under Chapter 5.05 CMC. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.015 Amount and payment.

Every dealer in the city engaging in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel whether in the dealer’s name, the name of another or the name of the dealer’s representative or agent is required to do the following:

(A) Provide a statement (not later than the twenty-fifth of each month) to the city of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by the dealer in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser for which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable license tax during the preceding month.

(B) Pay a license tax of $0.02 per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this chapter.

(C) In lieu of claiming a refund of the tax as provided in CMC 3.15.090 or of any prior erroneous payment of the license tax made to the city by the dealer, the dealer may show such motor vehicle fuel tax as a credit or deduction on the monthly statement and payment of tax. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.020 License requirements.

No dealer may sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until the dealer has secured a dealer’s license as required in this chapter. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.025 License applications and issuance.

(A) Every person before becoming or remaining a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in the city must obtain a license authorizing that person to engage in business as a dealer.

(B) Applications for the license must be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city, including the following:

(1) The business name under which the applicant transacts business.

(2) The address of applicant’s principal place of business and location of distributing stations in the city.

(3) The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent.

(C) Once the application is complete and accepted for filing, the city will issue the dealer a license to transact business in the city. A license is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued.

(D) The city will retain all completed applications together with a record of all licensed dealers for a minimum of five years. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.030 Failure to secure license.

(A) If a dealer fails to secure a license prior to becoming or remaining a dealer in the city, the tax on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer is immediately due and payable.

(B) The city will determine from as many reliable and available sources as the city deems reasonable the amount of tax due, and assess the dealer for the amount found due, together with a penalty of 25 percent of the tax. In any legal action to collect the tax or penalty or both, the city’s assessment is prima facie evidence that the dealer is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.035 Cancellation of license.

(A) The city may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued to that dealer. Upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, the city will set a date not later than 30 days after receipt of the written request and then the license will be no longer effective.

(B) The city may, after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the license of the dealer upon finding that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.040 Payment of tax and delinquency penalties.

(A) The license tax imposed by this chapter must be paid on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month.

(B) Except as provided in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, if payment of the tax is not paid as required by subsection (A) of this section, a penalty of 10 percent of the license tax maybe assessed by the city and is immediately due and payable.

(C) Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, if payment of the tax and penalty (if any) is not made on or before the first day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, the city may impose a further penalty of up to 25 percent of the tax. This penalty is in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (B) of this section and is immediately due and payable.

(D) Penalties imposed by this section do not apply if a penalty is assessed under CMC 3.15.030.

(E) The city manager may waive any penalties assessed under this section and report to the city council on a regular basis. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.045 Failure to file monthly statement.

If a dealer fails to file the statement required by CMC 3.15.015, the city will determine from as many available sources as the city determines reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer for the period unreported, and such determination is prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed or used. The city will immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of 10 percent of the tax. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.050 Exemption of export fuel.

(A) The license tax imposed by CMC 3.15.010 will not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:

(1) Exported from the city by a dealer; or

(2) Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or more for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer is required to report such exports and sales to the city.

(B) Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle will not be considered as exported from the city.

(C) In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or more for export by the purchaser, the dealer must retain in the dealer’s files (for at least two years) an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as required by the city. This certificate is prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.055 Sales to Armed Forces exempted.

The license tax imposed by CMC 3.15.010 and 3.15.015 is exempted on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the Armed Forces of the United States, but every dealer is required to report such sales to the city. A certificate by an authorized Armed Forces officer will be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.060 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the vehicle fuel tank motor vehicle fuel for the person’s own use only for the purpose of operating that motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.065 Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.

(A) A dealer selling or delivering motor vehicle fuel to dealers is not required to pay a license tax unless the selling dealer has assumed liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city.

(B) The dealer in making monthly statements to the city as required by CMC 3.15.015 must show separately the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.070 Examinations and investigations.

The city or its authorized agents may make an examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel within the city. The city may make other investigations it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examination discloses that reports of dealers or other persons have shown incorrectly the amount of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing, the city may make changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons or may make refunds as necessary to correct the errors disclosed. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.075 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

(A) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a dealer must be taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city.

(B) Except in the case of a fraudulent report or failure to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this chapter will be served on dealers within three years from the date any additional taxes become due, and is subject to penalty as provided in CMC 3.15.050. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.080 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

The city or its authorized agents may examine at any time during normal business hours the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.085 Records to be kept by dealers.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel must keep a record in such form as required by the city of all purchases, invoices, bills of lading, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel for a period of not less than three years. The records must include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and at all times during the business hours are subject to inspection by the city or its authorized agents. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


3.15.090 Use of tax revenues.

(A) The city manager is responsible for the disposition of the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter.

(B) For the purpose of this section, “net revenue” means the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized by this chapter.

(C) The net revenue must be used for the planning, financing, design, construction, maintenance, repair, operation and the use of streets within the city. [Ord. 910 § 1, 2010.]


Chapter 3.20 COMPETITIVE BIDDING

Sections:

3.20.010    Advertising contracts.

3.20.020    Contract amendments (including change orders and extra work).

3.20.030    Contracts under certain dollar amounts.

3.20.040    Public infrastructure contracts.

3.20.050    Emergency contracts.

3.20.060    Equipment repair and overhaul.

3.20.070    Contracts for price-regulated items.

3.20.080    Purchases under federal contracts.

3.20.090    Copyrighted materials.

3.20.100    Investment contracts.

3.20.110    Food contracts.

3.20.120    Product prequalification.

3.20.130    Requirements contracts.

3.20.140    Single seller of product required.

3.20.150    Purchase of used personal property.

3.20.160    Information technology contracts.

3.20.170    Telecommunications systems contracts.

3.20.180    Telecommunications services.

3.20.190    Hazardous material removal and oil cleanup.

3.20.200    Insurance and employee benefits.


3.20.010 Advertising contracts.

The city may purchase advertising, regardless of dollar value, without competitive bidding. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.020 Contract amendments (including change orders and extra work).

An amendment for additional work or product which is reasonably related to the scope of work under the original contract, including change orders, extra work, field orders, or other change in the original specifications that increases the original contract price, may be made with the contractor or without competitive bidding subject to the following conditions:

(A) The original contract was let by: (1) competitive bidding or alternative procurement process; (2) unit prices or additive alternates were provided that established the cost basis for the additional work or product; and (3) a binding obligation exists on the parties covering the terms and conditions of the additional work; or

(B) The original contract was let pursuant to a declaration of emergency, in accordance with ORS 279.015(4)(a) and 279.015(5) and OAR 125-310-0030; or

(C) The additional work is required by reason of existing regulations or ordinances of federal, state or local agencies, dealing with the prevention of environmental pollution and the preservation of natural resources, that affect performance of the original contract and such regulations or ordinances, as provided in ORS 279.318, either were not cited in the original contract or were enacted or amended after submission of the successful bid or proposal; or

(D) The original contract was for the renovation or remodeling of a building;

(E) Except for amendments entered into pursuant to subsections (A) to (D) of this section, the aggregate increase resulting from all amendments to a contract shall not exceed 20 percent of the initial contract price. Contracts for the renovation or remodeling of buildings may have aggregate amendments not exceeding 33 percent of the initial contract price; provided, however, that amendments made pursuant to subsection (A) of this section are not to be applied against either the 20 percent or the 33 percent aggregate limit on contract amendments; provided, further, that contracts amended pursuant to subsections (B) or (C) of this section are not subject to either the 20 percent or the 33 percent aggregate limit on contract amendments.

If the original contract required the contractor to provide a performance and payment bond, and the city has terminated the contract and notified the surety of such termination, the city may allow the contractor’s surety an opportunity to provide a substitute contractor to complete performance of the original contract. Such substitute performance, and any amendment of the original contract that makes a substitute contractor a party to the contract, and is not an award of a public contract for purposes of ORS 279.015(1), shall not be subject to the competitive procurement provisions of ORS 279.005 through 279.111. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.030 Contracts under certain dollar amounts.

(A) The city may, in its discretion, let public contracts not to exceed $75,000 for the purchase of goods, materials, supplies and services without competitive bidding if the city has determined that the awarding of the contract without competitive bidding will result in cost savings and the following conditions are met:

(1) The contract is for a single project and is not a component of or related to any other project;

(2) When the amount of the contract does not exceed $5,000, the city is exempt from competitive bidding (pursuant to ORS 279.015(1)(d)); however, the city shall, where practical, obtain competitive quotes;

(3) When the amount of the contract is more than $5,000, but less than $75,000, the city shall, at minimum, obtain three informally solicited, competitive quotes. The city shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received. If three quotes are not available, a lesser number will suffice; provided, that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes;

(4) The required goods, materials, supplies or services are unavailable from a qualified rehabilitation facility as provided in ORS 279.850; and

(5) The city shall encourage minority, women-owned and emerging small businesses to participate in its purchasing processes, where applicable, by notifying the Advocate for Minority, Women and Emerging Small Business as required by ORS 200.035.

(B) The city may, in its discretion, let public contracts for trade-related projects, i.e., construction, maintenance, repair, or similar labor and materials contracts, without competitive bidding if the city has determined that the awarding of the contract without competitive bidding will result in cost savings and the following conditions are met:

(1) The contract is for a single project and is not a component of or related to any other project;

(2) When the amount of the contract does not exceed $5,000, the city should, where feasible, obtain competitive quotes;

(3) When the amount of the contract is more than $5,000 but less than $75,000, except as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section, the city shall obtain a minimum of three competitive quotes. The city shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received. If three quotes are not available, a lesser number will suffice; provided, that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes;

(4) When the contract is for maintenance or repair of roads, highways or parking lots and is less than $75,000, the city may let the contract without competitive bidding if at least three competitive quotes are obtained. The city shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received and comply with the requirements, as applicable, of subsection (B)(6) of this section. If three quotes are not available, a lesser number will suffice, provided a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes;

(5) When the contract is a public improvement contract of less than $75,000, and the bidders are being drawn exclusively from a list of certified emerging small businesses maintained by the Office of Minority, Women and Emerging Small Business, the city may let the contract without formal competitive bidding after a good faith effort to obtain a minimum of three competitive quotes from emerging small businesses. To obtain maximum exposure for all firms and guard against favoritism, care shall be taken to obtain quotes from different firms each time the list is used. The city shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received and comply with the requirements, as applicable, of subsection (B)(6) of this section. A lesser number of quotes will suffice provided a written record is maintained of the effort to obtain three quotes; and

(6) When the contract is for a “public improvement” as defined in ORS 279.011(8) or for “public works” as defined in ORS 279.348(3) and the contract price exceeds $25,000 but is less than $75,000, the city and the contractor shall comply with:

(a) The prevailing wage provisions of ORS 279.348 to 279.365, when applicable;

(b) The performance bond requirements of ORS 279.029;

(c) The contractor registration requirements of ORS Chapter 701; and

(d) Any other law applicable to such a contract.

(C) If more than one supplier may be available and the total purchase is estimated to exceed $75,000, the city shall select a contractor through competitive bidding. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.040 Public infrastructure contracts.

(A) The city may, in its discretion, let public contracts not to exceed $250,000 for construction projects involving public infrastructure without competitive bidding. For the purposes of these exemptions, public infrastructure includes but is not limited to: (1) the construction, reconstruction or upgrading of any water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system; (2) the construction, grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or the opening, laying out, widening, extending or altering of any street; and (3) the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks. Such contracts may be let if the following conditions are met:

(1) The contract is for a single project, and is not a component of or related to any other project;

(2) The city council, acting as the contract review board, approves written findings that justify the exemption of the contract from public bidding, based upon the following factors as relevant to a given project:

(a) Operational, budget and financial data.

(b) Public benefits.

(c) Value engineering.

(d) Specialized expertise required.

(e) Public safety.

(f) Market conditions.

(g) Technical complexity.

(h) Funding sources.

(3) When the contract is for a “public improvement” as defined in ORS 279.011(8) or for “public works” as defined in ORS 279.348(3) and the contract price exceeds $25,000, the city and the contractor shall comply with:

(a) The prevailing wage provisions of ORS 279.348 to 279.365, when applicable;

(b) The performance bond requirements of ORS 279.029;

(c) The contractor registration requirements of ORS Chapter 701; and

(d) Any other law applicable to such a contract.

(B) If more than one supplier may be available and the total purchase is estimated to exceed $250,000, the city shall select a contractor through competitive bidding. 

(C)(1) The city of Cornelius is hereby authorized to sole source city public improvement contracts for construction, maintenance, repair of public rights-of-way (or utilities located in city rights-of-way) where the work to be done under the public improvement contract is adjacent, connecting or in close proximity (i.e., three to six blocks) to where a private developer is having construction work done on infrastructure in their development and the public improvement portion is estimated to cost less than $500,000.

(2) The mayor and city council may periodically adjust the limit of contracts for which this exemption is applicable by resolution, based upon published indices of construction cost trends. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004; Ord. 887 §§ 1, 2, 2007.]


3.20.050 Emergency contracts.

(A) Pursuant to the requirements of this section, the city may in its discretion enter into a public contract without competitive solicitation if an emergency exists. Emergency means circumstances that could not have been reasonably foreseen that create a substantial risk of loss, damage, interruption of services or threat to public health or safety that requires prompt execution of a contract to remedy the condition.

(B) Regardless of the dollar value of the contract, when the city enters into an emergency contract, it shall:

(1) Make a written declaration of emergency, including findings describing the emergency circumstances that require the prompt performance of the contract, stating the anticipated harm from failure to establish the contract on an expedited basis; and

(2) Encourage competition to the extent reasonable under the circumstances; and

(3) Record the measures taken under subsection (B)(2) of this section to encourage competition, the amounts of the bids, quotes or proposals obtained, and the reason for selecting the contractor.

(C) Pursuant to ORS 279.015(4) and (5), the city council, the city manager, or another officer authorized by the city shall declare the existence of the emergency as required by subsection (B) of this section, which shall authorize the city to enter into an emergency contract.

(D) Any contract awarded under this exemption and delegation shall be awarded within 60 days following declaration of the emergency unless an extension is granted by the city council pursuant to ORS 279.015(5) and ORS 279.727. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.060 Equipment repair and overhaul.

(A) The city may enter into a public contract for equipment repair or overhaul without competitive bidding, subject to the following conditions:

(1) Service or parts required are unknown and the cost cannot be determined without extensive preliminary dismantling or testing; or

(2) Service or parts required are for sophisticated equipment for which specially trained personnel are required and such personnel are available from only one source; and

(3) The city purchases within the limits and pursuant to the methods in subsection (B) of this section.

(B) Regardless of the price of the contract, the city shall document in its procurement file the reasons why either competitive bids or quotes were deemed to be impractical and may then directly enter into the contract. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.070 Contracts for price regulated items.

The city may, regardless of dollar value and without competitive bidding, contract for the direct purchase of goods or services where the rate or price for the goods or services being purchased is established by federal, state, or local regulatory authority. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.080 Purchases under federal contracts.

(A) When the price of goods and services has been established by a contract with an agency of the federal government pursuant to a federal contract award, the city may purchase the goods and services in accordance with the federal contract without subsequent competitive bidding. In exercising this authority under this exemption, the city shall:

(1) Include in the contract file a letter or memoranda from the appropriate federal agency granting permission to the city to purchase under the federal contract; and

(2) Include in the contract file documentation showing the cost savings to be gained from anticipated purchases from the federal contract.

(B) The city shall not contract pursuant to this section in the absence of a substantial cost savings to be realized by using this method. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.090 Copyrighted materials.

The city may, without competitive bidding and regardless of dollar amount, purchase copyrighted materials if there is only one known supplier available for such goods. Examples of copyrighted materials covered by this exemption may include, but are not necessarily limited to, new adopted textbooks, workbooks, curriculum kits, reference materials, audio and visual media, and nonmass-marketed software. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.100 Investment contracts.

The city may, without competitive bidding and regardless of dollar amount, contract for the purpose of the investment of public funds or the borrowing of funds by the city when such investment or borrowing is contracted pursuant to duly enacted statute, ordinance, charter or constitution. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.110 Food contracts.

(A) The intent of this section is to provide a method for the city to procure food products which are available for a limited period of time at “lower than normal” prices (also referred to as “spot buys”).

(B) The city may procure an unlimited dollar value of food using a competitive bid or quote process when all of the following conditions are present:

(1) A nonexclusive requirements contract or regularly scheduled bid process already exists for the item being purchased;

(2) The proposed unit price of the item(s) to be purchased is significantly less than a comparable item’s price on an existing requirements contract or recent bid (as described in subsection (C) of this section) and the amount saved exceeds any additional administrative costs incurred to purchase using this exemption;

(3) The product being purchased has limited availability (i.e., the product may no longer be available upon completion of normal bid processes);

(4) Any requirements contracts currently in place for the item being purchased contain clauses allowing for the use of this exemption; and

(5) The purchase does not jeopardize fulfillment of a guaranteed minimum volume under an existing requirements contract.

(C) Purchases may only be made under this exemption after the city documents the following in its procurement file: the city’s attempt and method to obtain quotes from at least three sources; the written quote or bid, if obtained; item specifications; quantity; unit pricing; delivery; and other pertinent information. Contract or bid pricing used for comparison shall be representative of current pricing available and shall have been obtained or confirmed no more than six months prior to the current purchase. When practical, written quotes are recommended. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.120 Product prequalification.

(A) When specific design or performance specifications must be met or such specifications are impractical to create or reproduce for a type of product to be purchased, the city may specify a list of approved or qualified products by reference to the prequalified product(s) of particular manufacturers or sellers in accordance with the following product prequalification procedures:

(1) Reasonable efforts have been made to notify all known manufacturers and vendors of competing products of the city’s intent to compile a list of prequalified products and of the opportunity to submit applications for including their product(s) on the list of prequalified products. Notice may be provided by advertisement in a trade journal of state-wide distribution, when possible; or, instead of advertising, the city may provide direct written notice to manufacturers and vendors appearing on the appropriate list maintained by the city; and

(2) Manufacturer and vendor applications to include products in the city’s list of prequalified products are accepted up to 15 calendar days (unless otherwise specified in the advertisement or the city’s written notice) prior to the initial advertisement for bids or proposals on the type of product to be purchased.

(B) If an application for including a product in a list of prequalified products is denied, the city shall promptly provide the applicant with written notice of the denial. The applicant may appeal to the designated city authority, requesting review and reconsideration of the denial. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.130 Requirements contracts.

Requirements contracts may be established for the purposes of minimizing paperwork, achieving continuity of product, securing a source of supply, reducing inventory, and reducing lead time for ordering. The city may enter into requirements contracts whereby it is agreed to purchase goods or services for an anticipated need at a predetermined price provided the contract is let by a competitive procurement process pursuant to the requirements of ORS 279.005 to 279.111 and this chapter.

(A) Agencies may purchase the goods and services from a contractor awarded a requirements contract without first undertaking additional competitive solicitation.

(B) The term of the contract, including renewals, shall not exceed five years unless otherwise exempted pursuant to ORS 279.015. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.140 Single seller of product required.

Subject to the requirements of OAR 125-340-0030, the city may purchase without competitive bidding if there is only one seller of a product of the quality required, or if the efficient utilization of existing equipment or supplies requires specification of a compatible product for which there is only one seller. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.150 Purchase of used personal property.

(A) Subject to the provisions of this section, the city may purchase used property or equipment without competitive bidding and without obtaining competitive quotes, if it has determined that the purchase will result in cost savings to the city and will not diminish competition or encourage favoritism. “Used personal property or equipment” is property or equipment which has been placed in its intended use by a previous owner or user for a period of time recognized in the relevant trade or industry as qualifying the personal property or equipment as “used,” at the time of the city purchase. “Used personal property or equipment” generally does not include property or equipment if the city was the previous user, whether under a lease, as part of a demonstration, trial or pilot project, or similar arrangement.

(B) For purchases of used personal property or equipment costing less than $75,000, the city, where feasible, shall obtain three competitive quotes, unless the city has determined and documented that a purchase without obtaining competitive quotes will result in cost savings to the city and will not diminish competition or encourage favoritism.

(C) For purchases of used personal property or equipment totaling $75,000 or up to the maximum dollar limitation stated in OAR 125-310-0012, the city shall obtain and keep a written record of the source and amount of quotes received. If three quotes are not available, a written record must be made of the attempt to obtain quotes.

(D) If the total purchase is estimated to exceed the maximum dollar limitation stated in OAR 125-310-0012, the city may submit a written request for a written delegation of authority from the city council prior to making the purchase. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.160 Information technology contracts.

The city may enter into a contract to acquire information technology hardware and software, without competitive bidding, subject to the following conditions:

(A) If the contract amount does not exceed $75,000, the city shall, as a minimum, follow OAR 125-310-0012. Prior to selecting a contractor, reasonable efforts shall be made to solicit proposals from three or more vendors. Justification of award shall be documented and become a public record of the city.

(B) If the contract amount exceeds $75,000, the city shall determine and use the best procurement method, pursuant to ORS 279.005 through 279.111, and shall solicit written proposals in accordance with the requirements of the model public contract rules. The city shall document the evaluation and award process, which will be part of the public record justifying the award.

(C) If the amount of the contract is estimated to exceed $500,000, the city shall provide proposers an opportunity to review the evaluation of their proposals before final selection. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.170 Telecommunications systems contracts.

(A) An agency having delegated purchasing authority may enter into a contract to acquire telecommunications system hardware and software, without competitive bidding, subject to the following conditions:

(1) If the contract amount does not exceed $75,000, the city shall as a minimum obtain competitive quotes. Prior to selection of a contractor, reasonable efforts will be made to solicit proposals from three or more vendors. Justification of award shall be documented and become a public record of the city;

(2) If the contract amount exceeds $75,000, the city shall determine and use the best procurement method, pursuant to ORS 279.005 through 279.111, and shall solicit written proposals in accordance with the requirements of the model public contract rules (OAR Chapter 137, Division 030).

(B) The telecommunications solicitation authorized in subsection (A)(2) of this section shall:

(1) State the contractual requirements in the solicitation document;

(2) State the evaluation criteria to be applied in awarding the contract and the roles of any evaluation committee. Criteria that would be used to identify the proposal that best meets the city’s needs may include, but are not limited to, cost, quality, service and support, compatibility and interconnectivity with the state’s existing telecommunications systems, product or system reliability, vendor viability and financial stability, operating efficiency, and expansion potential;

(3) State the provisions made for bidders or proposers to comment on any specifications which they feel limit competition; and

(4) Be advertised in accordance with ORS 279.025 and OAR 137-030-0015. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.180 Telecommunications services.

(A) This section is intended to allow the city to secure the most competitive, cost-effective telecommunications services of the quality needed to meet all service performance requirements while minimizing administrative and service delivery costs.

(B) In determining the appropriate procurement method for telecommunications services, the city shall: (1) comply with the requirements of ORS 291.038; and (2) determine whether competition exists. In determining whether competition exists, the city may consider the following factors:

(1) The extent to which alternative providers exist in the relevant geographic and service market. The relevant market will vary with the geographic area and from service category to service category, depending upon changes in the regulatory environment and competitive marketplace. Thus, the relevant market will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. For example, an alternative local access service or private line provider might offer services in Portland, but not in Medford or the rest of the state;

(2) The extent to which alternative services offered are comparable or substitutable in technology, service provided, and performance; (For example, if the city requires digital services, analog services are not comparable or substitutable, or if the city requires fiber optic technology, then copper, microwave or satellite transmission technology may not be comparable or substitutable.)

(3) The extent to which alternative providers can respond to the city’s interests in consistency and continuity of services throughout its service area, volume discounts, equitable service for all users, centralized management, and limiting city liability. For example, to be considered as the state’s telephone long distance provider, any long distance service vendor must be able to meet, support and interface with the state’s centralized automated billing requirements. The city must document for the record its findings on these factors or any other factors used in determining whether competition exists. In developing its findings, the city may solicit the information either through informal telephone or written contacts, or through a formal request for information (RFI).

(C) Upon determining that competition does not exist for the relevant service and geographical area, the city may proceed to secure the service on a sole source basis, as described in OAR 125-300-0100, and follow all applicable rules and procedures. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.190 Hazardous material removal and oil cleanup.

(A) The city may enter into public contracts without competitive bidding, regardless of dollar amount, when ordered to clean up oil or hazardous waste pursuant to the authority granted the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) under ORS Chapter 466, especially ORS 466.605 through 466.680, and such DEQ order necessitates the prompt establishment and performance of the contract in order to comply with the statutes regarding spill or release of oil or hazardous material that has created an emergency condition. Comprehensive cleanup rules are set forth at OAR 340-122-205 to 340-122-360. In exercising its authority under this exemption, the city shall:

(1) To the extent reasonable under the circumstances, encourage competition by attempting to make informal solicitations or to obtain informal quotes from potential suppliers of goods or services;

(2) Make written findings describing the circumstances requiring cleanup or a copy of the DEQ order ordering such cleanup; and

(3) Record the measures taken under subsection (A)(1) of this section to encourage competition, the amount of the quotes or proposals obtained, if any, and the reason for selecting the contractor selected.

(B) The city shall not contract pursuant to this exemption in the absence of an order from the Department of Environmental Quality to clean up a site with a time limitation that would not permit hiring a contractor under the usual competitive bidding procedures. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


3.20.200 Insurance and employee benefits.

The city may purchase employee benefit insurance without competitive bidding, regardless of dollar amount. [Ord. 849 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2004.]


Chapter 3.25 IN-LIEU-OF FRANCHISE FEE

Sections:

3.25.010    In-lieu-of franchise fee.


3.25.010 In-lieu-of franchise fee.

Effective July 1, 2013, as compensation for the use of city-owned rights-of-way, the water, sewer, and storm drainage funds shall pay the general fund an in-lieu-of franchise fee. This fee shall be in an amount equal to five percent of the net revenue of the water, sewer, and storm drainage charges collected within the city after deductions have been made for any outstanding bonded debt service obligations. [Ord. 2013-002 § 1, 2013.]


Chapter 3.30 MARIJUANA SALES TAX

Sections:

3.30.010    Definitions.

3.30.020    Tax imposed.

3.30.030    Collection.

3.30.040    Interest and penalty.


3.30.010 Definitions. 

“Marijuana item” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.015(16).

“Marijuana retailer” means a person who holds a license under ORS 475B.110 and sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.

“Retail sale price” means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item. [Ord. 2016-010 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2019-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


3.30.020 Tax imposed.

As authorized by ORS 475B.345 and by Cornelius electors, the city of Cornelius hereby imposes a tax of three percent on the retail sale price of all marijuana items sold by a marijuana retailer in the city. [Ord. 2016-010 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2019-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


3.30.030 Collection.

The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items. Pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the city of Cornelius and the state of Oregon, acting by and through the Oregon Department of Revenue, marijuana retailers shall remit the taxes collected to the Oregon Department of Revenue in accordance with Oregon law and the administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. [Ord. 2016-010 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2019-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


3.30.040 Interest and penalty.

(A) Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

(B) If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400. 

(C) Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.

(D) Taxes, interest, and penalties transferred to the city of Cornelius by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the city’s general fund.

(E) If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.760, the intergovernmental agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and the city of Cornelius pursuant to ORS 305.620, and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. [Ord. 2019-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


Chapter 3.35 NONPROFIT CORPORATION LOW-INCOME HOUSING TAX EXEMPTIONS

Sections:

3.35.010    Definitions.

3.35.020    Nonprofit corporation low-income housing exemption – Criteria.

3.35.030    Application for exemption.

3.35.040    Determination of eligibility for exemption, notice to county assessor.

3.35.050    Termination of exemption.

3.35.060    Delegation of administrative authority.


3.35.010 Definitions.

(A) “Governing body” means the Cornelius city council.

(B) “Low income” means income at or below 60 percent of the area median income as determined by the State Housing Council based on information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. [Ord. 2015-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


3.35.020 Nonprofit corporation low-income housing exemption – Criteria.

(A) Property that meets all of the following criteria shall be exempt from taxation as provided in this section:

(1) The property is owned or being purchased by a corporation that is exempt from income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended before December 1, 1984.

(2) Upon liquidation, the assets of the corporation are required to be applied first in payment of all outstanding obligations, and the balance remaining, in cash and in kind, to be distributed to corporations exempt from taxation and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes or to the state of Oregon.

(3) The property is:

(a) Occupied by low-income persons; or

(b) Held for future development as low-income housing.

(4) The property or portion of the property receiving the exemption, if occupied, is actually and exclusively used for the purposes described in Section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended before December 1, 1984.

(5) The exemption has been approved as provided in CMC 3.35.040.

(B) For the purposes of subsection (A) of this section, a corporation that has only a leasehold interest in property is deemed to be a purchaser of that property if:

(1) The corporation is obligated under the terms of the lease to pay the ad valorem taxes on the real and personal property used in this activity on that property; or

(2) The rent payable by the corporation has been established to reflect the savings resulting from the exemption from taxation.

(C) A partnership shall be treated the same as a corporation to which this section applies if the corporation is:

(1) A general partner of the partnership; and

(2) Responsible for the day-to-day operation of the property that is the subject of the exemption. [Ord. 2015-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


3.35.030 Application for exemption.

(A) To qualify for the exemption provided by CMC 3.35.020, the corporation shall file an application for exemption with the city for each assessment year the corporation wants the exemption. The application shall be filed on or before March 1st of the assessment year for which the exemption is sought, except that when the property designated is acquired after March 1st and before July 1st, the application for that year shall be filed within 30 days after the date of acquisition. The application shall include the following information, as applicable:

(1) A description of the property for which the exemption is requested;

(2) A description of the charitable purpose of the project and whether all or a portion of the property is being used for that purpose;

(3) A certification of income levels of low-income occupants;

(4) A certification that all residents of the property for which exemption is requested are aged 55 and older;

(5) A description of how the tax exemption will benefit project residents;

(6) A description of the development of the property if the property is being held for future low-income housing development; and

(7) A declaration that the corporation has been granted an exemption from income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended before December 1, 1984.

(B) The applicant shall verify the information in the application by oath or affirmation.

(C) In addition to the application listed in subsection (A) of this section, the applicant will also need to enter into a payment-in-lieu-of-tax (PILOT) agreement with the city on terms to be mutually agreed upon by the city and the applicant. The city council will approve all PILOT agreements by separate resolution. [Ord. 2015-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


3.35.040 Determination of eligibility for exemption, notice to county assessor.

(A) Within 30 days of the filing of an application under CMC 3.35.030, the city shall determine whether the applicant qualifies for the exemption under CMC 3.35.020. If the governing body determines that the applicant qualifies, the city shall certify to the Washington County assessor that all or a portion of the property is exempt from taxation under the levy of the certifying governing body.

(B) Upon receipt of certification sent pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the Washington County assessor shall exempt the property from taxation to the extent certified by the city. [Ord. 2015-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


3.35.050 Termination of exemption.

(A) If the city determines that property that has received an exemption under this chapter in anticipation of future development of low-income housing in connection with the exempt property and finds that the property is being used for any purpose other than the provision of low-income housing, or that any provision of this chapter is not being complied with, the city shall give notice of the proposed termination of the exemption to the owner, by mailing the notice to the last-known address of the owner, and to every known lender, by mailing the notice to the last-known address of every known lender. The notice required under this subsection shall state the reasons for the proposed termination and shall require the owner to appear at a specified time, not less than 20 days after mailing the notice, to show cause, if any, why the exemption should not be terminated.

(B) If the owner fails to appear and show cause why the exemption should not be terminated, the governing body shall notify every known lender, and shall allow any lender not less than 30 days after the date the notice of the failure to appear and show cause is mailed to cure any noncompliance or to provide assurance adequate to the governing body that all noncompliance will be remedied.

(C) If the owner fails to appear and show cause why the exemption should not be terminated, and the lender fails to cure or give adequate assurance of the cure of any noncompliance, the city council shall adopt an ordinance or resolution stating its findings that terminate the exemption. A copy of the ordinance or resolution required under this subsection shall be filed within 10 days after its adoption with the county assessor, and a copy shall be sent to the owner at the owner’s last-known address and to the lender at the last-known address of the lender within 10 days after its adoption.

(D) Upon the county assessor’s receipt of the city’s termination findings:

(1) The exemption granted the housing unit or portion under this chapter terminates immediately, without right of notice or appeal;

(2) The property shall be assessed and taxed as other property similarly situated is assessed and taxed; and

(3) Notwithstanding ORS 311.235, there shall be added to the general property tax roll for the tax year next following the presentation or discovery, to be collected and distributed in the same manner as other real property tax, an amount equal to the difference between the taxes assessed against the property and the taxes that would have been assessed against the property had it not been exempt under this chapter for each of the years, not to exceed the last 10 years, during which the property was exempt from taxation under this chapter.

(E) The assessment and tax rolls shall show potential additional tax liability for each property granted exemption under this chapter because the property is being held for future development of low-income housing.

(F) Additional taxes collected under this section shall be deemed to have been imposed in the year to which the additional taxes relate. [Ord. 2015-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


3.35.060 Delegation of administrative authority.

The city council hereby delegates to the mayor or his/her designee all authority necessary to make all determinations and otherwise administer the provisions of this chapter, excepting determinations and actions required to be taken by the city council pursuant to CMC 3.35.050. [Ord. 2015-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Tax

5.10    Repealed

5.15    Liquor License Applications

5.20    Trailer Camps

5.25    Merchant Police

5.30    Garage Sales

5.35    Mobile Vendors

5.40    Taxicabs

5.45    Antique/Secondhand/Precious Metal and Gem Dealer

5.50    Repealed

5.60    Business Food Waste Requirement


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS TAX

Sections:

5.05.010    Purpose and scope.

5.05.020    Definitions.

5.05.030    Imposition of tax.

5.05.040    Multiple businesses or premises.

5.05.050    Basis and rate – Adjustments to rate.

5.05.060    Tax year and payment.

5.05.070    Delinquency charge.

5.05.080    Issuance and display of receipt.

5.05.090    Administration.

5.05.100    Remedies for nonpayment.

5.05.110    Temporary business license.


5.05.010 Purpose and scope.

The business tax imposed by this chapter is for revenue purposes only. The tax shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other license or permit fee, charge or tax required under any other city code provisions. This chapter shall not be construed to constitute a regulation of any business activity, or a permit to engage in any activity otherwise prohibited by law, or a waiver of any regulatory licensing requirement imposed by any other city code provisions. [Code 2000 § 9.005.]


5.05.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Apartment house” means a building, portion of a building, or group of buildings on a parcel of land within the city containing two or more dwelling units which are rented, leased, let or made available for compensation for sleeping or living purposes. A building containing two dwelling units shall not be deemed an “apartment house” within the provisions of this chapter if the owner of the building occupies one of the dwelling units. The term “apartment house” shall include a hotel or motel, automobile or tourist court, rooming or lodging house, and mobile home or trailer park. In the case of mobile homes or trailer parks, the term “dwelling unit” shall mean “space” or “stall.”

(B) “Business” means an enterprise, establishment, store, shop, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted, either directly or indirectly, for private profit or benefit. The term “business” shall include the ownership, management or operation of an apartment house.

(C) “Commercial building rental” means a building, portion of a building, or a group of buildings on a parcel of land within the city containing two or more businesses. A building or portion of a building containing two businesses shall not be considered a “commercial building rental” if the owner of the building conducts a business in a portion of such building.

(D) “Doing,” “engaging in,” or “transacting business” means any act or series of acts performed in the course of pursuit of a business activity.

(E) “Temporary business license” means a person, firm or corporation which intends to conduct or operate a business within the city for a period not to exceed 30 days in any one calendar year may apply for a temporary business license under the provisions of CMC 5.05.110. [Ord. 585 § 1, 1981; Code 2000 § 9.010.]


5.05.030 Imposition of tax.

(A) No person shall establish, maintain, operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any business within the city without first having paid the business tax as computed under CMC 5.05.050.

(B) It is the intention of this chapter to impose the business tax upon the owner, partner, or operator of the business and not upon a person whose income consists of a salary or wage paid to such person by the owner, partner, operator or employer. However, the employees, agents or representatives of a person who has no regular place of business within the city, but engages in business within the city, shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the businesses they represent with this chapter. [Code 2000 § 9.015.]


5.05.040 Multiple businesses or premises.

(A) If a person is engaged in doing business at more than one establishment, branch or location, each establishment, branch or location shall be considered a separate business subject to the business tax.

(B) If two or more related businesses are carried on in the same premises by the same person, it shall be sufficient if the business tax is paid in the name of the business to which the premises is primarily appropriated and based upon the total number of individuals on the whole premises; provided, however, that any business activity leased, under concession to, or owned wholly or in part by a different person or persons on the same premises shall be separately taxed. In determining whether different activities on the same premises are related to the primary use within the meaning of this subsection, normal and ordinary customs and usages of business shall be considered. [Code 2000 § 9.020.]


5.05.050 Basis and rate – Adjustments to rate.

(A) In addition to an $80.00 application fee and except as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the business tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid on the basis of the following schedule:

(1) Resident business tax: $35.00 for each business and an additional $5.00 thereafter for each person employed or otherwise working full-time at or for the business.

(2) Nonresident business tax: $50.00 for each business and an additional $5.00 thereafter for each person employed or otherwise working full-time at or for the business.

(3) Temporary business tax: $75.00 for each business without regard to the number of employees.

(4) Mobile home park residential and commercial building rentals: $50.00 plus $5.00 for each space, dwelling unit or separate rent or leased area.

(B) Determining Number of Employees.

(1) For purposes of this section, the phrase “each person employed or otherwise working full-time” means the average number of officers, proprietors, partners and associates engaged in the taxable business, as well as the business’ employee. The monthly average shall be computed from the 12-month period preceding the business tax year or such portion thereof as such business has existed. A business that has individuals employed on a part-time basis shall have its business tax computed by prorating the total number of part-time hours worked as a ratio of the regular work period for the particular business when figuring the monthly average. Fractional numbers of one-half percent or more shall be considered the next highest number.

(2) Persons employed or otherwise working full-time for a business subject to this business tax who work entirely outside the city are not to be counted.

(3) If a business has its principal place of business outside the city, only those persons actively engaged in doing business within the city shall be counted.

(4) A business beginning after the start of the “tax year” as that phrase is used in CMC 5.05.060 shall have its tax based on the number of persons estimated to be employed or otherwise working full-time for the business during the remaining portion of the tax year.

(C) The city council may adjust the rates imposed by its business tax at such times as it deems necessary and shall do so by resolution. [Ord. 803 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 9.025.]


5.05.060 Tax year and payment.

(A) The business tax year shall be January 1st to December 31st.

(B) The business tax shall be paid annually in advance of the business tax year. If a person, firm or corporation begins engaging in business after the beginning of the business year, the business tax shall be paid in advance on a prorated basis as of the beginning of the quarterly period during which such activity begins.

(C) The city manager may authorize payment of the business tax by a person liable therefor on a quarterly prorated basis. [Code 2000 § 9.030.]


5.05.070 Delinquency charge.

(A) Except for the payment of business tax as set forth in CMC 5.05.060, the business tax shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by July 1st of the applicable business tax year. If a person begins engaging in business after the start of the business tax year, the business tax shall be deemed delinquent if the tax is not paid within 30 days after commencement of the business activity.

(B) Whenever the business tax is not paid on or before the delinquency date, a delinquency charge equal to 20 percent of the original business tax due and payable shall be added for each 30-day period, or fraction thereof, during which the business tax and any accumulated delinquency charges remain unpaid. The total amount of the delinquency charge for any business tax year shall not exceed 100 percent of the business tax due and payable for that year.

(C) The date that the business tax is received by the city or the date of the postmark if remittance is made by mail shall be used in determining when the business tax is paid. [Code 2000 § 9.035.]


5.05.080 Issuance and display of receipt.

Upon payment of the business tax, a person shall be issued a receipt by the city for the payment. The receipt shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the business premises at all times. If there is no regular place of business within the city, the receipt shall be in the possession of a representative of the business present within the city at all times during which business is being transacted by any employee, agent or representative within the city. [Code 2000 § 9.040.]


5.05.090 Administration.

(A) The city manager shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. He or she may:

(1) Adopt reasonable rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration of this chapter.

(2) Prepare, adopt and make available to the taxpayer all forms necessary for compliance with this chapter.

(3) Examine the books, papers and records of any person subject to the tax at any reasonable time for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter.

(B) No person shall:

(1) Violate or fail to comply with any rule or regulation adopted by the city manager;

(2) Refuse or hinder the examination of books, papers and records; or

(3) Willfully make any false or misleading statement to the city manager regarding the computation of the amount of business tax due and payable under this chapter.

(C) The city manager shall keep all information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter in strict confidence. Such information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to the persons charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. [Code 2000 § 9.045.]


5.05.100 Remedies for nonpayment.

(A) The amount of any unpaid business tax, including delinquency charges, shall constitute a debt due the city. The city attorney may collect the amount due by the appropriate means, including the institution of an action in the name of the city against the person liable therefor in any court of competent jurisdiction.

(B) No civil judgment or action taken by the city attorney under this section shall bar or prevent any prosecution in the municipal court for a violation of this chapter. [Code 2000 § 9.050.]


5.05.110 Temporary business license.

A person, firm or corporation may obtain a temporary business license to operate or conduct a business within the city for a period of 10 calendar days, subject to the following conditions:

(A) Any person, firm or corporation seeking a temporary business license shall apply for such a license on a form or forms to be provided by the city recorder. The application shall be filed in the office of the city recorder, together with an application fee of $20.00. The temporary business license may be extended for two additional 10-day periods. The application to extend the temporary business license shall be filed in the office of the city recorder, together with an application fee of $20.00 for each extension period requested. In no event shall a temporary business license be issued to a person, firm or corporation or their successor in interest or assigns for a period exceeding 30 days in any calendar year. Filing an application for a temporary business license or an extension thereof shall constitute the consent of the applicant to the investigation of the applicant by and through the department of police and any federal, state or local police agency with which the department of police shall cooperate. The department of police investigation shall be conducted to determine the existence of good moral character of the applicant. Among other things, the application form shall require the applicant to identify and describe the real property and location upon which the business shall be conducted, and the applicant shall submit with the application form a written statement from the owner of the property so identified evidencing the owner’s consent to the applicant’s conducting business upon the described real property for the period requested.

(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any nonprofit firm, individual or corporation of which is authorized to do business by the Department of Commerce, State of Oregon. [Ord. 585 § 2, 1981; Code 2000 § 9.051.]


Chapter 5.10 SOLICITORS

(Repealed by Ord. 904)


Chapter 5.15 LIQUOR LICENSE APPLICATIONS

Sections:

5.15.010    License application.

5.15.020    City manager’s duties.

5.15.030    Hearing procedure.

5.15.040    Applicant notice.

5.15.050    Public notice.

5.15.060    Action by council.


5.15.010 License application.

Any person or business requesting the recommendation of the city council to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) upon a liquor license application shall make application upon suitable forms furnished by the city and/or the Commission. The application shall contain:

(A) The type of license applied for and a description of the nature of the business for which the application is made.

(B) The name and address of the applicant(s); if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the business is a corporation, the name and address of the home office and the name and address of the registered agent in this state and the name and address of the local agent or representative who will be in charge of the business in the city.

(C) Name and address of all businesses and locations for which applicant ever possessed a license to sell alcoholic beverages, both in Oregon and elsewhere.

(D) The address of the location where the business will be located in the city.

(E) The date of application.

(F) Any other information the city manager or council deems necessary for review.

(G) The signature of the applicant or agent making the application.

(H) The applicant shall be required to pay prior to processing the application the fee established by the council as provided by applicable resolution. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 9.205.]


5.15.020 City manager’s duties.

(A) The city manager shall provide application forms and shall maintain a record of all applications. The city manager may cause any application to be reviewed by the chief of police, community services director, fire chief or any other department manager at his or her discretion for the purpose of obtaining information necessary to make a recommendation to the council. The applicant shall promptly supply to the city manager such other or additional information as the city manager may deem necessary to review the application.

(B) The city manager may waive any of the provisions of this chapter, other than city council review, for any retail outlet establishing new facilities and/or annual renewal, when the outlet does not permit consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises, but serves only as a retail package store/outlet. In such a case, the recommendation of the manager may be placed on the city council consent agenda, from which it may be removed for discussion upon the request of any member of the council. Upon completion of the review, the city manager shall make a recommendation to the council. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 9.206.]


5.15.030 Hearing procedure.

(A) If the city manager recommends approval of an application, the matter will be scheduled as an agenda item before the city council. Any member of the council or any person determined by the council to be affected may request a public hearing before the city council prior to approval of an application. Such public hearing will be scheduled and notice given pursuant to CMC 5.15.040 and 5.15.050.

(B) The city, the applicant, and any interested parties shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses. The mayor and council members may ask questions of any witness.

(C) The city, the applicant, or any other affected party may be represented by legal counsel at their own expense.

(D) After due consideration of the evidence and testimony presented to it, the city council shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial evidence relative to the criteria in this chapter and shall be final. In the case of an adverse recommendation, findings shall be produced and forwarded to the OLCC along with the council recommendation. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 9.207.]


5.15.040 Applicant notice.

Before the city manager forwards a recommendation of denial to the city council, notice to the applicant shall be given either personally or by registered or certified mail. The notice shall:

(A) State the time and place of the meeting.

(B) Afford the opportunity for the applicant or an affected party to request a public hearing.

(C) State the city manager’s reasons for the recommendation of denial.

(D) State that if the applicant desires a public hearing, the city manager must receive notice, in writing, within seven days of the date of notice of recommendation for denial. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 9.208.]


5.15.050 Public notice.

(A) Not less than seven calendar days prior to the city manager’s action upon a liquor license application, the city shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice specifying all liquor license applications by business name and address pending before the city manager.

(B) In the event that a public hearing before the city council is scheduled, the city shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice specifying a time, date and location of the hearing and the business name and address of the applicant. The notice shall be published not less than seven calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice shall inform the public that testimony may be given for or against the application. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 9.209.]


5.15.060 Action by council.

The council shall recommend to the Commission on each liquor license application either approval, denial or modification in particulars stated. In making such determination the council may consider among other factors the following:

(A) The completeness and accuracy of the application.

(B) The timeliness and responsiveness of the applicant in supplying information requested by the city manager or council.

(C) The frequency of persons under 21 years of age, unaccompanied by adults, in the area of the applicant’s premises.

(D) Compliance with all statutes and ordinances related to the control and use of alcoholic beverages and controlled substances.

(E) The criminal record and moral character of the applicants and the agents and employees of the applicant.

(F) The maintenance of the applicant’s former or existing licensed premises including, but not limited to, noise, sanitation, cleanliness, orderliness, law enforcement incident experience and compliance with applicable nuisance laws and other ordinances and regulations.

(G) The relative condition of the premises with respect to sanitation and cleanliness.

(H) The anticipated demands on city services to include law enforcement.

(I) The number and sufficiency of licensed premises in the locality set out in the application. (If a reduction in dispenser licenses is warranted, the council may make a decision based on reasonable comparisons of services, facilities and economic benefit to the area, as well as convenience and public interest.)

(J) Conformance to city ordinances or regulations pertaining to zoning, building and fire codes.

(K) Any other factors, which in the opinion of the council, have bearing on the public health, safety, welfare, convenience or necessity, of the city and/or its citizens. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 9.210.]


Chapter 5.20 TRAILER CAMPS

Sections:

5.20.010    Trailer coach parking permits.


5.20.010 Trailer coach parking permits.

It shall be unlawful to park or place any trailer coach occupied for living or sleeping purposes within the city for any time exceeding three hours, except in a trailer park. A trailer coach used for sleeping or living purposes may be parked in the city outside of a trailer park for a period not to exceed 15 days upon obtaining a permit from the city recorder. A permit shall not be issued unless the trailer complies with all sanitary, fire and zoning regulations of the city and the state. The fee for the permit shall be $1.00. [Code 2000 § 9.255.]


Chapter 5.25 MERCHANT POLICE

Sections:

5.25.010    Definition.

5.25.020    Compliance with code and licenses required.

5.25.030    Application for license.

5.25.040    Investigation of applicant by city manager – Report to council.

5.25.050    Issuance of license.

5.25.060    License fee.

5.25.070    Surety bond.

5.25.080    Revocation of license.

5.25.090    Periodic investigations by the city manager.

5.25.100    Rules and regulations.

5.25.110    Persons employed to watch by one employer.

5.25.120    Uniforms, badges, buttons, etc.


5.25.010 Definition.

For purpose of this chapter, “merchant police” means any person engaged in the business of watching, guarding or protecting any premises, property or persons. The term does not include any individual who has only one employer and who is employed to watch, guard or protect only the premises, property or person of that employer, any common carrier engaged in interstate commerce, or any individual employed by the carrier to watch, guard or protect premises, property or persons for such carriers. [Code 2000 § 9.305.]


5.25.020 Compliance with code and licenses required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a merchant police business, or engage in business as a merchant policeman, except as provided in and authorized by this chapter and without first having obtained a license from the city. [Code 2000 § 9.310.]


5.25.030 Application for license.

Before any license is issued under this chapter, the applicant shall submit to the city recorder a written application for the license. The application shall include the following information:

(A) An affidavit signed and sworn to before a notary public, setting out the full name, age, residence, present occupation and occupations for the preceding five years of the applicant shall be submitted by any such person proposing to engage in the business of merchant policeman. The affidavit shall be referred to the city manager for investigation and shall show facts sufficient to prove to the satisfaction of the city manager the good character, competency and integrity of each such applicant and shall list any previous arrests or convictions of a crime.

(B) Each applicant shall be supported by statements in writing from not less than three reputable citizens, each of whom shall certify that he has personally known the applicant for a period of at least five years prior to the filing of such affidavit, and that he believes the applicant is competent, honest and of good character, and that he would recommend to the council that the applicant is suitable to engage in a merchant police business. [Code 2000 § 9.315.]


5.25.040 Investigation of applicant by city manager – Report to council.

If the city manager finds after investigation that the character, competency and integrity of the applicant are such as to command the confidence of the public and that all other requirements have been met, he shall submit a written report to the council and recommend that the license be issued or denied. [Code 2000 § 9.320.]


5.25.050 Issuance of license.

The license shall be issued by the council through the city recorder, who shall only issue the license upon motion made and passed by the council. If the council authorizes and directs the issuing of the license, the applicant shall pay to the city recorder the annual license fee required by CMC 5.25.060. [Code 2000 § 9.325.]


5.25.060 License fee.

The annual license fees for merchant police businesses and those in business as merchant policemen shall be $25.00. [Code 2000 § 9.330.]


5.25.070 Surety bond.

Every applicant for a license shall, before receiving the license, furnish a surety bond in the sum of $1,000, conditioned on the faithful performance and honest conduct of himself and his employees who will be engaged in watching, guarding or protecting the undertakings of the person licensed under this chapter. The bond shall be payable to the city or to any other affected person, business or corporation and shall guarantee the payment of any judgment secured against such licensee for his negligence, default or breach of conduct in the performance of his duties authorized by the license, up to the sum of $1,000. [Code 2000 § 9.335.]


5.25.080 Revocation of license.

If at any time the activities of the licensee or employees are such that the best interests of the city are not fully protected, then, upon recommendation of the city manager, the council may revoke the license granted under this chapter. [Code 2000 § 9.340.]


5.25.090 Periodic investigations by the city manager.

It shall be the duty of the city manager to make periodic investigations of the activities of any licensee and to ascertain any and all information which may be of benefit to the council in determining whether or not such license should be continued in force and effect. [Code 2000 § 9.345.]


5.25.100 Rules and regulations.

The council may issue and promulgate from time to time rules and regulations to protect the health, safety and peace of the citizens of the city in relation to the merchant police business. Such rules may require reports to be furnished to the city manager concerning the licensee and those employed by the licensee. [Code 2000 § 9.350.]


5.25.110 Persons employed to watch by one employer.

Any individual who has only one employer and who is employed to watch, guard or protect the premises, property or person of that employer shall register with the city manager and carry identification furnished by the city manager while on duty. The city shall require a reasonable deposit on all identification and badges furnished such registrants. [Code 2000 § 9.355.]


5.25.120 Uniforms, badges, buttons, etc.

It shall be unlawful for any merchant policeman, guard or other licensee regulated by this chapter and not a member of the police or fire department to wear a uniform, cap, badge or buttons similar to or in imitation of the official uniform, cap, badge or buttons at the time in use by the members of the police and fire department. Any person desiring to provide merchant police, watchmen guards or other licensees regulated by this chapter with distinctive uniform, cap, badge or buttons, to be worn by such persons or employees thereof, shall not do so until the form, design and color thereof has been submitted to and approved by the city manager. [Code 2000 § 9.360.]


Chapter 5.30 GARAGE SALES

Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Permitted activity.


5.30.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Domestic uses and purposes” means any use or purpose other than a business, commercial or industrial use or purpose.

(B) “Garage sale” means all sales or offers for sale of goods and articles from and at a residence, unless the residence is located within a zone classification of the zoning ordinance which authorizes the sale of such goods and articles.

(C) “Goods and articles” means any things of value which have been owned and used for domestic uses and purposes for a continuous period of not less than six months in, at or upon the designated location of the garage sale. [Code 2000 § 9.405.]


5.30.020 Permitted activity.

No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, authorize or permit another person, firm or corporation to conduct or authorize more than two garage sales in any 12-month period. No garage sale shall be conducted for more than 72 consecutive hours. [Ord. 600 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.410.]


Chapter 5.35 MOBILE VENDORS

Sections:

5.35.010    Definitions.

5.35.020    Permit required.

5.35.030    Permit application and fee.

5.35.040    Mobile vendor regulations.

5.35.050    Permit display.

5.35.060    Permit and fee exemptions.

5.35.070    Application for mobile vendor permits.

5.35.080    Additional requirements for mobile businesses.

5.35.090    Revocation of permits.


5.35.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“Mobile business” or “mobile vendor” means a vendor that sells or attempts to sell any commodity or thing of value from a vehicle, push cart, wheeled cart, or other mobile equipment or implement on a transient basis at one or more locations within the city.

“Mobile food pod” means a site containing two or more food carts and associated amenities on private property.

“Type ‘A’ mobile vendor” means a mobile vendor that sells goods from a vehicle in the public right-of-way and periodically stops outside of the flow of traffic on an as-needed basis to respond to immediate demand for goods. An example of this type of mobile vendor would be an ice cream truck.

“Type ‘B’ mobile vendor” means a mobile vendor that sells goods or services from a custom-constructed vehicle, cart or other moveable equipment on property outside the public right-of-way. This type of vendor may be located on a single property throughout the day or may move from one approved property to another for fixed periods during the day. An example of this type of vendor would be a food truck or hot dog cart.

“Vending” means selling or attempting to sell any commodity or thing of value:

(1) By the use of amplified or unamplified advertisement of the commodity; or

(2) From a vehicle, shed, structure, or shelter, whether enclosed or unenclosed.

“Vendor” means any person, firm or corporation except a nonprofit corporation, charitable or religious organization, or an employee, agent or representative of a governmental agency, who is vending. [Code 2000 § 9.505; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


5.35.020 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell or attempt to sell any commodity or thing of value by means of vending such commodity or thing upon any property within the city without first obtaining a business license from the office of the city recorder in accordance with the requirements of CMC 5.35.030. [Code 2000 § 9.510; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


5.35.030 Permit application and fee.

Any person, firm or corporation desiring to sell or attempting to sell any commodity or thing of value by means of vending such commodity or thing from a mobile vehicle, implement, or equipment upon any property within the city shall make application for a permit to do so at the office of the city recorder on a form provided by the city recorder. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, prorated to correspond with the proportion of the year remaining, which shall be the total permit fee until December 31st next following the date of issuance of the permit. Permits may be renewed on an annual basis by the community development director upon application and payment of an annual permit renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. [Code 2000 § 9.515; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


5.35.040 Mobile vendor regulations.

(A) Except as otherwise provided herein, or as specifically exempted under any other ordinance, or specifically exempted by state law, a person operating a mobile business in the city must obtain a business license and pay the related fees under Chapter 5.05 CMC.

(B) Except as otherwise provided herein and in addition to obtaining a business license, a person operating mobile business must obtain a mobile vendor permit and pay the related, nonrefundable fees.

(C) Applications for a mobile vendor permit must be on a form provided by the city and include all of the information required under CMC 5.35.070.

(D) Incomplete applications or applications submitted without the required fee will be denied outright.

(E) Applications are subject to approval by the community development director. Approval or denial of a mobile vendor permit will be provided to applicant within 10 business days from receipt of a complete application.

(F) Type “B” mobile vendors may be permitted in the following zones:

(1) Highway commercial (C-2).

(2) Central mixed use (CMU).

(3) Light industrial (LI).

(4) General industrial (M-1).

(5) Corridor commercial (CC).

(6) Gateway mixed use (GMU).

Type “A” mobile vendors may be permitted in all zones within the city of Cornelius.

(G) The operator of a Type “B” mobile business must provide written permission from the owner, leasing agent, or person in charge of any and all property(ies) at which the business will operate.

(H) Any vehicle used in the operation of a mobile business must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.

(I) At no time may a mobile business or its equipment block the flow of traffic in a public right-of-way, a vision clearance area, fire lane, emergency access lane, or handicapped parking or access area.

(J) A Type “B” mobile business may not operate within 300 feet and on the same block face of a retail outlet offering the same or similar commodity, without written permission from the owner of said establishment.

(K) If a mobile business uses electricity for operation, the electrical connection must be of a type which can be quickly disconnected and must comply with all applicable laws, including National Electrical Code Chapter 550.

(L) A mobile business must at all times contain solid waste from its operations in an approved on-site solid waste container. Failure to properly contain solid waste and/or clean up waste generated from its operations shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(M) A mobile business operation may not occupy or block the minimum parking spaces required under the Cornelius Municipal Code for existing businesses or residences on the subject property or adjacent properties.

(N) Wastewater shall be collected, stored, and disposed of in an approved manner.

(O) No direct water, sanitary sewer, or storm drainage connections are allowed between a mobile business and any utility systems, except in the case of mobile food pods, as defined in CMC 5.35.010.

(P) Mobile food pods shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system, including an approved grease separator.

(Q) Mobile food pods shall be connected to a permanent city water source.

(R) Mobile food pods shall provide one off-street parking space per mobile food vendor located within the pod; this requirement shall not apply within the central mixed use and corridor commercial zoning districts.

(S) Mobile food pods shall provide permanent restrooms and hand washing facilities for customers and employees.

(T) All vehicles, equipment, parking, and customer seating areas associated with a mobile business must be located on an improved surface, such as asphalt, concrete, or gravel.

(U) Mobile businesses may only conduct business during the following hours:

(1) Eight a.m. to midnight in commercial or industrial zones except within 50 feet of a residential zone; and

(2) Eight a.m. to 9:00 p.m. in commercial or industrial zones within 50 feet of a residential zone, or within a residential zone (Type “A” mobile vendors only). [Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


5.35.050 Permit display.

(A) The operator of a mobile business must continuously post during the hours of operation, in a conspicuous place at the business, their business license and any mobile vendor permits issued.

(B) A mobile business operator must retain and be able to immediately provide upon request any other required approvals or permits from the city fire department and county department of health and human services. [Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


5.35.060 Permit and fee exemptions.

The following businesses are exempt from payment of a mobile vendor permit fee:

(A) Religious, educational, and charitable organizations specifically exempt from taxation under Oregon or federal law; and

(B) Producers of fruits, vegetables, nuts, and other raw food products raised in Oregon that are sold in the city by themselves or their immediate families. [Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


5.35.070 Application for mobile vendor permits.

(A) An application for a mobile vendor permit shall be submitted on a form provided by the city recorder and must include the following information:

(1) A written description of goods to be sold, hours of operation, number of employees, and any appurtenances to the business that will be located on the site(s);

(2) Tax assessor’s map and tax lot numbers for the site(s) proposed;

(3) Names and locations of adjacent streets;

(4) Addresses and location of any permanent buildings on the site(s);

(5) Locations of all driveways on the site(s) and adjacent properties;

(6) Location of all drive aisles and fire lanes on the site(s);

(7) Diagram of on-site parking lot and parking space configuration (i.e., right-angle vs. angled, single-loaded vs. double-loaded);

(8) Proposed location of the business vehicle on the site(s);

(9) Dimensions from proposed mobile business operations to all permanent buildings, drive aisles, and driveways;

(10) Location of any temporary electrical hookups;

(11) Location of any furniture, solid waste containers, and similar fixtures to be placed in the immediate vicinity of the mobile business; and

(12) Documentation demonstrating compliance with minimum parking requirements.

(B) In addition, the following materials must be submitted with the mobile vendor permit application:

(1) Written permission from the owner, leasing agent, or person in charge of the property at which the business will operate.

(2) A copy of the applicant’s current business license.

(3) A copy of the applicant’s current food handler certificate (if applicable).

(4) A copy of the applicant’s current certificate of insurance.

(C) Mobile food pods shall be permitted through a Type III design review procedure. [Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


5.35.080 Additional requirements for mobile businesses.

(A) All temporary buildings, equipment, furniture, wastebaskets, and other stand-alone items must be placed in the immediate vicinity of the mobile business and must be removed from the site upon cessation of business operations on a daily basis.

(B) A mobile vendor may advertise their business with signage affixed to the mobile vending vehicle or equipment. The mobile vendor may also place one temporary sandwich board type sign not to exceed six square feet on any one face. The sandwich board sign may be located:

(1) On the same site as the mobile vending unit;

(2) On another privately owned site within the city with written approval of the owner, leasing agent, or person in charge of the property at which the sign will be located; or

(3) On a public sidewalk, where the placement of the sign leaves no less than five feet of unimpeded pedestrian walkway. 

(C) Signage not affixed to a mobile vending unit must be removed from its placement location upon cessation of business operations on a daily basis.

(D) Fuel Cylinders.

(1) All equipment used in the fuel system shall be approved for LPG use.

(2) Shall be limited to enough propane to last for one day’s usage.

(3) Food vending trailers shall be limited to a two-week supply – two 25-gallon cylinders maximum.

(4) Shall be protected from physical damage.

(5) Cylinders larger than five gallons shall be secured to prevent falling or being knocked over.

(6) If in a pushcart or mobile stand, the tank shall be outside of the cart in a vented compartment.

(7) Propane valves shall be easily accessible.

(8) Shall be used as designed (e.g., cylinders designed for vertical use shall not be laid down when being used).

(9) Located far enough from flame or spark-producing devices to not heat the cylinders.

(10) Hoses shall be protected from physical damage. Hose connections shall be of an approved LPG type.

(11) No Teflon tape on any connections. Connections are designed to have metal-to-metal contact.

(12) Regulator to be on each cylinder. Can manifold two cylinders together into one regulator. Hose from regulator not to be more than two feet.

(13) No splices in supply lines.

(14) No more than enough supply hose to run from appliance to cylinders.

(15) Only approved propane clamps are to be used on supply lines (no aviation clamps, etc.).

(16) Propane cylinders shall not be stored or used in buildings or enclosed structures.

(17) All cylinders shall have collars around the valves and shall be in good condition with current hydrostatic test date stamp on cylinder.

(18) Propane cylinders are not to be tied/placed together with carbon dioxide (CO2) cylinders.

(19) Food booths located in their own separate tent structures may have propane bottles inside their tent structure; provided, that the side and back walls of the tent structure are raised six feet off of the floor or ground, whichever is higher.

(20) All cylinders shall be equipped with an overfilling prevention device (OPD). Old tanks without this device will not be allowed.



(E) Appliances and Devices.

(1) Each appliance is required to have one 2A-10BC or higher-rated fire extinguisher. If cooking utilizes a deep fat fryer, the vendor is required to have one K-Class fire extinguisher. All fire extinguishers are to bear a current servicing tag that is current within one year from certified fire extinguisher company.

(2) Appliances and devices shall be approved for LPG use.

(3) There shall be at least a one-foot clearance between appliances and combustibles.

(4) Any LPG burning appliances or device, whose flame is not visible while operating, shall be equipped with approved automatic devices to shut off the flow of gas to burners and pilots in the event of flame extinguishments or combustion failure.

(5) Fuel supply to appliances shall be turned off at the cylinder when the appliance is not in use or during the changing of cylinders. [Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


5.35.090 Revocation of permits.

(A) Grounds. A mobile vendor permit may be revoked if the operator:

(1) Is charged with and fails to contest, or is conclusively determined to be in violation of, two or more provisions of this chapter in a 12-month period; or

(2) Operates the business in a way that creates a nuisance.

(B) Notification.

(1) If the city determines that grounds for revocation of a mobile vendor permit exist, a notice of revocation will be issued in writing and delivered to the permittee in a manner reasonably calculated to give notice, including delivery by United States first-class mail, postage prepaid.

(2) The revocation is effective 14 calendar days after issuance of the notice unless the permittee files a written appeal with the city or upon failure to appear at the hearing should an appeal be filed.

(C) Appeal.

(1) An appeal is initiated by the filing of a written appeal with the community development director no later than 21 calendar days after issuance of the notice of revocation.

(2) Upon filing of an appeal, the community development director will include the appeal notice in the next available planning commission agenda.

(3) The appealing party or any other person the planning commission deems has relevant evidence concerning the existence of grounds for revocation will be allowed to present testimony and documentary evidence at the hearing.

(4) After consideration of the arguments and evidence, the planning commission will determine whether the city has established by a preponderance of the evidence that grounds for revocation exist and issue a written decision containing findings of fact that address the allegations contained in the notice of revocation such that if:

(a) Grounds for revocation have been established, the planning commission will revoke the mobile vendor permit; or

(b) Grounds for revocation have not been established, the proceedings will end.

(D) Review. Review of a planning commission decision will be by the city council.

(1) A review of a planning commission decision is initiated by the filing of a written request for review with the community development director no later than 14 calendar days after issuance of the planning commission’s decision.

(2) The city council will affirm the decision of the planning commission unless it finds that there was no substantial evidence to support the findings of fact made by the planning commission or that the planning commission made an error of law.

(3) The city council will issue a written decision on the appeal.

(4) If the city council affirms the decision of the planning commission, the permit revocation is immediately effective.

(5) The decision of the city council is conclusive and final. 

(E) Revocation of a mobile vendor permit is in addition to any other remedy that the city might have under the law.

(F) Revocation of a mobile permit bars the permittee from obtaining a mobile vendor permit from the city for one year after the effective date of revocation. [Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 5.40 TAXICABS

Sections:

5.40.010    Definitions.

5.40.020    License required.

5.40.030    License cancellation.

5.40.040    Repealed.

5.40.050    Application for license.

5.40.060    Reciprocity of licenses from other cities.

5.40.070    Issuance of license.

5.40.080    Display of license.

5.40.090    Rates.

5.40.100    Repealed.

5.40.110    Operator regulations.

5.40.120    Passenger compliance with rates.

5.40.130    Cancellation of license.

5.40.140    Assignability.

5.40.150    Telephone listing.


5.40.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Motor vehicle” means every self-propelled vehicle by or upon which any person may be transported or carried upon any public highway, street or alley, excepting vehicles used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

(B) “Taxicab” means every motor vehicle having a seating capacity of five passengers or less as per manufacturer’s ratings used for the transportation of passengers for hire and not operating exclusively over a fixed and definite route. [Code 2000 § 9.605.]


5.40.020 License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a taxicab within the city without first securing a license therefor under the provisions of this chapter. Taxicab service which originates outside the corporate boundaries of the city and is limited to the delivery of a passenger or passengers within the corporate boundaries of the city is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. [Code 2000 § 9.610.]


5.40.030 License cancellation.

Any license issued under this chapter may be cancelled by the council for any violation of the terms thereof or violation of the traffic laws of the city or the state, or the violation of any other state laws. This provision shall apply equally to the drivers of taxicabs and to the companies operating the same. [Code 2000 § 9.615.]


5.40.040 Repealed.

(Repealed by Ord. 660.) [Code 2000 § 9.620.]


5.40.050 Application for license.

(A) Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate taxicabs within the city shall file with the recorder an application setting forth the following information:

(1) The name and address of the applicant.

(2) The number of licenses applied for and the make, serial number, motor number, latest Oregon license number and the P.U.C. numbers, if any, on each vehicle that the applicant is going to use for each license.

(3) The amount and name of the company or companies in which the applicant’s public liability and property damage insurance is carried together with a certificate of insurance evidencing that the insurance coverages are in force.

(B) Any person holding a license to operate taxicabs within the city shall file with the city recorder the following, which shall be maintained on a current status as a provision of the license:

(1) The license number of vehicles so used, along with the serial number and/or motor number, make and model of the vehicle.

(2) The name, age and chauffeur’s license number of each operator or driver.

(3) The amount and name of the company in which public liability and property damage insurance is carried, together with proof that the policy or policies are in full force and effect. [Ord. 660 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 9.625.]


5.40.060 Reciprocity of licenses from other cities.

If the applicant possesses a valid license issued by another city in Washington County to operate a taxicab in any such city, the city recorder may issue a license to operate a taxicab within the city of Cornelius without further review; providing however, the information required in CMC 5.40.050(B) shall be submitted and maintained as a condition of the license. [Ord. 660 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 9.626.]


5.40.070 Issuance of license.

Upon receipt of the application, the recorder shall determine if the license applied for satisfies the requirements of this chapter. If the recorder finds that the application satisfies said requirements, then the recorder may issue the license to the applicant. [Ord. 660 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 9.630.]


5.40.080 Display of license.

Upon the granting of the license, there shall be typed or printed thereon the number of the license, the period for which the license is valid, the name of the licensee, and the make of the vehicle for which the license is issued. The license shall be on display in the vehicle at all times. [Ord. 660 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 9.635.]


5.40.090 Rates.

No rates shall at any time be charged or collected for taxicab service, either directly or indirectly, which have not been authorized by the council by resolution. All fares shall be computed by the most direct route between the point of origin and destination. [Ord. 660 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 9.640.]


5.40.100 Repealed.

(Repealed by Ord. 660.) [Code 2000 § 9.645.]


5.40.110 Operator regulations.

The holder of each license shall employ competent drivers over 21 years of age who shall be holders of a chauffeur’s license under the laws of the state. Operators and drivers shall conduct themselves toward their passengers in a courteous manner, shall not drive or operate their cabs in a reckless manner, shall at all times keep their cabs clean and suitable for occupancy by the travelling public. Any violation of this section by the driver shall be grounds for the revocation of the license or franchise. The holder of the license shall keep a record at all times of the driver on duty and operating his cab at any hour, which record shall be open to inspection by the city authorities in order that it may be determined who was operating a taxicab at any particular time or occasion.

Any operator driving a cab while under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall be cause for the taxicab license being immediately revoked. [Code 2000 § 9.650.]


5.40.120 Passenger compliance with rates.

It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay the rates authorized by resolution of the council after having hired the taxicab. [Ord. 660 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 9.655.]


5.40.130 Cancellation of license.

Whenever a violation of the terms of this chapter is reported to the city manager, an investigation shall at once be made as to the truth of the allegations. If the holder of the license or any employee is found by the council to have violated any of the terms hereof, the city recorder may cancel the license. [Code 2000 § 9.660.]


5.40.140 Assignability.

Any license issued hereunder shall not be assignable by the owner thereof to any other person, firm or corporation without the approval of the council by resolution. [Code 2000 § 9.665.]


5.40.150 Telephone listing.

The licensee shall obtain and maintain a telephone listing during the term of the license, which listing plainly identifies the name of the licensee’s business, address, and a local, toll-free telephone number. [Code 2000 § 9.670.]


Chapter 5.45 ANTIQUE/SECONDHAND/PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALER

Sections:

5.45.010    Titles and purpose.

5.45.020    Definitions.

5.45.030    License.

5.45.040    Dealer register.

5.45.050    Dealer report and holding of article.

5.45.060    Severability.

5.45.070    Emergency.


5.45.010 Titles and purpose.

This chapter shall be known as the “Antique/Secondhand/Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Ordinance.” The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and regulating of certain business activities that the city council finds present an extraordinary risk of being used as a means of concealing criminal behavior involving the theft of personal property. This risk is present despite the best efforts of legitimate antique, secondhand and precious metal and gem dealers. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.700.]


5.45.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter unless the context requires otherwise:

(A) “Antique” means any item of property that is possessed or valued because of its character, craft, style, rarity and association with an earlier period of time that is purchased for more than $50.00 by an antique dealer. As herein defined, “antique” does not include vehicles and components.

(B) “Antique dealer” means any person engaged in, conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of purchasing antiques from any person not representing a bona fide business, who appears with such article at the dealer’s place of business.

(C) “Article” means antique, secondhand and precious metal and gem as defined by this section.

(D) “Council” means the city council of the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(E) “Bona fide business” means an enterprise operated for the purpose of producing a profit or for charity that has a legal identity as a business, and that applies state and federal business income tax regulations to its income and expenses.

(F) “License” means the license issued to secondhand dealers, antique dealers and precious metal and gem dealers, pursuant to this chapter.

(G) “Person” means any real person, partnership, association or corporation.

(H) “Precious metal and gem” means any metal or gem that is valued for its character, rarity, beauty or quality, including gold, silver, platinum, diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires and pearls, and any other gems, whether as a separate item or in combination as a piece of jewelry, but excluding the following items: (1) gold bullion bars (0.995 fine or better); (2) silver bullion bars (0.995 fine or better); and (3) all coins, whether actual currency or commemorative, from all countries.

(I) “Precious metal and gem dealer” means any person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of purchasing precious metals and gems from any person not representing a bona fide business, who appears with such article at the dealer’s place of business.

(J) “Purchase” means to transfer an article from a person, not representing a bona fide business, to any dealer regulated by this chapter, for any valuable consideration. Purchase does not include consignment of property for sale.

(K) “Secondhand articles” means the following used personal property: (1) televisions; (2) hi-fis, stereos, radios, tapes, recorders/players; (3) amplifiers, video recording equipment and accessories; (4) cameras, projectors and accessories; (5) tools; (6) office equipment including typewriters, calculators, recorders, transcribers and computers; (7) guns and equipment; (8) sewing machines; (9) jewelry; (10) clocks and watches; (11) silverware; (12) air conditioners; (13) electronic testing, regulating and repair equipment; (14) citizen’s band and walkie-talkie equipment; (15) microwave ovens; (16) telephones; (17) machinery; and (18) farm implements.

(L) “Secondhand dealer” means any person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand articles from any person not representing a bona fide business, who appears with such article at the dealer’s place of business.

(M) “Chief of police” means the chief of police for Cornelius, Oregon. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.701.]


5.45.030 License.

(A) It shall be unlawful to operate as an antique, secondhand or precious metal and gem dealer in the city of Cornelius without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.

(B) Application for a license shall be made upon standard forms issued and kept by the city recorder. Upon application for a license the recorder may issue an appropriate temporary license to be valid for the period of time stated on its face, said period of time not to exceed 30 days. The application or a copy thereof shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation preparatory to issuance of final license. If it appears from such investigation or otherwise that a final license should not be issued to the applicant, the chief of police shall notify the recorder to that effect and shall set forth the reasons why, in the chief of police’s opinion, the applicant should be denied a license. A copy of the chief of police’s report shall be provided to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the finding of the chief of police to the council. A decision by the council to deny a license may be appealed in accordance with ORS 34.010 through 34.100.

(C) Every license issued shall expire on January 15th of each year and may be renewed. No license granted under this chapter shall be assignable.

(D) Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of a license. The chief of police may for cause recommend the revocation of any license granted under this chapter. The recommendation, with reasons therefor, shall be made in writing to the council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation the council shall call for a public hearing on said matter and notify the affected licensee. Notice to the licensee shall be in writing and set forth the chief of police’s recommendations and reasons and shall be provided not later than 10 days before the hearing. Witnesses and interested parties may be heard at the hearing. After such hearing, the council may, in its discretion, revoke the license. Any appeal of the decision of the council shall be taken in accordance with ORS 34.010 through 34.100. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.702.]


5.45.040 Dealer register.

(A) All antique dealers, secondhand dealers and precious metal and gem dealers shall keep a book register of all antiques, secondhand articles and precious metal and gems purchased by the dealer. The register shall contain a full, true and complete description of the subject article including any engraved identifying number, mark or symbol.

(B) The register shall show the hour and day the article was received and the amount paid. The register shall include the name, current address, date of birth and signature of the person from whom the purchase is made. In addition, two pieces of identification shall be presented at the time of purchase. At least one piece of identification shall confirm the person’s name and date of birth. The type of identification used, such as driver’s license, along with its number, shall be listed in the register with the person’s name.

(C) The register information on a purchase shall be retained by the dealer for a period of not less than one year. At the request of the chief of police or his designee, the chief of police or his designee shall be allowed to review the register and any articles in possession of the dealer and subject to this chapter. Inspection of register and articles shall be during regular business hours.

(D) Each article identified in the dealer’s register shall be identified in the register with a number, letter or symbol. The article itself, while it is in the possession of the dealer, shall be identified by placing that number, letter or symbol on the article. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.703.]


5.45.050 Dealer report and holding of article.

(A) All antique, secondhand and precious metal and gem dealers shall at the time of purchase of an article complete the form provided by the chief of police. Completed forms must be returned to the chief of police not later than the next business day following the purchase. Placing the completed form in the mail not later than the next business day following the purchase shall be considered timely return. Postmark of the mailing of the completed form shall be verification of the timeliness of the return.

(B) Each article, subject to this chapter shall not be sold or otherwise disposed of for a period of seven days from date of purchase. Notwithstanding this requirement, the chief of police or his designee may authorize, in cases in which it is shown that extreme financial hardship will result from holding an article for the seven-day period, the sale or transfer of such article before the expiration of this period. Any authorization to sell an article prior to the expiration of seven days shall be in writing.

(C) Whenever the chief of police, or his designee, upon reasonable belief that an article is the subject of a theft, notifies in writing any antique, secondhand or precious metal or gem dealer not to dispose of any specifically described article, the article shall be retained in substantially the same form and shall not be sold, exchanged, dismantled or otherwise disposed of for a period of time, not to exceed 30 days as determined by the chief or his designee. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.704.]


5.45.060 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.706.]


5.45.070 Emergency.

The council hereby finds that in order to establish a program to license antique, secondhand and precious metal and gem dealers and thereby reduce the risk of loss or destruction of property of the residents and inhabitants of the city, the terms and provisions of this chapter must be effective immediately; therefore, an emergency is hereby declared to exist and the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the council and approval of the mayor under the Charter of the city. [Ord. 601 § 1, 1982; Code 2000 § 9.707.]


Chapter 5.50 RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA

(Repealed by Ord. 2016-014)


Chapter 5.60 BUSINESS FOOD WASTE REQUIREMENT

Sections:

5.60.010    Title and intent.

5.60.020    Definitions.

5.60.030    Covered business applicability.

5.60.040    Business owner requirements.

5.60.050    Compliance timeline and temporary compliance waivers.

5.60.060    Enforcement.


5.60.010 Title and intent.

This chapter shall be known, pleaded, and cited as the “Cornelius Business Food Waste Requirement Code,” and referred to herein as “this code.” This business food waste requirement provides an opportunity to increase recycling of food waste and to assist the Metro region to achieve waste reduction goals. Metro does not intend for this requirement to apply to food that is fit for human consumption and accepted for donation by a charitable organization or the use of food waste for animal consumption in compliance with applicable regulations. [Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019.]


5.60.020 Definitions.

(A) “City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(B) “Covered business” means a business that cooks, assembles, processes, serves, or sells food or does so as service providers for other enterprises.

(C) “Food waste” means waste from fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy products, fish, shellfish, nuts, seeds, grains, coffee grounds, and other food that results from the distribution, storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling or serving of food for human consumption.

(1) Food waste includes but is not limited to excess, spoiled or unusable food and includes inedible parts commonly associated with food preparation such as pits, shells, bones, and peels.

(2) Food waste does not include liquids or large amounts of oils and meats which are collected for rendering, fuel production or other non-disposal applications, or any food fit for human consumption that has been set aside, sorted properly and is accepted for donation by a charitable organization and any food collected to feed animals in compliance with applicable regulations. [Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019.]


5.60.030 Covered business applicability.

(A) Except as limited in subsection (B) of this section, all covered businesses must comply with the provisions of this chapter. Covered businesses subject to this chapter include but are not limited to:

(1) Cafeterias and buffets;

(2) Caterers;

(3) Correctional facilities;

(4) Food service contractors;

(5) Full service restaurants;

(6) Grocery retail;

(7) Grocery wholesale;

(8) Limited service restaurants;

(9) Specialty food markets; and

(10) Warehouse clubs.

(B) The following covered businesses must comply with the provisions of this chapter only if they have full-service restaurants or on-site food preparation or service:

(1) Colleges and universities;

(2) Drinking places;

(3) Elementary and secondary schools;

(4) Hospitals;

(5) Hotels;

(6) Nursing and residential care; and

(7) Retirement and assisted living. [Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019.]


5.60.040 Business owner requirements.

(A) A covered business must comply with the following minimum requirements for business food waste:

(1) Separate food waste from all other solid waste for collection.

(2) Collect food waste that is controlled by the business, agents and employees.

(a) This requirement does not apply to food wastes controlled by customers or the public.

(b) A covered business may, at its discretion, also collect food waste from customers or the public but must ensure that food wastes are free of non-food items.

(c) Elementary and secondary schools may also include student-generated food waste from school cafeteria meals but must ensure that food wastes are free of non-food items.

(3) Have correctly labeled and easily identifiable receptacles for internal maintenance or work areas where food waste may be collected, stored, or both.

(4) Post accurate signs where food waste is collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the covered business must source separate.

(B) In addition to the minimum requirements in subsection (A) of this section, owners or managers of single- or multi-tenant buildings containing covered businesses must allow or otherwise enable the provision of the food waste collection service to lessees or occupants subject to the business food waste requirement. [Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019.]


5.60.050 Compliance timeline and temporary compliance waivers.

(A) Covered businesses must comply with the food waste requirements as determined by the quantity of food waste they generate per week, on average. Implementation will begin with Business Group 1 and progress to the other groups according to the dates noted below. Covered businesses that demonstrate they generate less than 250 pounds per week of food waste are not subject to this requirement.

	Business Group 1

March 31, 2020 – March 31, 2021	Business Group 2

March 31, 2021 – Sept. 30, 2022	Business Group 3

Sept. 30, 2022 – Sept. 30, 2023

	≥0.5 ton (1,000 pounds) per week food waste generated	≥0.25 ton (500 pounds) per week food waste generated	≥0.125 ton (250 pounds) per week food waste generated

(B) A covered business may seek a temporary 12-month waiver from the business food waste requirement by providing access to a recycling specialist for a site visit and demonstrating that the covered business cannot comply with the business food waste requirement. Businesses must agree to periodic waiver verification site visits to determine if conditions that warrant the waiver are still in place and cannot be remedied in accordance with waiver criteria. [Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019.]


5.60.060 Enforcement.

(A) A covered business that does not comply with the business food waste requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance will describe the violation, provide the covered business an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance.

(B) A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation in accordance with Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC.

(C) A violation of these business food waste requirements is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $1,000. Each and every day during which any provision of these business food waste requirements are violated shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing, the city may, with the approval of the city manager, maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain the violation of the provisions of the recycling regulation. In such an event, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorneys’ fees.

(D) The procedures in Chapters 1.10 through 1.25 CMC apply to the prosecution of any violation of this chapter. [Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019.]


Title 6 (Reserved)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Solid Waste

8.10    Nuisances

8.15    Repealed

8.20    Discarded Vehicles

8.25    Distressed Residential Property Registration

8.30    Wood Burning


Chapter 8.05 SOLID WASTE

Sections:

8.05.010    Title.

8.05.020    Purpose, policy and scope.

8.05.030    Definitions.

8.05.040    Grant of exclusive franchise.

8.05.050    Franchise term.

8.05.060    Franchise fees.

8.05.070    Rates.

8.05.080    Billing.

8.05.090    Prohibitions and limitations.

8.05.100    Exemptions.

8.05.110    Franchisee obligations.

8.05.120    Subcontracts.

8.05.130    Transfer of the franchise.

8.05.140    Suspension, modification or termination.

8.05.150    Business recycling.

8.05.160    Termination of service.

8.05.170    Public responsibilities.

8.05.180    Violations.

8.05.190    Enforcement.

8.05.200    Insurance requirements.

8.05.210    Rules and regulations.

8.05.220    Amendments.

8.05.230    Appeals.

8.05.240    Severability.


8.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known, pleaded, and cited as the “Cornelius Solid Waste Management and Resource Recovery Code,” and referred to herein as “this code.” [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.020 Purpose, policy and scope.

(A) To protect the public health, safety, welfare and environment and to conserve energy and natural resources within Cornelius and to carry out recycling, reuse and other resource recovery and waste reduction requirements of ORS Chapters 459 and 459A, it is declared the policy of the city of Cornelius to establish and implement programs to:

(1) Carry out the responsibility and the authority granted, delegated and imposed by ORS Chapters 459 and 459A.

(2) Ensure present and future safe, efficient and economical accumulation, storage, collection, transportation, disposal or resource recovery of or from solid waste.

(3) Ensure maintenance of a financially stable, reliable solid waste management service and facilities.

(4) Eliminate potential overlapping service to reduce truck traffic, street wear, air, water and land pollution and noise.

(5) Ensure just, fair, reasonable and adequate rates providing necessary solid waste management services to the public.

(6) Provide for technologically and economically feasible recycling pursuant to city, county, Metro and state adopted waste reduction and recycling and reuse plans.

(7) Prohibit rate preferences and other discriminatory practices which might benefit one or few users at the expense of other users of the service or the general public.

(8) Provide standards for solid waste management services and public responsibilities.

(9) Provide the basis for coordinated planning and cooperation between the city, county and other local and state governmental units to achieve the purposes of this section.

(10) Protect against improper and dangerous handling of hazardous wastes and infectious wastes.

(11) Provide a basis and incentive for investment in waste handling equipment, facilities, sites, systems and new technology.

(B) The authority granted under the terms of this franchise is also for the purpose of accomplishing the objectives set forth in ORS Chapter 459A. This authority and responsibility includes recycling as required in ORS Chapter 459A, together with regulations promulgated thereunder. The authority granted herein shall also carry out the following:

(1) The purposes of ORS 459A.085.

(2) The recycling, reuse and other requirements of ORS Chapter 459A.

(3) The requirements of any waste reduction program adopted by Washington County and approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(4) The State Solid Waste Management Plan and any adopted Department of Environmental Quality, Washington County and Metropolitan Service District (Metro) Solid Waste Management Plans.

(5) The Oregon Land Conservation and Development Goals No. 6 and No. 11 on environment and public facilities, respectively.

(6) Applicable requirements of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended.

(7) Applicable requirements and provisions of ORS 468.220(6) and 646.740.

(8) Applicable rules, requirements, standards and regulations promulgated under the above. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.030 Definitions.

(A) “City council” or “council” means the Cornelius city council.

(B) “City manager” or “manager” means the Cornelius city manager. Wherever this chapter grants authority to the manager, that authority may be exercised by any person designated by the manager.

(C) “Compensation” includes:

(1) Any type of consideration paid for service including, but not limited to, rent, proceeds from resource recovery, any direct or indirect provision for the payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees, occupants or similarly situated persons;

(2) The exchange of service between persons; or

(3) The flow of consideration from a person owning, possessing or generating solid waste to another person who provides services or from a person providing services to another person owning, possessing or generating solid waste.

(D) “Commercial” means commercial and industrial businesses, including, but not limited to, retail sales, services, wholesale operations, manufacturing and industrial operations, excluding businesses lawfully conducted on residentially zoned property and permitted under applicable zoning regulations.

(E) “Compact” and “compaction” means the process of, or to engage in, the shredding of material or the manual or mechanical compression of material.

(F) “Dispose” or “disposal” means the accumulation, storage, discarding, collection, removal, transportation, and recycling or resource recovery of waste.

(G) “Disposal site” means land and facilities used for the disposal, handling or transfer of or resource recovery from solid wastes, including but not limited to dumps, landfills, sludge lagoons, sludge treatment facilities, disposal sites for septic tank pumping or cesspool cleaning service, transfer stations, resource recovery facilities, incinerators for solid waste delivered by the public or by a solid waste collection service, composting plants and land and facilities previously used for solid waste disposal at a land disposal site; but the term does not include a facility subject to the permit requirements of ORS 4688.050; nor a landfill site which is used by the owner or person in control of the premises to dispose of soil, rock, concrete or other similar nondecomposable material, unless the site is used by the public either directly or through a solid waste collection service; or a site operated by a wrecker issued a certificate under ORS 822.110.

(H) “Franchisee” means Cornelius Disposal Service, Inc.

(I) “Generator” means the person producing solid waste or recyclable material to be placed, or that is placed, for collection and disposal. As used herein, “generator” does not include any person who manages an intermediate function resulting in the alteration or compaction of the solid waste or recyclable material after it has been produced by the generator and placed for collection.

(J) “Hazardous wastes” means any wastes defined as such by or pursuant to ORS 466.005; by another governmental unit; or found to be so by the franchisee to service workers, equipment or to the public.

(K) “Mixed recycling” means the process where two or more types of recyclable materials are collected together or commingled (i.e., not separated) in a combination allowed by applicable regulations.

(L) “Multi-family” means property with five or more dwelling units located thereon.

(M) “Person” means the state of Oregon, a public or private corporation, local government unit, public agency, individual, partnership, association, cooperative, firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity.

(N) “Placed for collection” means solid waste that has been placed by the customer for service by the franchisee under the requirements of this chapter.

(O) “Putrescible material” means organic materials that can decompose and may give rise to foul-smelling, offensive odors or products or create a health or vector problem.

(P) “Receptacle” means a can, cart, bin, container, drop box or other vessel used for collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials that have been approved by the city and into which solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris may be placed for collection.

(Q) “Recyclable material” means any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

(R) “Residential” means property with four or fewer dwelling units that are used for residential purposes irrespective of whether such dwelling units are rental units or are owner-occupied.

(S) “Resource recovery” means the process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste and includes:

(1) “Energy recovery” means recovery in which all or a part of the solid waste materials are processed to utilize the heat content (or other forms of energy) of or from the material.

(2) “Material recovery” means any process of obtaining from solid waste, by presegregation or otherwise, materials which still have useful physical or chemical properties after serving a specific purpose and can, therefore, be reused or recycled for the same or other purposes.

(3) “Recycling” means any process by which solid waste is transformed into new or different products in such a manner that the original products may lose their original identity. As used in this code, “recycling” includes the collection, transportation and storage of solid waste done in order to place the solid waste in the stream of commerce for recycling or resource recovery.

(4) “Reuse” means the return of a commodity into the economic stream for use in the same kind of application as before without change in its identity.

(T) “Service” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, disposal of or resource recovery from solid waste, including solid waste management.

(U) “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, waste paper, cardboard, grass clippings, compost, tires, equipment and furniture; sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge; commercial, industrial, demolition and construction wastes; discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof; discarded home and industrial appliances; manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, dead animals, infectious waste as defined in ORS 459.387, and other wastes; but the term does not include:

(1) Hazardous wastes as defined in ORS 466.005.

(2) Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of fowl and animals.

(3) Beverage containers, subject to reuse or refund provisions as set out in ORS 459A.700 to 459A.740.

(V) “Solid waste management” means the prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid waste; or resource recovery from solid waste; and facilities necessary or convenient to such activities.

(W) “Source separate” means the process of separating recyclable materials from solid waste by the generator.

(X) “Special service” means collection of bulky waste including furniture, appliances and large quantities of waste.

(Y) “Waste” means material that is no longer usable or wanted by the source of the material, which material is to be utilized or disposed of by another person. For the purpose of this subsection, “utilized” means the productive use of wastes through recycling, reuse, salvage, resource recovery, energy recovery or landfilling for reclamation, habilitation or rehabilitation of land.

(Z) “Waste reduction” means reduction of the volume of waste that would otherwise be disposed of in a landfill disposal site, through techniques such as source reduction, recycling, reuse or other resource recovery.

(AA) “Yard debris” means grass clippings, leaves, hedge trimmings, and similar vegetative waste generated from property or landscaping activities, but does not include stumps or similar bulky wood materials. Yard debris is a subset of solid waste. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.040 Grant of exclusive franchise.

There is hereby granted Evergreen Disposal and Recycling, Inc., the exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide “service” within the city limits subject to provisions of ORS 459.085(3), including those areas that may hereafter be annexed to the city. The franchisee is authorized use of the streets and other public facilities of the city as necessary to provide service. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2019-02 § 2.]


8.05.050 Franchise term.

(A) The franchise granted under CMC 8.05.040 shall be in full force and effect as of February 5, 2009, subject to the terms and conditions set out in this code as well as the timely payment of franchise fees to the city.

(B) Unless the council acts to terminate further renewals of the franchise, the franchise is renewed each January 1st beginning January 1, 2010, for a term of seven years running from that January 1st renewal. At five-year intervals, beginning with 2014, the city shall review with the franchisee the standards and provisions contained in this code and make revisions thereto so as to carry out the purpose and policy set out in CMC 8.05.020. At any time the council may give written notification of termination of any further renewal, which may be with or without cause, and the franchisee then shall have a franchise which will terminate five years from date of mailing of the notice of termination, which shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. The council may later extend the term or reinstate the continuing renewal provision upon agreement with the franchisee. Nothing in this section restricts or limits the ability of the council to suspend, modify or terminate the franchise for cause pursuant to CMC 8.05.140. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.060 Franchise fees.

(A) In consideration of the franchise granted by CMC 8.05.040, and for other privileges granted, including but not limited to use of the city streets, the franchisee shall pay the city a fee equal to four percent of the gross cash receipts resulting from any solid waste services subject to the franchise. When any other person without a franchise may conduct activities under CMC 8.05.100(A)(8), no franchise fees shall be payable. To stimulate recycling and reuse and make more materials recyclable, no franchise fee shall apply to gross receipts from collection or sales of recyclable or reusable materials. No franchise fee shall be payable upon that portion of gross receipts paid by the franchisee to Metro or other governmental body under CMC 8.05.070(F).

(B) Such franchise fees shall be computed on a quarterly basis and due to the city 30 days following the end thereof. The franchisee shall maintain an adequate bookkeeping system showing the gross cash receipts resulting from all franchised solid waste services conducted. Records shall be open at reasonable times for audit by authorized personnel designated by the city. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.070 Rates.

(A) The rates to be charged to all persons by the franchisee shall be adequate, reasonable and uniform based upon the level and type of service rendered.

(B) Nothing in this section is intended to prevent:

(1) The reasonable establishment of uniform classes of rates based on the type of waste collected, transported, disposed of, recycled or resource recovered; or the number, type and location of customers served; or upon other factors so that rates are reasonably based on the cost of the particular service.

(2) The franchisee from volunteering service at reduced cost for a civic, community, benevolent or charitable purpose.

(C) A regular rate adjustment shall be made no more frequently than annually pursuant to the following criteria and procedures:

(1) In the event either the city or the franchisee proposes a rate change, written notice shall be given to the city or franchisee, respectively.

(2) The notice of proposed rates shall include the new proposed rates and a statement including relevant facts and/or dates justifying the proposed rate.

(3) Within 30 days following the written request for a rate change, the city manager shall make specific findings of fact, giving due consideration to the following factors:

(a) Changes in cost of operation, comparative collection rates of other cities, cost of acquiring and replacing equipment, cost of providing for future, added or different service, and a reasonable operating margin of between eight to 12 percent, stated as a “return on revenue.”

(b) Based upon the findings, the city manager shall render a decision recommending to the city council either that the request for a rate change be approved or denied, or that the rate change requested be approved in a different form.

(4) Within 60 days of the receipt of the city manager’s decision, findings of fact and other materials deemed necessary for a decision, the council shall act upon the proposed rate change. The council may accept, reject or modify the city manager’s decision and enact any resulting rate increase by resolution.

(D) Rates established by the council are fixed and the franchisee shall not charge more or less than the fixed rate except as provided in this subsection and subsection (B)(2) of this section.

(E) When no rate has been established for a service which the franchisee can provide at customer request, the franchisee shall charge a rate based on the factors outlined in subsections (A) and (C)(3)(a) of this section.

(F) By resolution of the council, fees or charges imposed by a governmental body or agency and any increase in disposal fees charged to solid waste collectors shall be passed through to the customers of the franchisee on a proportional basis according to type or class of receptacle. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.080 Billing.

(A) The franchisee may require advance payment for residential and multi-family residential service for up to two months in advance; in addition, the franchisee may bill one month in advance, for the current amount, an amount in arrears or any combination thereof. When service is terminated which was paid for in advance, the franchisee will refund a pro rata portion of the payment for any period in which service was not provided. When billed in advance, no rate adjustments shall be effective until the end of the advance billing. Accounts billed two months in advance shall not be considered delinquent until after 30 days from initial billing.

(B) The franchisee may charge at the time of or in advance of providing service for any customer who has not established credit with the franchisee. The franchisee may consider, in approving or disapproving credit, credit information used in the normal course of business practice by other businesses.

(C) Prior to providing service to any person, firm or corporation not previously having service in the city, the franchisee is hereby authorized to require payment of an amount equal to two months’ service from the customer as a deposit against service to be provided by the franchisee. After 12 consecutive months of currently paid service, the franchisee shall refund, without interest, the deposit to the customer. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.090 Prohibitions and limitations.

No person shall:

(A) Provide service or offer to provide service without first having obtained a franchise from the city.

(B) Accumulate, store, collect, transport, dispose of or resource recover solid wastes except in compliance with this code, other city codes, ORS Chapters 459 and 459A, all related to solid waste management and any rules or regulations or amendments promulgated under any of the foregoing.

(C) Enter into a receptacle for the purpose of compacting the contents of the receptacle.

(D) Remove a receptacle from the location where the receptacle was placed for collection, unless the person is authorized to do so by the generator.

(E) Remove the lid from any solid waste or recycling receptacle and remove, disturb, collect, compact or scatter solid waste or recyclable materials placed in such receptacle or deposit solid waste into such receptacle, unless the person is authorized to do so by the generator. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.100 Exemptions.

(A) Nothing in this code requires a franchise for the following businesses or practices:

(1) Transportation of solid waste by a person (generated or produced by such person) to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market so long as such person complies with this code, other city regulations and ORS Chapters 459 and 459A relating to solid waste management and regulations promulgated under any of the foregoing. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, in the case of a residential dwelling unit (whether individually owned, nonowner-occupied or grouped through an association or cooperative of property owners) any waste generated or produced is owned by the individual owner or occupant and not by the landlord, property owner, cooperative or association or property manager or agent of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person owning, managing or entitled to possession of the property may haul wastes unlawfully left by a tenant or occupant at the end of the lawful term of the tenancy or occupancy.

(2) Transporting, disposing of or resource recovering sewage sludge, septic tank pumpings and cesspool pumpings.

(3) Any person licensed as a motor vehicle wrecker under ORS 822.110, et seq., from collecting, transporting, disposing of or utilizing motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.

(4) A contractor employed to demolish, construct or remodel a building or structure, including but not limited to land-clearing operations and construction wastes, when the wastes hauled by such contractor are hauled in vehicles owned by, under the control of or in the possession of the contractor and hauled by a contractor or contractor’s employees as a regular part of their employment.

(5) The collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by private charitable organizations regularly engaged in such business or activity, including but not limited to the Salvation Army, Goodwill Industries and similar organizations.

(6) The collection, transportation or redemption of beverage containers under ORS Chapter 459A, including and limited to that portion commonly known as the “Bottle Bill,” together with other related statutes or regulations promulgated thereunder or under ORS Chapter 459A.

(7) A person that transports or disposes of solid waste accumulated or created as an incidental part of the regular carrying on of the business of a janitorial service, gardening or landscaping service, or rendering service. As used in this subsection, “janitorial service” does not include the collection and disposal of solid waste accumulated.

(8) The collection, transportation and reuse or recycling of totally source-separated materials or operation of a collection center for totally source-separated materials by a religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization, which organization was not organized for nor is operated for any solid waste management purpose and which organization is using the activities for fundraising, including but not limited to Scouts, churches, service clubs, school-sponsored activities, and similar organizations or activities as determined by the city manager.

(9) Recyclable material collection, handling, processing, transportation or marketing when the recyclable material is source-separated by the generator and is purchased from or exchanged by the generator for fair market value for recycling or reuse.

(B) Nothing in this code:

(1) Requires the franchisee to store, collect, transport, dispose of or resource recover any hazardous waste; provided, however, that the franchisee may engage in the management of hazardous wastes in compliance with all city, local, state and federal laws, rules or regulations.

(2) Requires the franchisee to service a receptacle that fails to meet the standards set out in CMC 8.05.170, if servicing such a receptacle would create a collection safety hazard for the franchisee’s employees or equipment.

(3) Prohibits any governmental entity from accumulating, storing, collecting, transporting, disposing of or resource recovering solid waste generated from or by the operations of that entity as long as the entity complies with the provisions of the CMC, ORS Chapters 459 and 459A dealing with solid waste management, and regulations promulgated under any of the foregoing.

(C) The city council may withdraw any other practice, business or activity by resolution of the council, after a public hearing thereon, and based upon written findings adopted by the council that the exemption is designed to carry out the purposes of CMC 8.05.020; that there is a need for the proposed service; that the franchisee cannot or will not provide the proposed service; that the applicant has the necessary equipment, personnel, finances and experience to provide the service; and, that the granting of the exception will not materially detriment or substantially impact service, consumer rates or the franchisee.

Prior to granting such an exemption, the city manager shall give 30 days’ prior written notice from date of mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the franchisee of the public hearing and proposed basis of the exemption. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.110 Franchisee obligations.

(A) The franchisee shall:

(1) Furnish sufficient vehicles, receptacles, personnel, finances and scheduled days of collection in each area of the city as necessary to provide solid waste management service as required under this code; or subcontract with others to provide such service pursuant to this code; provided, however, that the franchisee shall remain responsible for performance and quality of the service required by this code. Should the franchisee utilize a subcontractor to perform any of the obligations imposed by this section, they too shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of this code.

(2) Furnish the level and type of services provided on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code together with any additional service(s) or change(s) therein as may be directed by the city council, including but not limited to recycling and reuse or waste reduction, and at rates established by the council. When emergency services are needed, the city manager may direct the franchisee to provide special emergency services.

(3) Except as provided in CMC 8.05.160 and for will-call collections, make residential collections no less often than once a week for putrescible materials.

(4) Permit inspection by the city of the franchisee’s facilities, equipment, books and personnel at reasonable times.

(5) The franchisee shall inform all customers of the service requirements contained in CMC 8.05.170 and in any administrative rules promulgated thereunder.

(6) The franchisee shall comply with all laws relating to solid waste management service.

(7) The franchisee shall be solely responsible for the resolution of disputes with customers unless a customer cannot meet the standards in CMC 8.05.170 and either the franchisee or the customer requests intervention by the city in the dispute.

(B) The franchisee shall provide the level of recycling and reuse service required by ORS Chapter 459A, and any waste reduction plan of either Washington County or Metro as may now exist or come into existence during the term of the franchise or any extension thereof.

(1) The minimum level of recycling, reuse and waste reduction services which are a continuing responsibility of the franchisee are as follows:

(a) Provide curbside collection of recyclable materials and yard debris for residential customers on a schedule approved by the city. This service shall be for both yard debris and recyclable materials on the DEQ list of principal recyclable materials. Any yard debris and recyclable material placed for collection shall be prepared in accordance with city-approved instructions provided by the franchisee to their customers.

(b) Provide collection of recyclable materials from commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental and multi-family residential sources at the frequency required by the Waste Reduction Plan of Washington County, Metro Solid Waste Management Plan or as may be otherwise directed by the city.

(c) Provide notice to potential recycling and reuse sources, provide quarterly notices to customers as required by ORS Chapter 459A, and sponsor educational promotional activities to increase public participation in recycling.

(d) Provide such additional recycling or reuse service as directed by the council when the council finds that said service is required by the city, Metro, Washington County or other wasteshed area, including the state.

(C) The city and franchisee agree that:

(1) Pursuant to ORS Chapter 459A, the net cost of any required or permitted recycling as well as the cost of any notice, educational or promotional service shall be considered as a cost of doing business, and as part of the rate base, to be considered in all future rate adjustments. When there is a significant net cost increase for recycling or providing educational/promotional services that has not previously been included in the rate base, it may be considered by the franchisee as an additional, unanticipated cost and the franchisee may apply to the city for a supplemental rate increase.

(2) The franchisee may subcontract all or a portion of any waste reduction program or activity; however, the franchisee would remain primarily liable for the performance and quality of all said subcontracted services. Any subcontractor shall comply with all provisions of this code.

(D) The franchisee shall:

(1) Resource recover or dispose of collected wastes in compliance with applicable city, county and state statutes, including ORS Chapters 459 and 459A, as well as regulations promulgated under any of the above. All collected wastes which are not resource recovered shall be delivered to a DEQ-approved disposal site.

(2) Not later than 10 days prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code, file with the city recorder a written acceptance of the franchise set out in CMC 8.05.040.

(E) City Service.

(1) The franchisee shall provide collection services to property owned, controlled or operated by the city at no cost to the city, including bus stops.

(2) All services provided the city (including the operating costs associated with provision of park and bus stop collection services) shall be considered a cost of doing business and part of the rate base to be considered in future rate adjustments. The franchisee shall provide documentation supporting said operating costs to the city.

(F) The scope of the services and affected properties identified in subsection (E) of this section shall be agreed to by the franchisee and the city in writing with a copy thereof kept for public inspection in the office of the city recorder. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.120 Subcontracts.

The franchisee may subcontract to provide a portion of required service(s) when the franchisee either does not have the necessary equipment or service capability. Such a subcontract shall not relieve the franchisee from its primary responsibility to provide and maintain service in compliance with the franchise and this code. In addition, the subcontractor shall comply with all provisions of the code and franchise. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.130 Transfer of the franchise.

Any transfer or assignment of the franchise or a stock transfer that would change the controlling interest shall not become effective until submitted to and approved by the city council. Any transfer of the franchise shall be granted by the council if the applicant for the transfer provides a letter of consent from the current franchisee and applicant demonstrates to the city council’s satisfaction that:

(A) The applicant has the available resources (including but not limited to vehicles, equipment, facilities and personnel) sufficient to meet the standards of service established by this code.

(B) The person has sufficient experience to ensure compliance with this code.

(C) The person has in force, or provides a letter of intent for, liability insurance in the amounts and for the coverage required by this code. Upon award of the transfer, the applicant shall provide the city with certificate(s) of insurance evidencing the coverage and amounts prior to the effective date of the transfer. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.140 Suspension, modification or termination.

(A) Failure to comply with a written notice to provide service(s) required by this code, or otherwise comply with the code after written notice from the city to do so, is grounds for modification(s), termination or suspension of the franchise.

(1) After written notice is given, the franchisee shall have 10 days from the date of the notice to comply, request a public hearing before the council, or request an extension for compliance. The council shall grant said extension if the franchisee shows good cause.

(2) In the event the franchisee or the city manager requests a hearing, the franchisee shall be given 20 days’ prior notice for the time, date and place of the hearing.

(3) At the public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall be given an opportunity to present oral or documentary evidence to the council. The council’s findings shall be conclusive; provided, however, that such action may be judicially reviewed by way of ORS 34.010, et seq.

(4) If the franchisee fails to comply with the written notice or with the council’s order after the public hearing, the franchise may be suspended, modified or terminated.

(B) In the event the council finds an immediate health or safety danger to the public, it may take action to alleviate such condition(s) within the time specified in a notice to the franchisee prior to a public hearing on said action. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.150 Business recycling.

(A) All businesses required to have a city of Cornelius business license (Chapter 5.05 CMC) shall recycle as follows:

(1) Businesses shall source separate from the waste stream all paper, cardboard, glass/plastic bottles or jars, and aluminum/tin cans;

(2) Businesses and business recycling service customers shall provide recycling containers for internal maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials may be collected, stored, or both; and

(3) Businesses and business recycling service customers shall post accurate signs where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the business must source separate and that provide recycling instructions.

(B) Exemptions.

(1) This section does not apply to a business operated from their home. A residence is the place where a person lives.

(2) A business may seek an exemption from the requirements in subsection (A) of this section, if:

(a) The business provides access to the city or designated agent for a site visit; and

(b) The city or designated agent determines during the site visit that the business cannot comply with the business recycling requirement because of space or economic restrictions or other extenuating circumstances.

(C) To assist businesses in compliance with this section, the city or designated agent shall:

(1) Notify businesses of the business recycling requirement at the time application is made for a business license;

(2) Provide businesses with education and technical assistance to assist with meeting the requirements of this section; and

(3) The city’s business license procedures shall include provisions requiring that the business shall certify that they have complied with the requirements of this section upon signing the business license application and the business shall also certify upon renewal of the business license that they have complied with the requirements of this section.

(D) A business that does not comply with the business recycling requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice shall describe:

(1) The violation;

(2) How the business or business recycling service customer can cure the violation within the time specified in the notice; and

(3) An offer of assistance with compliance.

(E) A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure the violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation shall provide:

(1) An additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified on the citation; and

(2) Notification to the business or business recycling service customer that it may be subject to a fine.

(F) A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure the violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may be subject to a fine. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009; Ord. 909 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.160 Termination of service.

The franchisee shall not terminate or otherwise interrupt service to all or any portion of its customer base unless:

(A) Street or road access is blocked and there is no alternative route; provided, that the franchisee shall restore service not later than 24 hours after street or road access is reopened.

(B) Weather conditions render service unduly hazardous to the franchisee’s employees and/or equipment, or such termination/interruption is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an act of God, a public enemy or a vandal.

(C) The customer does not comply with the service standards of CMC 8.05.170.

(D) The customer’s billing is delinquent 60 days from and after the date of the billing. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.170 Public responsibilities.

(A) Preparation of Solid Waste.

(1) Solid waste shall be drained of surplus liquid and placed in a leak-proof receptacle. No liquid waste or semi-solid waste shall be directly placed in a receptacle.

(2) Pet feces, sharp objects such as broken glass and knives and any other solid waste with the potential of causing injury or disease shall be securely wrapped in a manner to prevent exposure or injury to the public or to the franchisee’s employees.

(3) Ashes shall be allowed to cool and be securely wrapped or bagged before depositing in any receptacle.

(4) No hazardous waste shall be put into any receptacle placed for collection or disposal by the franchisee.

(5) When materials, customer abuse, fire or vandalism causes excessive wear or damage to a receptacle provided by the franchisee, the cost of repair or replacement may be charged to the customer.

(6) Areas around the receptacles shall be free of accumulated waste. The franchisee shall periodically maintain receptacles supplied by the franchisee, if maintenance is needed.

(B) Solid Waste Receptacles.

(1) Receptacles for mechanical collection shall be provided the generator by the franchisee unless otherwise authorized by the franchisee.

(2) Except for drop boxes, receptacles shall be equipped with lids sufficient to keep out water and prevent disturbance by animals and entry by pets; shall be kept closed except when being filled, emptied or cleaned; and shall be kept in a clean, leak-proof and reasonable sanitary condition by the generator. Except for drop boxes, receptacles shall not be filled so that the lid cannot be securely closed. If such a receptacle is overfilled, an additional disposal fee may be charged.

(3) Solid waste placed in receptacles not designed for emptying by mechanical means shall not exceed 60 pounds, including the receptacle and its contents. The receptacle shall have tapered sides, a bail or two handles on opposite sides, a close-fitting lid with handle, not exceed 32 gallons in capacity and be watertight in construction. They shall be made of metal or other rigid material that will not crack or break in freezing weather, are rodent-resistant and easily cleanable.

(4) Receptacles known as “carts” designed for emptying by mechanical means shall not exceed a weight of 180 pounds for 90- to 95-gallon receptacles, 120 pounds for 60- to 65-gallon receptacles, 60 pounds for 32- to 35-gallon receptacles and 40 pounds for 20-gallon receptacles, including the container and contents.

(5) A stationary compactor or other container for commercial or industrial use shall not exceed the safe loading or design limits for the operation of the collection vehicles; nor shall the weight put the collector over the weight limit for the loaded vehicle. The collector shall furnish the customer with information concerning limitations on his equipment, upon request. If the weight of a container exceeds 250 pounds (loose), an additional disposal fee may be charged.

(6) No person shall install a stationary compactor for collection of solid wastes unless the franchisee has been notified, has the equipment to handle the solid waste and the compactor complies with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations.

(7) If the contents of a receptacle are compacted, either mechanically or manually, the compactor rate will be charged.

(8) Sunken refuse cans or containers shall not be serviced unless they are placed above ground by the customers for service.

(C) Placement of Receptacles for Collection.

(1) Receptacles containing solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris shall be kept or placed for convenient and safe access for collection, and (except as provided in this subsection) shall not be kept upon the street, sidewalk or other public place unless first approved by the city.

(2) All carts designed for mechanical collection shall be placed at the curb or roadside by the generator prior to collection time.

(3) Placement of receptacles for collection is limited to a time period of 24 hours prior to pickup and 24 hours after pickup.

(4) Receptacles shall be placed so that no part of the receptacle may be more than three feet from the curb or edge of the street. Placement shall be made so receptacles are within manageable reach if standing in the street at or next to the curb or roadside line.

(5) The generator shall provide safe access to the pickup point so as not to jeopardize the franchisee’s (or subcontractor’s) employees or equipment, pedestrians, mailboxes, bicyclists or the motoring public.

(6) Receptacles shall be placed for collection outside any locked, latched, bolted or hooked enclosure. Access must not require the collector to pass under low-hanging obstructions such as eaves, tree branches, clotheslines or electrical wires which obstruct safe passage to and from receptacles.

(7) No person shall block service access to a commercial container that is one cubic yard capacity, or a larger drop box or roll-off box or other similar receptacle for solid waste or recycling collection. Customers using containers shall provide a location so as to meet standards of the Consumer Products Safety Commission and the city’s design review requirements.

(8) Solid waste service customers shall place items not intended for pickup at least five feet from any solid waste can or container. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.180 Violations.

(A) Violations of the prohibited behavior listed in CMC 8.05.090 are subject to general penalty provisions of the Cornelius Municipal Code.

(B) No person shall provide nor offer to provide solid waste management service in the city of Cornelius unless they are exempted under CMC 8.05.100 or unless they are the franchisee to whom this franchise is granted. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.190 Enforcement.

(A) The city may enforce the provisions of this code by administrative, civil or criminal remedies or any combination as necessary to obtain compliance with this code. The city council shall take such legislative action as is necessary to support the code and the franchise granted thereunder.

(B) The franchisee may enforce payment or protect its rights granted by the terms of the franchise by civil action.

(C) The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this code. The city manager or his designate may enter any affected premises at all reasonable times to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. Failure on the part of a customer to cooperate and allow inspection by the city shall relieve the franchisee from provision of service. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.200 Insurance requirements.

(A) Insurance. The franchisee shall maintain general commercial liability, business interruption and automobile insurance policies in such forms and with such companies as shall be approved by the city manager. The insurance policies shall name the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, agents and volunteers as additional insureds. The policies shall be primary and provide single limit general liability coverage of not less than $2,000,000 and separate automobile coverage of $1,000,000 or the limit of liability contained in ORS 30.260 to 30.300, whichever is greater. Certificates of insurance shall provide the city with not less than 30 days’ written notice of cancellation or material change to each policy.

(B) Indemnification. The franchisee’s rights as franchise holder are conditioned on the franchisee’s indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its council, employees, agents and insurers against any liability or damage which may arise or occur as the result of the franchisee’s performance under the terms of this code. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.210 Rules and regulations.

The city may propose and prepare rules and regulations pertaining to this code. The rules and regulations shall be in writing and be maintained for inspection in the office of the city recorder. All rules and regulations promulgated under the authority of this section (and amendments thereto) shall be forwarded to the franchisee, who shall have not less than 30 days to respond in writing to such rules and regulations. If the franchisee has objections or revisions to the proposed rules, the franchisee shall meet and confer with the city manager regarding the franchisee’s concerns. If the concerns are not resolved through consultation with the city, then the city shall forward the proposed rule, with the franchisee’s comments, to the city council for its consideration. The franchisee may request that the city council hold a public hearing on a proposed rule. The council may approve the proposed rule as submitted, modify the rule, or reject the rule. The city shall enact all rules by written order. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.220 Amendments.

The city or the franchisee may propose amendments to this code. Proposed amendments shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the city and the franchisee. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendments. The franchisee shall be given at least 30 days’ written notice of such hearing. The city council may, after a public hearing, adopt the amendments. The franchise shall be amended upon acceptance of the amendments by franchisee. The franchisee shall accept any amendment which is necessary to conform the franchise requirements to new or modified requirements imposed upon the city by an outside regulatory agency. If there is a financial impact to the franchisee as a result, such impact shall be considered as a cost of doing business to the franchisee and may be included as part of the rate base subject to documentation of said cost being provided the city. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.230 Appeals.

(A) Any determination by the franchisee may be appealed to the city manager within 15 days. Appeal must be filed in writing with the city recorder.

(B) Any determination by the city manager pursuant to this code may be appealed to the city council within 15 days. Appeal must be filed in writing with the city recorder. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


8.05.240 Severability.

Any judicial determination that any portion(s) of this code are unconstitutional or otherwise invalid shall not invalidate other provisions of this code. [Ord. 908 § 1, 2009.]


Chapter 8.10 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.10.010    Definitions.

8.10.020    Nuisances affecting the public health.

8.10.030    Abandoned ice boxes.

8.10.040    Attractive nuisance.

8.10.050    Snow and ice removal.

8.10.060    Weeds.

8.10.070    Surface water drainage.

8.10.080    Fences.

8.10.090    Adoption of Oregon fireworks law.

8.10.100    Notices and advertisements.

8.10.110    General nuisances.

8.10.120    Abatement notice.

8.10.130    Abatement by the owner.

8.10.140    Abatement by the city.

8.10.150    Assessment of costs.

8.10.160    Summary abatement.

8.10.170    Penalty for violation.


8.10.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the following means:

“Agent in charge of property” means any lessee, contract purchaser, or person, other than the owner, having the possession or control of property. [Code 2000 § 6.500.]


8.10.020 Nuisances affecting the public health.

The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting the public health and may be abated in the manner prescribed in CMC 8.10.120 to 8.10.160:

(A) Privies. Any open vault or privy maintained within the city, except those privies used in connection with construction projects and constructed in accordance with the directions of the city engineer.

(B) Debris, Solid Waste or Garbage on Private Property. All accumulations of debris, solid waste, garbage, rubbish, manure and other refuse located on private property and which has not been removed within a reasonable length of time and which affects the health, safety or welfare of the city.

(C) Stagnant Water. Any pool of water which is without a proper inlet or outlet and which, if not controlled, will be a breeding place for mosquitoes and other similar insects.



(D) Water Pollution. The pollution of any body of water or stream or river by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(E) Food. All decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption.

(F) Odor. Any premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause a noisome or offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition.

(G) Particular Businesses. Any pigsty, slaughter house or tannery maintained within the city.

(H) Vermin Infestation. The infestation of real property, improvements thereon, or accumulations of debris, solid waste or other matter located thereon, with rats, mice, rodents, vermin and other related or similar animals. For purposes of this section, the term “infestation” means the nesting, use, occupancy or location of one or more rats or mice, or rodents, or vermin or other related or similar animals on real property, improvements thereon, or in accumulations of debris, solid waste or other matter located thereon.

(I) Encroachments within Public Rights-of-Way. The placement of any object within a public right-of-way without first having received a revocable permit pursuant to CMC 9.10.090(C). [Ord. 716 § 3, 1991; Code 2000 § 6.505.]


8.10.030 Abandoned ice boxes.

No person shall place, leave or discard any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or similar container which has an airtight snap lock in any place accessible to children without first removing such airtight snap lock or the door or doors from the ice box, refrigerator or similar container. [Code 2000 § 6.510.]


8.10.040 Attractive nuisance.

(A) No person owning, controlling or in possession of any premises shall permit:

(1) Any machinery, equipment or other devices on such premises which are attractive and dangerous to children and which are accessible to the children.

(2) The piling of any lumber, logs, or piling in such manner as to be attractive and dangerous to children and which is accessible to children.

(3) Any excavation to remain open for an unreasonable length of time without erecting proper safeguards or barriers to prevent such excavation from being used by children.

(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized construction projects; provided, that during the course of construction reasonable safeguards are maintained to prevent injury or death to playing children.

(C) Any nuisance as described in this section may be abated as provided in CMC 8.10.120 to 8.10.160. [Code 2000 § 6.515.]


8.10.050 Snow and ice removal.

No person owning or controlling any premises, improved or unimproved, abutting upon any public sidewalks within the city shall permit:

(A) Any snow to remain on such sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen.

(B) Any such sidewalk to be covered with ice, and it shall be the duty of any such person to remove any ice accumulating on such sidewalk or to properly cover it with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel within the first two hours of daylight after the ice has formed. [Code 2000 § 6.520.]


8.10.060 Weeds.

(A) No person, as owner, occupant or agent in charge of, shall permit on any real property, improved or unimproved, or upon any sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such property, obnoxious vegetation; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit bushes, trees, grass and other shrubbery grown or maintained for ornamental purposes nor shall it prohibit the growth or maintenance of any vegetation designed for food or fuel purposes.

(B) As used in this section, “obnoxious vegetation” includes:

(1) Grass or weeds more than 12 inches high;

(2) Poison oak or poison ivy; and

(3) Blackberry vines or vegetation that:

(a) Constitute a fire hazard because it is near other combustibles;

(b) Extend into a public way or a pathway;

(c) Extend across a property line; or

(d) Are used for habitation by trespassers.

(C) Obnoxious vegetation as defined in subsection (B) of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in CMC 8.10.120 to 8.10.160. [Code 2000 § 6.525; Ord. 2013-003 § 2, 2013.]


8.10.070 Surface water drainage.

(A) No person owning or controlling any real property shall permit any type of surface water from any source whatsoever to flow from the premises across or upon any sidewalk abutting such property.

(B) It is hereby made the duty of each person owning or controlling real property abutting upon any sidewalk to provide a proper system of drainage so that any overflow water will not be carried across or upon any sidewalk.

(C) The improper drainage of any type of surface water from any source across or upon any sidewalk is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in CMC 8.10.120 to 8.10.160. [Code 2000 § 6.530.]


8.10.080 Fences.

(A) No person shall construct or maintain any barbed-wire fence or allow barbed-wire to remain as a part of any fence, unless such wire is placed not less than six inches above the top of a board or picket fence when such fence is not less than six feet in height.

(B) No person shall install, maintain or operate any electric fence within the city without first securing a permit from the city manager. A permit shall be granted only where the construction of such a fence will not endanger the general public.

(1) No person shall erect, maintain or locate, or permit the erection, maintenance or location, of a fence or barrier within that portion of the public right-of-way abutting property owned by or under the control or possession of any such person. Any fence or barrier located within the public right-of-way in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance subject to abatement under the provisions of this code.

(2) Any fence or barrier located within the public right-of-way on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to remain; provided, however, no person shall improve, repair, enlarge or extend said fence or barrier. If any such existing fence is partially damaged or destroyed, the entire fence shall be removed and its use terminated under the abatement provisions of this code.

(3) For purposes of this section, the terms “fence” or “barrier” shall not include structures used to establish vines, bushes or other landscaping materials; provided, however, no such structure shall be located or maintained within the public right-of-way for more than 12 calendar months. [Code 2000 § 6.535.]


8.10.090 Adoption of Oregon fireworks law.

The sale, use, and display of fireworks within the city shall be governed by and subject to applicable state law including OAR Chapter 837, Division 12, and ORS 480.110 to 480.170, inclusive. [Ord. 618 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 6.545.]


8.10.100 Notices and advertisements.

(A) No person shall affix or cause to be distributed any placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon any real or personal property, public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of private property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the use of and the location of signs and advertising.

(B) No person shall, either as principal or agent, scatter, distribute or cause to be distributed on the streets, sidewalks or other public places or upon any private property any placards or advertisements whatsoever.

(C) This section shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of advertising material during any parade or approved public gathering. [Code 2000 § 6.550.]


8.10.110 General nuisances.

In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within CMC 8.10.010 to 8.10.100, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in CMC 8.10.120 to 8.10.160. [Code 2000 § 6.555.]


8.10.120 Abatement notice.

(A) Upon determination in writing by the city manager, which shall be filed with the city recorder, that a nuisance as defined in this or any other law of the city exists, the city manager, or chief of police, or chief of the fire department shall forthwith cause a notice to be posted on the premises liable for the abatement directing the removal of such nuisance.

(B) At the time of posting, the city manager shall cause a copy of such notice to be forwarded by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the owner or agent in charge of the property at the last known address of such owner or agent.

(C) The notice to abate shall contain:

(1) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which such nuisance exists.

(2) A direction to remove the nuisance within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(3) A description of the nuisance.

(4) A statement that unless such nuisance is removed the city will remove the nuisance and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property.

(5) A statement that the owner or agent in charge of the property may protest the action by giving notice to the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(D) The person posting and mailing the notice as provided herein shall, upon completion of the posting and mailing, execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing and posting.

(E) An error in the name or address of the owner or agent in charge of the property or the use of a name other than that of the owner or agent shall not make the notice void and in such a case the posted notice shall be deemed sufficient. [Code 2000 § 6.560.]


8.10.130 Abatement by the owner.

(A) Within 10 days after the posting and mailing of the notice as provided in CMC 8.10.120, the owner or agent in charge of the property shall remove and abate the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

(B) The owner or agent in charge protesting that no nuisance in fact exists shall file with the city recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis for contending that no nuisance exists.

(C) The statement shall be referred to the council as a part of the council’s regular agenda at its succeeding meeting. At the time set for the consideration of the abatement, the owner or agent may appear and be heard by the council and the council shall thereupon determine whether a nuisance in fact exists and such determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided herein.

(D) Upon council determination that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner or agent shall, within 10 days after the council determination, remove or abate the nuisance. [Code 2000 § 6.565.]


8.10.140 Abatement by the city.

(A) If within the time fixed as provided by CMC 8.10.120 and 8.10.130, the nuisance has not been abated by the owner or agent in charge of the property, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be abated.

(B) The city shall maintain an accurate record of all expenses incurred by it in abating the nuisance which expense shall include an amount to cover administrative costs. As used in this section, “administrative cost” includes (but is not necessarily limited to) those costs, expenses or charges imposed for or by direct administrative, clerical, legal and other support services for nuisance abatement under this chapter. The amount imposed for said administrative costs will be in an amount so as to cover the city’s true cost(s) for nuisance abatement.

(C) The total cost, including the administrative cost, shall thereupon be assessed to the property as hereinafter provided. [Code 2000 § 6.570; Ord. 824 § 1, 2001.]


8.10.150 Assessment of costs.

(A) A notice of the assessment shall be forwarded by registered mail, the postage prepaid, to the owner or agent in charge of the property by the city recorder. The notice shall contain:

(1) The total cost, including the administrative overhead, of the abatement.

(2) A statement that the cost as indicated will become a lien against the property unless paid within 60 days.

(3) A statement that if the owner or agent in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the city recorder within 30 days from the date of the notice.

(B) Upon the expiration of 30 days after the date of the notice objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the council in its regular course of business.

(C) An assessment for the cost of abatement as determined by the city manager or by the council shall be made by resolution of the council and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens, and upon such entry being made, it shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(D) The lien shall be collected in the same manner as liens for street improvements are collected, and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum. Such interest shall commence to run 30 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(E) An error in the name of the owner or agent in charge of the property shall not void the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Code 2000 § 6.575.]


8.10.160 Summary abatement.

Upon determination by the city manager, chief of police or chief of the fire department that a nuisance as defined by this code exists and that unless the nuisance be summarily abated, the public health, safety or welfare will be endangered, such officer may act as follows:

(A) He shall give or cause to be given a notice to remove or abate such nuisance within 24 hours.

(B) If the nuisance is not removed or abated within 24 hours, he is authorized to remove or abate the nuisance and the cost shall be charged against the property and collected as provided in CMC 8.10.140 and 8.10.150. [Code 2000 § 6.580.]


8.10.170 Penalty for violation.

A finding of a violation of CMC 8.10.020 to 8.10.110 shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the nuisance. The abatement of a nuisance is not the exclusive remedy for violating CMC 8.10.020 to 8.10.110 but is in addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies available to the city. [Ord. 745 § 6, 1994; Code 2000 § 6.585.]


Chapter 8.15 OBNOXIOUS VEGETATION

(Repealed by Ord. 2013-003)


Chapter 8.20 DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

8.20.010    Discarded vehicles prohibited.

8.20.020    Owner responsibility.

8.20.030    Notice.

8.20.040    Violation.

8.20.045    Repeat violation(s).

8.20.050    Impoundment.

8.20.060    Fees and charges.

8.20.070    Repair of vehicles on streets.


8.20.010 Discarded vehicles prohibited.

It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave, or permit the parking or storing of a motor vehicle of any kind for a period of time in excess of 24 hours, which is in a rusted, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperable, unlicensed or abandoned condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city, unless it is located or situated where it is not visible from a public street, or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise, and property operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city. A vehicle that otherwise would be in violation of this chapter will be considered in compliance if it is completely covered with an earth tone fitted cover designed for that same specific vehicle model. For the purposes of this section, a tarp or plastic cover is not a fitted cover. [Code 2000 § 6.700; Ord. 2013-004, 2013; Ord. 2014-002, 2014.]


8.20.020 Owner responsibility.

The accumulation and storage of one or more of such vehicles, as hereinbefore defined, on public or private property shall constitute rubbish and unsightly debris and a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and it shall be the duty of the registered owner of the vehicle, the owner of the private property, or the lessee or other person in possession of the private property upon which the vehicle is located to remove it from the city, or to have it located where it will not be visible from a public street. [Code 2000 § 6.705; Ord. 2014-002, 2014.]


8.20.030 Notice.

It shall be the duty of the chief of police to give written notice to the registered owner of any motor vehicle which is in violation of CMC 8.20.010 and 8.20.020, or to give such notice to the owner or lessee of the private land upon which such motor vehicle is situated, that the vehicle violates this code and demand that the motor vehicle be removed from the city within 48 hours, or that within 48 hours it must be located where it will not be visible from a public street. The notice will also state that repeat violation(s) within 60 days are subject to a 24-hour remediation requirement. The notice may be given by personal service or by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested. [Code 2000 § 6.710; Ord. 2014-002, 2014.]


8.20.040 Violation.

If the vehicle is not removed or located as provided in the notice, those persons who were given notice shall be in violation of this code. [Code 2000 § 6.715; Ord. 2014-002, 2014.]


8.20.045 Repeat violation(s).

If a vehicle previously noticed under CMC 8.20.030 is again in violation of CMC 8.20.010 within 60 days of the previous notice, the chief of police may order that the vehicle be impounded if the violation is not corrected within 24 hours after notice is provided. [Ord. 2014-002, 2014.]


8.20.050 Impoundment.

(A) If the vehicle is not moved or located in compliance with the direction contained in the notice, the chief of police may cause the vehicle to be removed to a commercial garage, an automobile wrecking yard, or any other suitable place for storage of the vehicle, or vehicles, as may be designated by the chief of police.

(B) Within 48 hours after the removal and storage of the vehicle, in compliance with this section, the chief of police shall give written notice, either personally or by certified or registered mail, to the registered owner of the vehicle, and also to the owner, lessee, or person in possession of the land from which the vehicle was removed, that the vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this code.

(C) The notice shall include the location of the place where the vehicle is stored, the costs incurred by the city for the removal or towing, the storage charges accruing, and that, if the charges are not paid in full to the city recorder within 10 days immediately following the giving of notice, the vehicle shall be deemed to have been abandoned and will thereafter be discarded as junk or may, in the discretion of the chief of police, be sold as an abandoned vehicle in the manner prescribed by this code, disposing of abandoned vehicles. [Code 2000 § 6.720.]


8.20.060 Fees and charges.

If any vehicle is impounded and stored by the chief of police, under the provisions of this code or any ordinance of the city, or pursuant to any other lawful authority of the police department, the vehicle shall not be released until all charges connected with the removal, towing, and storage of the vehicle have been fully paid, as evidence by the city recorder’s paid receipt. [Code 2000 § 6.725.]


8.20.070 Repair of vehicles on streets.

It shall be unlawful to disassemble, construct, reconstruct, repair and/or service motor vehicles of any kind in or upon any street, road, alley or public thoroughfare in the city except for emergency service in which case emergency service shall not extend over a period of two hours and shall not interfere with or impede the flow of traffic. [Code 2000 § 6.730.]


Chapter 8.25 DISTRESSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION

Sections:

8.25.010    Definitions.

8.25.020    Registration, security and maintenance obligation.

8.25.030    Registration requirements – Information required – Change in ownership.

8.25.040    Maintenance obligations.

8.25.050    Security obligations.

8.25.060    Inspection requirement.

8.25.070    City authorized to act – Enhanced penalty.

8.25.080    Appeals.


8.25.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply unless inconsistent with the context:

“Abandoned residential property” means:

(1) Residential property that is both vacant and subject to either a pending judicial execution sale under ORS 18.901 (2012) et seq., or to nonjudicial foreclosure pursuant to ORS 86.740 to 86.755 (2012); or

(2) Residential property that is both vacant and was the subject of either a judicial execution sale under ORS 18.901 (2012) et seq., or nonjudicial foreclosure pursuant to ORS 86.740 to 86.755 (2012) where legal title is retained by the beneficiary(ies) of a foreclosed trust deed or was otherwise transferred to beneficiary(ies) pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

“Chief” means the chief of police or authorized designate thereof.

“Foreclosed residential property” means residential property an owner obtains as a result of:

(1) Foreclosing a trust deed on the residential property;

(2) Obtaining a judgment foreclosing a lien on the residential property; or

(3) Purchasing the residential property at a trustee’s sale or a sheriff’s sale.

“Local” means within 30 road/driving miles distance of residential property.

“Owner” means any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity identified as having or claiming a lien interest either as a mortgagee under a mortgage or as a trustee or beneficiary under a trust deed in abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property.

“Residential property” is property as defined in ORS 18.901 (2012).

“Vacant” means condition(s) indicative of residential property being uninhabited, vacant or abandoned including (but are not limited to):

(1) Visibly overgrown and/or dead vegetation at the property;

(2) Accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail;

(3) Visible accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris;

(4) Absence of typical household furnishing consistent with active residential habitation; and/or

(5) Statements by neighbors, delivery agents, government employees that the property is uninhabited or vacant. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.020 Registration, security and maintenance obligation.

All owners of abandoned residential property and vacant foreclosed residential property are obligated to continuously comply with the registration, security, maintenance and inspection requirements imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.030 Registration requirements – Information required – Change in ownership.

(A) Residential property shall be registered by the owner(s) thereof with the recorder in the event:

(1) Of an anticipated judicial foreclosure of the property, no earlier than the commencement of any of the actions described by ORS 18.904, 18.906, 18.908 (2012) and not later than the date first set for the execution sale described in ORS 18.930 (2012);

(2) Of an anticipated nonjudicial foreclosure of the property done pursuant to ORS 86.740 to 86.755 (2012) not later than the date of service or mailing of the notice of sale described in ORS 86.740 (2012); or

(3) An owner receives written notice from the chief that the chief believes the residential property is vacant.

(B) Each registration shall be on a form approved by the recorder and contain, at a minimum, the following:

(1) The name of the trustee or mortgagee;

(2) The name of the beneficiary (if different) under the trust deed;

(3) The street/office mailing address(es) of the trustee/mortgagee and, if there is one, the beneficiary under the trust deed;

(4) The name, mailing address and contact information of a local individual or entity charged with responsibility by the trustee, mortgagee and/or beneficiary for ensuring compliance with the obligations imposed by CMC 8.25.040 through 8.25.060.

(C) Each registration shall be accompanied by payment of a registration fee which amount is to be set by council resolution.

(D) The recorder shall maintain a current list of registered residential properties and deliver a copy thereof to the office of the chief.

(E) In the event ownership of a registered residential property changes, notice of the change shall be sent to the recorder not later than 30 days after the change. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.040 Maintenance obligations.

(A) The owners of residential property determined to be or registered as abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property shall cause the property to be maintained in a generally kempt condition generally found on surrounding occupied residential property and free of weeds, dead vegetation, graffiti, trash, accumulated newspapers, circulars, flyers, discarded personal items and other items/conditions that give the appearance the property is vacant or abandoned.

(B) In the event there are outdoor pools or spas at abandoned residential property or vacant residential property, they shall either be kept in working order or drained and kept dry. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.050 Security obligations.

(A) The owners of residential property determined to be or registered as abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property shall cause the property to be secured (including closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other opening(s) allowing access to the dwelling) and thereafter maintained so as not to be readily accessible to unauthorized persons.

(B) Residential property subject to subsection (A) of this section shall be continuously posted with a notice (printed and legible with a font size no less than 12 point) listing the name and contact information of the local individual or entity identified in the city’s registration form along with the following phrases completed with the appropriate identification and contact information:

“THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ____________.”

“TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL _________.”

The posting shall be placed either on the interior of the dwelling or secured to the exterior of the dwelling. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed on weather resistant materials. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.060 Inspection requirement.

The local individual or entity identified in the registration required by CMC 8.25.030 shall inspect the residential property on not less than a monthly basis to ensure that the requirements imposed by the terms of CMC 8.25.040 and 8.25.050 are met. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.070 City authorized to act – Enhanced penalty.

(A) In the event the chief believes an owner has failed to meet the registration, maintenance, security and inspection obligations of this chapter, the chief shall send notice of said failure to the owner at the address listed on the tax rolls of the county maintained consistent with ORS 311.560 (2012) or at such other address as may be known to the chief. The notice shall set out the nature of the failure(s) to be corrected and shall give the owner not less than 14 working days from the date of the notice to correct them. In the event the owner fails to remedy the matters within the time set out in the notice (or make, in the view of the chief, adequate arrangements otherwise) the city may then enter the property and cause the failures to be corrected, charging the costs thereof to the property as a lien.

(B) In addition to the foregoing, the city may enforce the terms of this chapter as provided elsewhere in this code or in state law.

(C) If the chief believes an owner’s failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter is willful or purposeful, the chief may authorize the appropriate enforcement personnel to seek an enhanced penalty of up to $1,000 per day in addition to the general penalty provided for in CMC 1.05.120. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


8.25.080 Appeals.

(A) In the event an owner is notified that residential property under their ownership is subject to the terms of this chapter but believes the property should not be, they may appeal said determination to the chief.

(B) Any appeal by an owner shall be:

(1) In writing;

(2) Received by the chief within 10 working days of the date the owner was notified that their residential property was subject to this chapter; and

(3) Setting out in summary form the basis for their belief that their residential property should not be subject to this chapter.

(C) Upon receipt of an appeal, the chief shall review the matter and provide the owner an opportunity to give additional information if the chief believes that additional information could better inform the decision on whether to affirm, deny or modify the notification. After the owner has been given the opportunity to provide additional information, the chief shall within 10 days of the receipt of that information affirm, deny or modify the notification as to the applicability of this chapter to the residential property in writing.

The chief’s decision is final subject only to judicial review pursuant to ORS 34.010 et seq. [Ord. 2013-005, 2013.]


Chapter 8.30 WOOD BURNING

Sections:

8.30.010    Purpose.

8.30.020    Definitions.

8.30.030    Residential wood smoke restriction.

8.30.040    Residential open burning of yard debris.

8.30.050    Exemptions and prohibitions.

8.30.060    Conformity with the law.


8.30.010 Purpose.

To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Cornelius. To ensure compliance with the requirements of the Federal Clean Air Act of 1990 and to avoid the negative impacts of failure to comply with the requirements. To reduce nuisances associated with the burning of wood and debris in the city. [Ord. 2016-002 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


8.30.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply unless inconsistent with the context:

“Air quality forecasting” means the process of using available data including but not limited to local weather conditions, air quality monitoring data, weather forecasts, and atmospheric ventilation forecasts to determine actual or projected ambient concentrations of particulate matter 2.5 (PM 2.5).

“Antique stove” means a wood burning stove that is valued because of its historical significance, roughly 100 years old or older.

“Boiler” means an enclosed device using controlled flame combustion and having the primary purpose of recovering thermal energy in the form of steam or hot water.

“Central, wood-fired furnace” means a device that burns wood to produce heat that warms spaces other than the space where the furnace is located.

“Code enforcement officer” means city code enforcement officer designated by the chief of police.

“Cook stove” means a wood-fired cook stove designed primarily for cooking food.

“DEQ” means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

“Fireplace” means a site-built or factory-built masonry fireplace that is designed to be used with an open combustion chamber and intended to be used primarily for aesthetic enjoyment or as a space heater.

“Green day air quality advisory” means an air quality advisory issued by the Washington County Department of Health and Human Services indicating acceptable monitored and forecasted ambient levels of particulate matter 2.5.

“Low income” means a person or family who demonstrates economic need because their total household income is equal to or less than the low-income guidance established and maintained by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

“Masonry heater” means wood burning device with a large masonry mass that absorbs heat and reradiates it throughout the home.

“µg/m3” means micrograms per cubic meter.

“Nonputrescible waste” means any solid waste that contains no more than trivial amounts of putrescible materials, or minor amounts of putrescible materials contained in such a way that they can easily be separated from the remainder of the load without causing contamination of the load. This category includes construction demolition debris and land-clearing debris; but excludes hazardous waste as defined in ORS 466.005 and source-separated recyclables whether or not sorted into individual material categories by the generator.

“Open burning” means outdoor burning in burn barrels or incinerators, open outdoor fires and any other outdoor burning where combustion air is not effectively controlled and combustion products are not effectively vented through a stack or chimney.

“Particulate matter 2.5” means particles suspended in the air that are less than 2.5 microns in diameter.

“Pellet stove” means a heating device that uses compressed pellets made from ground, dried wood or other biomass wastes designed for use in pellet stoves as its primary source of fuel.

“Putrescible waste” means solid waste containing organic material that can be rapidly decomposed by microorganisms and which may give rise to foul smelling, offensive products during such decomposition or which is capable of attracting or providing food for birds and potential disease vectors such as rodents and flies.

“Recreational fire” means a small outdoor fire (combustible pile no larger than three feet in diameter and two feet in height), limited to the purposes of cooking or enjoyment, or fires lit in chimneys, patio fireplaces, fire pits, or other similar devices using charcoal, natural gas, propane, manufactured fire logs, or clean dry natural firewood as fuel, and which occurs in designated areas on public lands or on private property. The fire cannot serve as a disposal fire.

“Red day air quality advisory” means an air quality advisory issued by the Washington County Department of Health and Human Services indicating that ambient concentrations of particulate matter 2.5 are forecasted to average 35 µg/m3 for at least 24 hours.

“Residence” means a building used as a home, dwelling or place of abode.

“Residential open burning” means open burning on a single- or multi-family property.

“Sauna” means a small room used as a hot-air or steam bath for cleansing and refreshing the body.

“Solid fuel burning device” means an indoor woodstove, woodstove insert or any other device that burns wood, coal or other nongaseous or nonliquid fuels for aesthetic, space-heating or water-heating purposes in or for a private residence or a commercial establishment and that has a heat output of less than 1,000,000 British thermal units (BTU) per hour. “Solid fuel burning device” does not include:

(1) Fireplaces;

(2) Antique stoves;

(3) Cook stoves;

(4) Pellet stoves;

(5) Masonry heaters;

(6) Central, wood-fired furnaces;

(7) Saunas; and

(8) Boilers providing process heat to a commercial, industrial or institutional establishment.

“Violation” means a transgression of any standard, order or permit or any part thereof, as described in this chapter. Violations include both acts and omissions.

“Yellow day air quality advisory” means an air quality advisory issued by the Washington County Department of Health and Human Services indicating that ambient concentrations of particulate matter 2.5 are forecasted to approach a daily average of 30 µg/m3. [Ord. 2016-002 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


8.30.030 Residential wood smoke restriction.

(A) Air Quality Advisories. The city shall communicate to the public air quality advisories issued by the Washington County Department of Health and Human Services during the winter heating season, November 1st through March 1st.

(B) The city shall caution against the operation of fireplaces and solid fuel burning devices during a yellow day air quality advisory period.

(C) Unless determined to be exempt according to CMC 8.30.050, no person shall operate or allow to be operated a fireplace or solid fuel burning device during a red day air quality advisory. [Ord. 2016-002 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


8.30.040 Residential open burning of yard debris.

(A) No person shall at any time of the year cause or allow to be initiated any open burning of yard debris on single- or multi-family property located within city limits.

(B) In accordance with Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter 340 Division 264, this prohibition does not apply to:

(1) Recreational fires;

(2) Barbecue equipment used in connection with any residence;

(3) Fires set or permitted by any public agency when such fire is set or permitted in the performance of its official duty for the purpose of weed abatement, prevention or elimination of a fire hazard, or a hazard to public health or safety, or for instruction of employees in the methods of firefighting, which in the opinion of the public agency is necessary.

(C) Open burning fires otherwise exempt from the requirements of this section are still subject to the requirements and prohibitions of the city fire department and the State Fire Marshal. [Ord. 2016-002 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


8.30.050 Exemptions and prohibitions.

(A) It shall be permissible to operate a solid fuel burning device or fireplace during a red day air quality advisory if one or more of the following circumstances applies to the residence:

(1) Sole Source. The residence relies on one or more solid fuel burning device(s) or fireplace(s) to heat the main living space of the residence. A solid fuel burning device shall not be considered to be the sole source of heat if the residence is equipped with a permanently installed working system such as oil, natural gas, electric, geothermal, solar or propane heating system whether connected or disconnected from its source.

(2) Economic Need. The household qualifies as low income.

(3) Emergency Conditions. Emergency conditions include:

(a) A utility supplier declares energy shortages;

(b) Electric power outages occur;

(c) Interruptions of natural gas service occur;

(d) Temporary (not to exceed 60 days) failure of a residence’s primary heat source; or

(e) Other circumstances when a failure of a residence’s primary heating system presents an immediate need to operate a solid fuel burning device or fireplace for the preservation of health and welfare. [Ord. 2016-002 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


8.30.060 Conformity with the law.

This chapter shall not in any way be a substitute for, nor eliminate in any way, the necessity for conformity with any and all laws or rules of the state or its agencies, nor any ordinances or rules and regulations of the city. [Ord. 2016-002 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    General Provisions

9.10    General Offenses

9.12    Graffiti

9.15    Offenses Affecting Minors

9.20    Noise Regulations

9.25    Drug Paraphernalia

9.30    Social Gaming


Chapter 9.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

9.05.010    Definitions.


9.05.010 Definitions.

As used in Chapters 9.10 and 9.15 CMC, except where the context indicates otherwise the following terms shall mean:

“City owned and managed campus facility property” means the City Hall Campus (City Hall, city library, police department and fire department) and the Kodiak Circle Campus (community development and public works).

“Inhalant delivery system” means any noncombustible product that employs a mechanical heating element, battery or circuit and that can be used to heat nicotine or other drug solution; or a cartridge or other unit containing a nicotine solution to be placed in an electronic cigarette, device or product.

“Minor” means any person under the age of 18 years.

“Public place” means any building, place or accommodation open and available to the general public, including all municipal buildings.

“Smoking” means any inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, grass, plant, liquid, vapor or any other tobacco or tobacco-like product or any substance in any manner or any form. This includes the use of any electronic smoking device or nicotine delivery devices which creates smoke, vapor, aerosol or any other byproduct, in any manner or in any form.

“Tobacco product” means any product that contains tobacco, or is derived from tobacco or nicotine, and is intended to be put in the human body. This includes all combustible, smokeless and electronic products and devices, but does not mean United States Food and Drug Administration-approved tobacco cessation products.

“Tobacco use” means smoking, inhaling, exhaling, vaping and any other ingestion or consumption of a tobacco product. This includes the use of smokeless tobacco products such as dipping or chewing tobacco.

“Vaping” means heating, inhaling, exhaling, ingesting or otherwise using an inhalant delivery system or other vapor, aerosol or drug delivery device. [Code 2000 § 6.005; Ord. 2016-001 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 9.10 GENERAL OFFENSES

Sections:

9.10.010    Alcoholic beverages.

9.10.020    Assault.

9.10.030    Disorderly conduct.

9.10.040    Disturbance of lawful assemblies.

9.10.050    Concealed weapons.

9.10.060    Discharge of weapons.

9.10.070    Interference with police.

9.10.080    Fire control.

9.10.090    Obstruction of rights-of-way.

9.10.100    Destruction of official notices and signs.

9.10.110    Injury to or removal of property.

9.10.120    Sidewalks.

9.10.130    Public records – Handling and retention.

9.10.135    Purpose and definitions.

9.10.140    Animals.

9.10.145    Keeping of livestock.

9.10.146    Penalties.

9.10.147    Nuisance abatement and other remedies.

9.10.150    Breaking open pound.

9.10.160    Horses on streets – Permits.

9.10.170    Unattended horses.

9.10.180    Stench bombs.

9.10.190    Public gatherings at which alcoholic liquor is provided.

9.10.200    Definitions.

9.10.210    Permit required.

9.10.220    Exclusions.

9.10.230    Public indecency.

9.10.240    Trespass.

9.10.250    Camping prohibited in certain places.

9.10.255    Smoking, vaping and tobacco use prohibited.


9.10.010 Alcoholic beverages.

(A) It shall be unlawful and an infraction for any person to use, sell, or drink any alcoholic liquor or possess an open container of any alcoholic liquor in or upon any public property within the city, including but not limited to buildings, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or public school property, unless authorized by another section of the city code.

(B) It shall be unlawful and an infraction for any person to use, sell, or drink any alcoholic liquor or possess an open container of any alcoholic liquor in or upon that portion of private property open to the public which is used or intended to be used for parking of motor vehicles or pedestrian access to a building from a parking area without the express written permission of the person in charge of the private property. The restriction contained in this subsection does not apply to the parking areas and building access areas associated with buildings which are legally used for dwelling purposes pursuant to the city’s zoning code.

(C) For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings unless the context requires otherwise:

(1) “Alcoholic liquor” means any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, and capable of being consumed by a human being.

(2) “Open container” means a bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or a seal broken or the contents partially removed.

(3) “Open to the public” has the same meaning as that set forth in CMC 9.10.240(C).

(4) “Person in charge” means this term has the same meaning as that set forth in CMC 9.10.240(D).

(5) “Public property” means all real property located within the city under the exclusive use, possession, control, or ownership of a public body.

(D) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to those areas and during such time as the person in charge of property holds a valid permit for a public gathering issued pursuant to CMC 9.10.210. [Ord. 613 § 1, 1983; Ord. 721 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1992; Code 2000 § 6.105.]


9.10.020 Assault.

No person shall:

(A) Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly cause physical injury to another.

(B) With criminal negligence, cause physical injury to another by means of a deadly weapon. [Code 2000 § 6.110.]


9.10.030 Disorderly conduct.

(A) No person shall, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or by recklessly creating a risk thereof:

(1) Engage in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior.

(2) Congregate with other persons in a public place and refuse to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse.

(3) Initiate or circulate a report, knowing it to be false, concerning an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, or other emergency.

(4) Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which he is not licensed or privileged to do.

(B) No person shall knowingly permit any disorderly conduct on any premises owned or controlled by him. [Code 2000 § 6.115.]


9.10.040 Disturbance of lawful assemblies.

No person shall knowingly interrupt, disturb or annoy any lawful assemblage, either public or private, by any offensive acts committed within such assembly or so near the same as to disturb the order of the meeting. [Code 2000 § 6.120.]


9.10.050 Concealed weapons.

No person other than an authorized peace officer or person licensed pursuant to ORS 166.240 shall carry concealed on or about his person in any manner any revolver, pistol or other firearm; or any knife, other than an ordinary pocket knife; or any dirk, dagger, stiletto, metal knuckles, or any weapon by the use of which injury could be inflicted upon person or property. [Code 2000 § 6.125.]


9.10.060 Discharge of weapons.

(A) No person other than an authorized peace officer shall fire or discharge within the city any air gun or weapon which acts by force of gunpowder or other explosive, or by the use of jet or rocket propulsion.

(B) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the firing or discharging of any weapon:

(1) By any person in the defense or protection of his property, person or family.

(2) At any place duly designed or commonly used for target practice. [Code 2000 § 6.130.]


9.10.070 Interference with police.

(A) No person shall hinder, delay, obstruct or resist any police officer or person duly empowered with police authority who is acting in the discharge of his duty.

(B) No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a police officer or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from such custody.

(C) No person shall impersonate, falsely assume or pretend to be a law enforcement officer.

(D) No person shall use or permit the use of property for planning or promoting criminal activities or violation of the code of the city.



(E) No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of any police radio communication system of the city.

(F) No person shall knowingly make or file with the police department of the city any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime. [Code 2000 § 6.135.]


9.10.080 Fire control.

(A) No person shall intentionally give any false alarm of fire or aid or abet in the commission of such an act.

(B) No person at a fire shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner or refuse to obey promptly any order of any member of the fire department or resist, obstruct or hinder any member of the fire department. For the purposes of this section, all members of the fire department are endowed with the same powers of arrest as are conferred upon peace officers for violations of this code. [Code 2000 § 6.140.]


9.10.090 Obstruction of rights-of-way.

(A) No person shall, except as otherwise permitted by this code:

(1) Obstruct, cause to be obstructed or assist in obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any public right-of-way.

(2) Use any public right-of-way or portion thereof for the selling, storing or display of merchandise or equipment except as may otherwise be provided by this code.

(3) Deposit any earth or other debris upon any public right-of-way.

(B) The term public right-of-way includes any street, road, alley, right-of-way, and any pedestrian or bicycle easement authorized for public use.

(C) No person may construct or place a path, fence, wall or structure within a right-of-way or place any object in a right-of-way in a manner that is inconsistent with its use for right-of-way purposes without first having received a revocable permit from the city council. Approval or denial of such revocable permit is within the sole discretion of the city council. The issuance of such permit may be conditioned upon the provision by the requesting person of liability insurance insuring the city’s interests, removal of improvements at the permittee’s expense, limitations of use, and the imposition of any other conditions deemed necessary by the city council. To be effective, a permit must be accepted in writing by the permittee and, for permits issued for a period of six months or longer, recorded with reference to the property adjacent to the right-of-way that is subject to the permit. The city manager may act on behalf of the city council when a request is to place excavated material, earth or debris in the right-of-way or to store materials in a right-of-way for a temporary period. [Ord. 716 § 2, 1991; Code 2000 § 6.145.]


9.10.100 Destruction of official notices and signs.

No person shall willfully deface or tear down any official notice or bulletin or any official sign or signal posted or placed in conformity with the law. [Code 2000 § 6.150.]


9.10.110 Injury to or removal of property.

(A) No person shall willfully or negligently cut, remove, deface or in any manner injure or damage real or personal property of the city within or outside the corporate limits.

(B) No person shall willfully or negligently cut, destroy, remove or injure any plant, flower, shrub, tree or bush growing upon any property owned or controlled by the city, within or outside the corporate limits.

(C) No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, or willfully break or destroy any property, real or personal, belonging to or under the control of another. [Code 2000 § 6.155.]


9.10.120 Sidewalks.

(A) No person or group of persons shall so gather or stand upon any sidewalk in such manner as to prevent, impede or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian traffic.

(B) No person or persons shall fail or refuse to disperse when lawfully ordered to do so by any police officer.

(C) No person shall permit any cellar door or grate located in or upon a sidewalk to remain open except when such entrance is being used; and when being used, such entrance shall be opened only with proper safeguards to protect pedestrians using the sidewalk. [Code 2000 § 6.160.]


9.10.130 Public records – Handling and retention.

(A) No person shall, without proper authority, take or remove any public record, document, book or paper on file or kept on record in any public office of the city.

(B) No person without proper authority shall mutilate or destroy any public record, document, book or paper on file or kept on record in any public office of the city.

(C) No person shall retain any public record, document, book or paper after lawful demand has been made for its return. [Code 2000 § 6.165.]


9.10.135 Purpose and definitions.

The purpose of CMC 9.10.135 through 9.10.147, inclusive, is to regulate the keeping of livestock at residences within the city. This chapter is not intended to regulate the lawful retail sale of goods within the commercial zones of the community nor is it intended to address the keeping of livestock in industrial zones within the city.

For purposes of CMC 9.10.135 through 9.10.147, inclusive, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings unless inconsistent with the context:

(A) “Animal” means any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian or insect, categorized as follows:

(1) “Bee” means a social colonial insect, kept in a beehive for purposes of producing honey and/or for pollination and does not include mason bees (Osmia rufa);

(2) “Cat” means a domesticated animal of the feline family (Felis catus);

(3) “Dog” means a domesticated animal of the canine family (Canis lupis familiaris);

(4) “Exotic animal” means an exotic or native animal not normally domesticated in the United States or that is wild by nature. “Exotic animal” includes the following orders and families (whether bred in the wild or captivity) and any hybrid with a domestic species; however, the listed animals are examples and not an exhaustive list or limit on the generality of each group:

(a) Canidae such as wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals and other nondomesticated dogs,

(b) Cervidae such as deer, moose and elk,

(c) Crocodilia such as alligators, caymen, and crocodiles,

(d) Falconiformes such as eagles, falcons, hawks and owls,

(e) Felidae such as lions, tigers, bobcats, lynx, cougars, leopards and other nondomesticated cats,

(f) Nonhuman primates and prosimians such as monkeys, chimpanzees and baboons,

(g) Procyonidae such as raccoons,

(h) Reptilia, including all venomous and constricting snakes, and

(i) All other animals not within the other animal categories of: bee, cat, dog, indoor animal, livestock or rabbit;

(5) “Indoor animal” means an animal kept inside a residential dwelling unit;

(6) “Livestock” means a domesticated animal fitting any of the following:

(a) Miniature livestock, livestock of a dwarfed variety, or species bred so as to be a smaller version than its “standard livestock” counterpart;

(b) Poultry, includes, but is not limited to, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese, quail, peacocks, pheasant, guinea birds, pigeons and doves; and

(c) Standard livestock, includes, but is not limited to, horses, bulls, cows, calves, heifers, mules, donkeys, asses, pigs, sheep, goats or llamas;

(7) “Rabbit” means a domesticated animal of the leporidae family.

(B) “Keeper” means any person owning, keeping, having custody of, or responsibility for control or care, possession, or harboring of an animal or who permits, allows or suffers an animal to remain on property owned or controlled by the person, regardless of whether that person has an ownership interest in the animal. Animal services facilities are not a keeper unless otherwise expressly provided for elsewhere in the code.

(C) Any person or property brought into the city via a forced annexation shall be exempt from the standards of this chapter until such time the property is redeveloped or sold. [Ord. 2015-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


9.10.140 Animals.

(A) No person shall torture, abandon, mutilate or needlessly kill any animal or bird; nor shall any person transport or permit to be transported any animal in a cruel and inhumane manner.

(B) No person shall fail to provide any animal in his custody with food, drink and protection from the elements.

(C) No person shall place or distribute any poison or other substance with the intent of poisoning any animal, except those animals commonly recognized as pests or rodents.

(D) No person shall keep any dangerous animal, wild or domesticated, within the city.

(E) No keeper may allow an animal, other than a cat, to run at large upon any street, sidewalk, public place not designated for that use or private property that is not under the control of the keeper. [Code 2000 § 6.170; Ord. 2015-04 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


9.10.145 Keeping of livestock.

(A) Keeping Livestock. Livestock may be kept in the city consistent with the following standards:

(1) If the keeper is in compliance with their livestock permit;

(2) Livestock are limited as follows:

	Livestock Categories	Maximum Number of Livestock Allowed on Single-Family Residential Property	Prohibited Livestock

	 	5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft.	Over 10,000 sq. ft.	 

	Poultry	6	13	Guinea Hens, Peacocks, Peahens, Roosters, Geese, Turkeys, Cockerel, Male Poultry (except Drake)

	Miniature Livestock	Prohibited	2	Uncastrated Males

	Standard Livestock	Prohibited	Prohibited	All Types

(3) Livestock may not be bred;

(4) Products generated by livestock, such as eggs, wool, hides or meat, may not be sold from residential property unless permitted as an approved home occupation;

(5) Livestock may not be slaughtered or butchered in public view on residential property;

(6) Livestock must be contained consistent with the following standards:

(a) All portions of an enclosure for the housing or shelter of livestock are to be located behind the front building plane of the dwelling;

(b) All portions of an enclosure for poultry are to be located a minimum of five feet from any property line;

(c) All portions of an enclosure for miniature livestock are to be located a minimum of 15 feet from any property line;

(d) All portions of an enclosure must be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times to prevent any condition which may be dangerous or detrimental to the health of the public or animals or constitute a nuisance;

(e) The outdoor, open air portion of the enclosure must meet the relevant minimum square footage requirements set out below, be able to provide the animals with the ability to feed, exercise and protect themselves from the elements as well as from other animals and be constructed in conformity with the city’s land use regulations and all applicable building code:

	Livestock Categories	Outdoor Portion of Animal Enclosure Minimum Square Footage

	Poultry	10 square feet per animal

	Miniature Livestock	1,000 square feet per animal

(7) Food storage for livestock must have secure sides and lids and be located or kept behind the front building plane of the residence and a minimum of five feet from all property lines;

(8) No more than one cubic yard of solid waste may be kept on the property at any one time and must be kept dry and be located behind the front building plane of the residence and a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines;

(9) Miniature livestock that can be classified as indoor animals are exempt from the livestock enclosure standards; and

(10) Poultry and standard livestock may not be classified as indoor animals.

(B) Permitting. The keeping of permitted poultry pursuant to the standards required within this chapter is exempt from permitting requirements. Prior to keeping livestock, other than poultry, a keeper must:

(1) Submit a livestock permit on a form provided by the city demonstrating compliance with the standards of this section. Incomplete permits or permits submitted without the fee under subsection (B)(2) of this section will be denied;

(2) Submit a nonrefundable livestock permit fee, the amount of which will be set by council resolution and be sufficient to offset the reasonable administrative costs of the city in administering the permit;

(3) Obtain the approval by the community development director; and

(4) Noncompliance with an approved permit and/or the requirements of this chapter will subject a keeper to citation and revocation of the permit and/or right to keep livestock. [Ord. 2015-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


9.10.146 Penalties.

(A) Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and shall be processed according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.15 CMC.

(B) Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate infraction.

(C) The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies available to the city under CMC 9.10.147. [Ord. 2015-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


9.10.147 Nuisance abatement and other remedies.

In addition to the penalties provided for in CMC 9.10.146, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter is considered a public nuisance and may be abated summarily, or in accordance with the abatement procedures set forth in this code, or by any other legal means available to the city. [Ord. 2015-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015.]


9.10.150 Breaking open pound.

No person shall break open or in any manner, directly or indirectly, aid or assist in or counsel or advise the breaking open of any city pound or shall hinder, delay or obstruct any person duly authorized in taking up or taking to the city pound any animal liable to be impounded. [Code 2000 § 6.175.]


9.10.160 Horses on streets – Permits.

(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead, direct, control or be in possession of any horse:

(1) Upon any sidewalk or walkway, improved or unimproved, located within the right-of-way of any public street, road or highway within the city; or

(2) In or upon private property without first obtaining the permission of the owner thereof; or

(3) In or upon any property owned by the city, including but not limited to city parks, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city manager.

(B) The city manager may issue such permits after first determining that such use of city property will not result in damage thereto and will not unreasonably interfere with other lawful and authorized uses. [Code 2000 § 6.180.]


9.10.170 Unattended horses.

It shall be unlawful for any person to tie, fix or otherwise connect any horse to a pole, post or other structure located within the right-of-way of any public street, road or highway within the city. [Code 2000 § 6.185.]


9.10.180 Stench bombs.

No person other than a peace officer acting in line of duty shall in any manner deposit upon the person or property of another any liquid, gaseous or solid substance which is injurious to person or property. No person shall attempt or aid in the attempt or commission of any such prohibited act. [Code 2000 § 6.190.]


9.10.190 Public gatherings at which alcoholic liquor is provided.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to conduct, sponsor or operate a public gathering at which alcoholic liquor is sold, provided or otherwise made available under the authority of a special Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) permit without first obtaining a permit under the requirements of CMC 9.10.210. [Ord. 620 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 6.195.]


9.10.200 Definitions.

For purposes of CMC 9.10.190 to 9.10.220, inclusive, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings:

(A) “Public gathering” shall mean an assembly or gathering of two or more people in a structure or facility open to the public whether such people are in attendance by reason of an invitation or not.

(B) “Alcoholic liquor” shall mean any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, and capable of being consumed by a human being. The term “alcoholic liquor” shall include “wine” as defined by the provisions of ORS 471.022.

(C) “Open to the public” shall mean that persons, other than the owner or person in control of the structure or facility, are permitted, invited or otherwise allowed within the structure or facility for the public gathering. Within the provisions of CMC 9.10.190 through 9.10.220, inclusive, an organization licensed by the State of Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) as a “private club,” as the same is defined in ORS 472.010(8), shall be deemed not “open to the public.” [Ord. 620 § 1, 1984; Ord. 692 § 1, 1989; Code 2000 § 6.200.]


9.10.210 Permit required.

(A) Every person, firm, association or corporation sponsoring, conducting, or otherwise arranging a public gathering shall first obtain a permit from the chief of police of the city of Cornelius. The application shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 14 calendar days prior to the date of the proposed public gathering, together with an application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council, on a form or forms provided by the chief of police. Among other things, the applicant shall estimate the number of people who will attend the public gathering.

(B) At each public gathering, when the estimated attendance is two but not more than 100 people, the applicant shall be responsible to provide, at the applicant’s cost, two uniformed, regular or reserve policemen from the city of Cornelius police department. For each additional 100 people estimated to be in attendance at said public gathering, the applicant shall provide one additional policeman. The applicant shall pay the actual cost of providing such security protection at fees to be established by the chief of police and payable at the time the public gathering permit is issued.

(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, the chief of police may require additional policemen for security protection at the proposed public gathering if the applicant or applicants have conducted a public gathering within 24 months of the proposed public gathering and the conduct or activities of those in attendance at said prior public gathering resulted in the arrest or citation of any such attendees. [Ord. 620 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 6.205; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


9.10.220 Exclusions.

The terms and provisions of this section shall not apply to a public gathering held, convened, or conducted within an establishment, or structure for which OLCC has issued an annual license or permit, and license or permit is valid and in good standing at the time of the public gathering. [Ord. 620 § 1, 1984; Code 2000 § 6.210.]


9.10.230 Public indecency.

No person shall, while in or in view of a public place, knowingly perform an act of urination or defecation, except in toilets provided for that purpose. [Ord. 683 § 1, 1988; Code 2000 § 6.215.]


9.10.240 Trespass.

(A) A person commits the infraction of trespass if the person enters or remains unlawfully in or upon premises.

(B) For the purposes of this section and CMC 9.10.250, the following terms shall mean:

(1) “Building,” in addition to its ordinary meaning, includes any booth, vehicle, boat, aircraft or other structure adapted for overnight accommodation of persons or for carrying on business therein. Where a building consists of separate units, including, but not limited to, separate apartments, offices or rented rooms, each unit is, in addition to being a part of such building, a separate building.

(2) “Enter or remain unlawfully” means:

(a) To enter or remain in or upon premises when the premises, at the time of such entry or remaining, are not open to the public or when the entrant is not otherwise licensed or privileged to do so; or

(b) To fail to leave premises that are open to the public after being lawfully directed to do so by the person in charge.

(C) “Open to the public” means premises which by their physical nature, function, custom, usage, notice or lack thereof or other circumstances at the time would cause a reasonable person to believe that no permission to enter or remain is required.

(D) “Person in charge” means a person, a representative or employee of the person who has lawful control of premises by ownership, tenancy, official position or other legal relationship. It includes, but is not limited to, the person, or holder of a position, designated as the person or position-holder in charge by the Governor, board, commission or governing body of any political subdivision of this state, and includes a peace officer when designated in writing by a person in charge to act on behalf of that person.

(E) “Premises” includes any building and any real property, whether privately or publicly owned. [Ord. 719 § 1, 1992; Code 2000 § 6.220.]


9.10.250 Camping prohibited in certain places.

(A) It is an infraction for any person to camp in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, or any other public property, any property open to the public, or under any bridgeway or viaduct, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the city code, by declaration of the mayor in emergency circumstances, or by the person in charge of the property.

(B) As used in this section:

(1) “To camp” means to set up, or to remain in or at, a campsite.

(2) “Campsite” means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping matter, or any stove or fire, is placed, established, or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof. [Ord. 719 § 2, 1992; Code 2000 § 6.225.]


9.10.255 Smoking, vaping and tobacco use prohibited.

(A) Smoking, vaping and tobacco use is prohibited on or in any city owned or managed campus facility (City Hall Campus and Kodiak Circle Campus).

(B) The city manager may adopt regulations to permit smoking, vaping and tobacco use by city employees, which might otherwise be prohibited by this section, to the extent necessary to comply with a collective bargaining agreement. [Ord. 2016-001 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 9.12 GRAFFITI

Sections:

9.12.010    Definitions.

9.12.020    Graffiti prohibited.

9.12.030    Possession of graffiti implement prohibited.

9.12.040    Other violations.

9.12.050    Community service.

9.12.060    Graffiti removal – Notice and procedures.


9.12.010 Definitions.

“Abate” means to remove graffiti from the public view.

“Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container adapted or made for spraying paint.

“Etching device” means a glass cutter, awl or any device capable of scratching or etching the surface of any structure or personal property.

“Felt tip marker” means an indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth inch.

“Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface with paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, regardless of content, which is visible from premises open to the public, such as public rights-of-way or other publicly owned property, and that has been placed upon any real or personal property, such as buildings, fences, and structures, without authorization from the owner or responsible party.

“Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, an etching device, or a graffiti stick.

“Graffiti nuisance property” means a property upon which graffiti has been placed and such graffiti has been permitted to remain for more than seven days after the property owner of record or occupant has been issued written notification.

“Graffiti stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-fourth of an inch wide.

“Manager” means the Cornelius city manager or the manager’s designee who is responsible for the administration of the graffiti nuisance abatement program under this chapter.

“Occupant” means any person, tenant, sublessee, successor or assignee that has control over property.

“Owner” means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property and includes but is not limited to a mortgagor in possession, an occupant, or a person, agent, firm or corporation that owns or exercises control over items of property, such as utility poles, drop boxes, postal collection boxes, and other types of containers.

“Permit” means to knowingly allow, suffer, or acquiesce by a failure, refusal or neglect to abate.

“Premises open to the public” means all public spaces, including but not limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, rights-of-way and public open space, and private property onto which the public is regularly invited or permitted to enter for any purpose.

“Property” means any real or personal property, including but not limited to items affixed or appurtenant to real property or premises, house, building, fence, or structure, and items of machinery, drop boxes, waste containers, utility poles and vaults, and post office collection boxes.

“Responsible party” means an owner, an entity or person acting as an agent for an owner by agreement, that has authority over the property or is responsible for the property’s maintenance or management. There may be more than one party responsible for a particular property.

“Unauthorized” means without consent of the owner, occupant or responsible party. [Ord. 876 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.230.010.]


9.12.020 Graffiti prohibited.

(A) It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to place, or put by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, mark, or any type of commonly known graffiti on any public or private property without the consent of the owner of the premises on which the property is located, or upon natural surfaces such as rocks, trees or any surface whatsoever. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti or aid or abet another person in applying graffiti.

(B) A violation of subsection (A) of this section is a violation punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed $500.00. Each wall or object upon which graffiti is placed constitutes a separate violation. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation. [Ord. 876 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.230.020.]


9.12.030 Possession of graffiti implement prohibited.

(A) No person may possess, with the intent to unlawfully apply graffiti on any real or personal property of another, any graffiti implement.

(B) Unlawful possession of a graffiti implement is a violation of this chapter punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation.

(C) In addition to issuing a citation, a graffiti implement used or possessed in violation of this section may be immediately seized and impounded by the police department. The court, upon disposition of the issued citation, shall determine whether the instrument shall be returned to the defendant or deemed to be contraband subject to destruction under Oregon law. [Ord. 876 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.230.030.]


9.12.040 Other violations.

(A) Any property located in the city of Cornelius that becomes a graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its remedies.

(B) Every responsible party who permits a property to become a graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

(C) Any retail business located in the city of Cornelius that sells “aerosol paint containers” as defined in CMC 9.12.010 and displays those containers is required to secure those aerosol paint containers in a locked display case requiring an employee to open that case and retrieve the aerosol paint container. Failure to secure aerosol paint containers in a locking display case is a violation of this chapter and punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. [Ord. 876 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.230.040; Ord. 889 § 1, 2007.]


9.12.050 Community service.

In lieu of a portion of any fine that may be imposed under CMC 9.12.020 and 9.12.030, the court shall order the violator to perform community service, unless the court finds that special circumstances exist that would preclude such service. Reasonable effort shall be made to require the violator to perform a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the person, preferably community service that constitutes in significant part the removal of graffiti. [Ord. 876 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.230.050.]


9.12.060 Graffiti removal – Notice and procedures.

(A) The owner or occupant of any property within the city of Cornelius shall remove any graffiti from that property within seven days of the graffiti’s appearance.

(B) Whenever the manager determines that graffiti exists on any property in the city, the manager may issue an abatement notice. The owner or occupant shall have seven days after the date of service of the notice to remove the graffiti.

(C) The notice shall be served by addressing the notice to the owner and occupant and delivering it by personal service or by mailing it as certified mail. Service may also be accomplished by posting the notice in a clearly visible location on the subject property.

(D) If the person who was served the notice is unable to remove, or cause to remove, the graffiti within the seven-day period due to a hardship, he or she may apply to the manager for an extension of time in which to remove the graffiti. For purposes of this subsection, “hardship” includes but is not limited to serious illness or disability, extremely inclement weather that temporarily prevents removal of the graffiti, or other extraordinary circumstance.

(E) If graffiti is not removed within seven days after serving notice on the owner and occupant, the manager may cause a citation to be issued to the owner or occupant or both requiring the person to appear in Cornelius municipal court.

(F) Failure to remove graffiti as required by this section is a violation punishable by a fine of up to $150.00. Each day the graffiti remains after the notice is sent constitutes a separate offense.

(G) The city manager may adopt rules and procedures to implement this chapter. [Ord. 876 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.230.060.]


Chapter 9.15 OFFENSES AFFECTING MINORS

Sections:

9.15.010    Sales to minors prohibited.

9.15.020    Sale of intoxicating liquor to minors.

9.15.030    Use of liquor by minor.

9.15.040    Curfew.

9.15.050    Parental responsibility.

9.15.060    Custody of minor.


9.15.010 Sales to minors prohibited.

No person shall sell, barter, trade, give or in any manner furnish to any minor under the age of 18 years, for his own consumption, any tobacco, cigars or cigarettes in any form, or any compound in which tobacco forms a component. [Code 2000 § 6.255.]


9.15.020 Sale of intoxicating liquor to minors.

No person shall sell, barter, trade, give or in any manner furnish to any person under the age of 21 any alcoholic liquor. [Code 2000 § 6.260.]


9.15.030 Use of liquor by minor.

No person under the age of 21 shall purchase, acquire, consume or have in his possession alcoholic liquor. [Code 2000 § 6.265.]


9.15.040 Curfew.

(A) No minor under the age of 18 years shall be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours specified herein, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and custody of the minor, or unless the minor is then engaged in an employment or night school which requires his presence in public places during the hours specified in this section.

(B) For the purpose of this section, the applicable hours shall be:

(1) As to children under 14 years who have not begun high school, between 9:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that during the months of June, July and August, the hours shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following morning;

(2) As to children 14 years of age or over or who have begun high school, the hours shall be between 10:15 p.m., Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning and between 12:00 midnight on Friday or Saturday, or any day prior to a legal holiday when no school is scheduled for said legal holiday, and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that during the months of June, July and August, the hours shall be between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning.

(C) Any child under the age of 18 years employed in selling, delivering or wrapping newspapers shall obtain from the newspaper employer, and the employer shall issue to the child employed, a card showing such employment within the protection of the preceding provision. [Code 2000 § 6.270.]


9.15.050 Parental responsibility.

It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian, or the person having the care or custody of any child under the age of 18 years, to permit, or by inefficient control to allow, such child to be in or remain in or upon any street, alley, park or other public place between the hours set forth in CMC 9.15.040. Proof that the child was on any street, alley, park or other public place at a time prohibited shall, prima facie, be sufficient evidence to sustain a conviction of a violation of this section. [Code 2000 § 6.275.]


9.15.060 Custody of minor.

Any peace officer may take into temporary custody a child violating any of the provisions of CMC 9.15.040 and, for the first violation, shall as soon as practicable notify the child’s parent, guardian or other person responsible for the child of the violation and shall take or send the child home and release the child to the custody of his parent or other responsible person. In case any child under the age of 18 years shall again violate any of the provisions of CMC 9.15.040, the child may be apprehended and taken into temporary custody as a juvenile offender and delinquent and may be brought before the juvenile court of the court in which such child resides or is found. [Code 2000 § 6.280.]


Chapter 9.20 NOISE REGULATIONS

Sections:

9.20.005    Definitions.

9.20.010    Sound measurement.

9.20.015    Noise limits.

9.20.020    Enforcement.

9.20.025    Noise disturbance prohibited.

9.20.030    Interference in reception.

9.20.035    Variances and permits.

9.20.040    Exceptions.

9.20.045    Chapter additional to other law.

9.20.050    Penalties – Civil enforcement by city.

9.20.055    Severability provision.


9.20.005 Definitions.

(A) “Amplifying equipment” means public address systems, musical instruments and similar devices capable of electronically amplifying sound.

(B) “City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(C) “Construction” means any and all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing, repair and/or related activities involving buildings, structures, public or private improvements.

(D) “Domestic power tools” means any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool or similar device commonly used in residential applications.

(E) “Emergency work” means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following severe weather, natural disasters or other unplanned or unanticipated events in order to protect property or persons from exposure to imminent danger.

(F) “Motor vehicle” means vehicle capable of operating on land or water which is designed to be self-propelled or is designed or used for the transport of persons or property; and/or as defined by the Oregon Revised Statutes.

(G) “Noise disturbance” means any sound which:

(1) Injures or endangers the safety or health of humans; or

(2) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.

(H) “Noise regulations” shall mean, unless the context requires otherwise, the terms of this chapter.

(I) “Noise-sensitive unit” shall include any building or other structure (or portion thereof) containing a residence, place of overnight accommodation, church, day care center, hospital, school, or nursing care center. For the purpose of this definition, “residence” and “overnight accommodation” does not include living/sleeping quarters of a caretaker or watchperson on industrial or commercial property provided by the owner or operator of the industrial or commercial facility.

(J) “Person” means any individual, association (incorporated or otherwise) or other entity including any officer, department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the United States, a state or political subdivision thereof.

(K) “Plainly audible” means any sound for which any information content of that sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as (but not limited to) understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal or comprehensible musical rhythms can be heard at a distance of 75 feet.

(L) “Warning device” means an electronic device used to protect persons or property from injury or damage, including but not limited to fire alarms, theft alarms, car alarms, and vehicle horns. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.800.]


9.20.010 Sound measurement.

(A) While sound measurements are not required for the enforcement of this chapter, should measurements be made, they shall be made with a sound level meter. The sound level meter:

(1) Shall be an instrument in good operating condition, meeting the requirements of a Type I or Type II meter (per ANSI standards).

(2) Shall contain at least an A weighted scale, and both fast and slow meter response capability.

(B) If measurements are made, the person making those measurements shall have completed training using the sound level meter, and shall use measurement procedures consistent with the training. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.805.]


9.20.015 Noise limits.

It is unlawful for any person to produce, or permit to be produced, with or from a sound-producing source, sound which:

(A) When measured at or within the boundary of a property on which a noise sensitive unit, not the source of the sound, is located, exceeds:

(1) Fifty-five dB at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; or

(2) Sixty dB at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. the same day.

(B) When measured at or within the boundary of or within a property on which no noise-sensitive unit is located, and the noise originates from outside the property, if the noise level exceeds:

(1) Sixty dB at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day; or

(2) Seventy-five dB at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on a public right-of-way at a distance of at least 100 feet from the source of the sound. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.806; Ord. 882 § 1, 2007]


9.20.020 Enforcement.

The responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter shall reside with the Cornelius city manager or the Cornelius chief of police or their respective designates. All persons empowered to enforce the terms of this chapter shall have, in addition to the powers that may be necessary and proper for the enforcement of these noise regulations:

(A) The ability to enter and inspect any private property or place for violations of these regulations as permitted by state and federal law;

(B) The power to issue summonses, notices of violation or other orders to any person in violation of these regulations; and

(C) To seize items that are in or being used for or in conjunction with a violation of these regulations for evidentiary purposes. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.810.]


9.20.025 Noise disturbance prohibited.

(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, cause, suffer or permit to be made or continued any noise disturbance as the same is defined in CMC 9.20.010(G) within the city.

(B) The following are deemed to qualify as “noise disturbances” for purposes of subsection (A) of this section and CMC 9.20.010(G), but this enumeration shall not be construed to be exclusive, namely:

(1) Permitting any animal to cause annoyance, or a disturbance at any time by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other sound that is heard beyond the boundary of the owner’s or keeper’s property;

(2) Using any engine, either stationary or moving, so as to create any loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;

(3) The sounding of any exhaust brake, horn or signal device or any other device on any automobile, motorcycle, truck, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal. Exhaust brakes may be applied only during an emergency to stop or slow to avoid a collision;

(4) The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on the same day;

(5) Sound-producing devices such as, but not limited to, musical instruments, loudspeakers, sound amplifying equipment, public address systems, radios, tape recorders and/or players, compact disc players, phonographs, television sets and stereo systems, including those installed in or on vehicles;

(6) Amplified sound in any outdoor facility except under the following conditions:

(a) Sound levels at the perimeter of the facility do not exceed the maximum levels of this chapter.

(b) Continuous amplified sound may be transmitted only 50 minutes of each hour if a permit to exceed CMC 9.20.015 levels is obtained.

(c) Even if a permit to exceed CMC 9.20.015 levels is obtained, continued amplified sound may not be transmitted more than four hours during any eight-hour block of time during weekends, and not to exceed three hours between 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays;

(7) The discharge of fireworks and other explosive devices except as allowed pursuant to the administrative rules of the Oregon State Fire Marshal’s office;

(8) The removal or rendering inoperative for purposes other than maintenance, repair or replacement of any noise suppression device on any motor vehicle or other mechanical equipment;

(9) The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled;

(10) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair or in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary sounds, grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;

(11) The operation of a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching or other such noise from the tires in contact with the ground because of rapid acceleration or deceleration, except that noise resulting from emergency action to avoid imminent danger;

(12) The use of a dynamic braking device engaged except to avoid imminent danger;

(13) The operation of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle, except during sanctioned parades. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.820.]


9.20.030 Interference in reception.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use within the corporate limits of the city any electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes interference with radio, television or emergency communication of good engineering design. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.825.]


9.20.035 Variances and permits.

(A) Any person who owns, controls, or operates a sound source, which does or may not comply with the terms of these noise regulations, may apply to the city manager for a variance from the provisions hereof.

(B) The applicant shall be required to pay a fee in the amount approved by resolution of the council for the processing of the variance on a city-approved form. In addition to the application form, the applicant shall provide such information as the city manager deems relevant and necessary to the consideration of the variance, including but not limited to the date, time and nature of the sound source and the reason(s) for the variance.

(C) When reviewing the request for the variance, the city manager shall give consideration to the following three factors:

(1) The geography, zone and population density of the affected area;

(2) Whether the public health, safety and welfare is affected;

(3) Whether compliance with the provisions of the noise regulations from which the variance is sought would produce hardship greater than the benefit that would be produced by the granting of the variance.

(D) Except where the city manager has submitted the matter to the city council consistent with the terms of subsection (F) of this section, he/she shall have 10 business days to consider the variance and may approve, deny or condition the variance with such terms as he/she, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, believes will advance the public’s interest and the purposes of these regulations. Any decision of the city manager shall be in writing. In approving or conditioning a variance, the city manager may also include a requirement for the provision of a bond, letter of credit or other financial security in an amount designed to cover the costs of assuring compliance with or enforcement of the terms of the variance, which bond, letter of credit or other financial device shall be provided to the city at least 24 hours prior to the time of the activity for which the variance is sought.

(E) Failure to comply with the terms of the written variance, including failure to provide financial security, shall be grounds for:

(1) Its immediate revocation by the city manager; and/or

(2) The forfeiture of the bond or other financial security for the costs associated with the city’s activities in assuring compliance with or enforcement of the variance.

(F) The city manager may submit any question arising with respect to the granting of a variance to the city council, which shall consider the matter at a time and place the council believes appropriate. The council shall have all the powers set out in subsection (D) of this section and may approve, deny or condition the variance as they may believe, in the exercise of their discretion, will advance the interests of the city. The decision of the city council shall be final. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.830.]


9.20.040 Exceptions.

Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9.20.025, the following sounds are exempted from the provisions of these noise regulations:

(A) Sounds created by activities or events for which a variance from the city manager or city council consistent with the provisions of CMC 9.20.035 has been obtained.

(B) Sounds created by organized athletic or other group activities, when such activities are approved by a government entity to be conducted on its property and the property is generally used for such purposes, such as stadiums, parks, streets, public plazas, schools, fairgrounds, airports and athletic fields. These exceptions do not prohibit the city manager, or his designee, from declaring a specific event or activity in violation of this chapter, or of other laws, ordinances or regulations.

(C) Sounds caused by emergency work, or by ordinary and accepted use of emergency equipment, vehicles and apparatus, regardless of whether such work is performed by a public or private agency, or upon public or private property.

(D) Sounds caused by bona fide use of emergency warning devices and alarm systems.

(E) Sounds regulated by federal law, including, but not limited to, sounds caused by railroads or aircraft.

(F) Sounds caused by demolition activities when performed under a permit issued by appropriate governmental authorities and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of the same day.

(G) Sounds caused by industrial, agricultural or construction activities during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. of the same day, other than sounds regulated under subsection (E) of this section, and which do not violate CMC 9.20.025(B)(4).

(H) Sounds caused by regular vehicular traffic upon premises open to the public.

(I) Sounds caused by air-, electrical- or gas-driven domestic tools, including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, lawn edgers, radial arm, circular and table saws, and/or other similar lawn or construction tools, but not including tools used for vehicle repair, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday.

(J) Sounds caused by chainsaws, when used for pruning, trimming or cutting of live trees. When used for private woodcutting, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. of the same day.

(K) Sounds caused by non-amplified human voice.

This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use or operation of any such device when necessary for the protection of life or property, for the care or treatment of sick or injured persons, or for the operation of a public utility. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.836.]


9.20.045 Chapter additional to other law.

The provisions of these noise regulations are cumulative and nonexclusive and shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy available to the city or other person. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.840.]


9.20.050 Penalties – Civil enforcement by city.

A violation of these noise regulations is a Class “A” infraction, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $1,000. Each and every day during which any provision of these noise regulations are violated shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing, the city may, with the approval of the city manager, maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain the violation of the provisions of these noise regulations. In such an event, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorneys’ fees. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.850.]


9.20.055 Severability provision.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these noise regulations is found to be unconstitutional, or otherwise unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the regulations. [Ord. 875 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 6.860.]


Chapter 9.25 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA

Sections:

9.25.010    Drug paraphernalia – Selling, giving, or possessing.

9.25.020    Definitions.

9.25.030    Exceptions.


9.25.010 Drug paraphernalia – Selling, giving, or possessing.

It is unlawful for any person to sell, deliver, possess, or manufacture drug paraphernalia that will be used to unlawfully plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance as defined by ORS 475.005. [Ord. 891 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 6.900.]


9.25.020 Definitions.

(A) For purposes of this chapter, “drug paraphernalia” is defined as all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body cocaine, methamphetamines, or any other substance defined as a controlled substance by Oregon Revised Statutes or United States Code, with the exception of marijuana, marijuana concentrates, or marijuana-infused products. Solely for the purposes of this chapter, marijuana, marijuana concentrates, or marijuana-infused products are not “controlled substances.”

“Drug paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to:

(1) Kits marketed for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;

(2) Isomerization devices marketed for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(3) Testing equipment marketed for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

(4) Scales and balances marketed for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(5) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, marketed for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

(6) Repealed by Ord. 2016-014;

(7) Containers and other objects marketed for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; and

(8) Objects marketed for use or designed specifically for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cocaine or other controlled substances into the human body, such as:

(a) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens or hashish heads;

(b) Water pipes;

(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;

(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;

(e) Repealed by Ord. 2016-014;

(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. [Ord. 891 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 6.905; Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


9.25.030 Exceptions.

(A) Drug paraphernalia does not include hypodermic syringes or needles.

(B) The provisions of this chapter do not apply to persons registered under the provisions of ORS 475.125 or to persons specified as exempt from registration under the provisions of that statute. [Ord. 891 § 1 (Exh. A), 2007; Code 2000 § 6.910.]


Chapter 9.30 SOCIAL GAMING

Sections:

9.30.010    Social gaming.


9.30.010 Social gaming.

(A) Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, social games, as defined in ORS 167.117, and card rooms, are prohibited in the city. 

(B) Private businesses, private clubs, places of public accommodation, private homes, and charitable, fraternal and religious organizations may engage in social games where no house income is realized from the games. [Ord. 2014-001 § 1, 2014.]


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    General Provisions

10.10    Signs and Signals

10.15    Parking

10.20    Pedestrians

10.25    Parades and Processions

10.30    General Regulations

10.35    Bicycles

10.40    Towing and Disposition of Vehicles

10.45    Exceptions

10.50    Traffic Citations

10.55    Property Inventory – Arrested Persons and Impounded Vehicles

Schedule A    Schedule of Stop Streets

Schedule B    Schedule of Prohibited Parking

Schedule C    Schedule of Loading Zone Designations


Chapter 10.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

10.05.010    Definitions.

10.05.020    Powers of the city council.

10.05.030    Powers of the city manager.

10.05.040    Authority of police and fire officers.


10.05.010 Definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted sections of the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:

(A) “Alley” means a narrow street through the middle of a block.

(B) “Bicycle” means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter.

(C) “Bus stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers.

(D) “Curb” means the extreme edge of the roadway.

(E) Holidays. Where used in this chapter or on signs erected in accordance with this chapter: Sundays, New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.

(F) “Loading zone” means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials or freight.

(G) “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when a vehicle is temporarily standing for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.

(H) “Parkway” means that portion of a street not used as a roadway or as a sidewalk.

(I) Passenger Loading Zone. Reserved only for the loading or unloading of passengers and their luggage.

(J) “Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

(K) “Stop” means complete cessation of movement.

(L) “Taxicab stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.

(M) “Traffic lane” means that portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of vehicles. [Code 2000 § 7.005.]


10.05.020 Powers of the city council.

The city council shall designate by resolution, subject to state law, the following:

(A) Streets, portions of streets, sides of streets or city-owned or leased land upon which parking or standing shall be prohibited, prohibited during certain hours or limited, and the angle of such parking.

(B) Through streets.

(C) One-way streets.

(D) Truck routes.

(E) Streets where trucks, machinery or any other large or heavy vehicles exceeding specified weights shall be prohibited. Such vehicles may, however, be operated on such streets for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise but then only by entering such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding no farther than the nearest intersection. [Code 2000 § 7.010.]


10.05.030 Powers of the city manager.

The city manager for best use of the streets in the public interest shall exercise the following powers based on standards established by the Oregon Transportation Commission and the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways; and subject to state law:

(A) Designate where traffic control signals shall be placed and the time of operation of such signals.

(B) Establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier vehicles.

(C) Designate the location of passenger loading zones for use in front of the entrance to any hotel, auditorium, theater, church, school or public building.

(D) Designate on each side of a block where required not more than two loading zones.

(E) Designate and let reserved parking spaces in the city parking lots to persons upon payment of the required fee, providing no more than 50 percent of the parking spaces in the city parking lots shall be let.

(F) Designate and cause to be placed or maintained appropriate signs, marks or lines for:

(1) Intersections where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U turns and the times when such prohibitions shall apply.

(2) Crosswalks at intersections where deemed necessary for pedestrian safety.

(3) Safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as deemed necessary for pedestrian safety.

(4) Playstreets, or such hours when certain streets may be used as such, on which no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon such street.

(5) Parking meters and fine boxes.

(6) Reserved parking spaces in city parking lots.

(G) Cause to be placed or marked and maintained:

(1) Traffic control signs.

(2) Parking spaces.

(3) Traffic lanes and other symbols.

(4) All other signs and markings necessary to implement traffic and parking controls enacted by the city council.

(H) Cause to be removed or reduced in height, or trim any hedge, shrubbery or tree extending over the street.

(I) Emergency and Experimental Regulations. Make and enforce temporary, experimental or emergency regulations, consistent with Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC. No such regulation shall be effective and in force until and unless adequate signs, signals, or other notices are erected clearly indicating such regulation. No such regulation shall remain in effect for more than 60 days. [Code 2000 § 7.015.]


10.05.040 Authority of police and fire officers.

(A) It shall be the duty of the police department through its officers to enforce Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC.

(B) In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC.

(C) Members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. [Code 2000 § 7.020.]


Chapter 10.10 SIGNS AND SIGNALS

Sections:

10.10.010    Duty to obey traffic signs and signals.

10.10.020    Vehicles stopping at stop signs.

10.10.030    Stop when traffic obstructed.

10.10.040    Private marking unlawful.


10.10.010 Duty to obey traffic signs and signals.

(A) No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic signs, signals, markers, barriers or parking meters placed in accordance with the Oregon Vehicle Code or Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC, including those erected by any authorized public utility and department of this city or other authorized person, unless it is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or otherwise directed by a police officer.

(B) No unauthorized person shall move, remove or alter the position of, or deface, or tamper with any such signs, signals, markers, barriers, parking meters or fine boxes. [Code 2000 § 7.045.]


10.10.020 Vehicles stopping at stop signs.

When stop signs are erected at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle approaching such sign shall come to a full stop before entering any crosswalk or intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. [Code 2000 § 7.050.]


10.10.030 Stop when traffic obstructed.

No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the opposite side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. [Code 2000 § 7.055.]


10.10.040 Private marking unlawful.

It shall be unlawful for any person to letter, mark, or paint in any manner any letters, marks, or signs on any sidewalk, curb, street or alley, or to post on a parking strip anything designed or intended to prohibit or restrict parking in front of any sidewalk, dwelling house, business house, or in any alley except in compliance with Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC. [Code 2000 § 7.060.]


Chapter 10.15 PARKING

Sections:

10.15.010    Method of parking.

10.15.020    Prohibited parking.

10.15.030    Use of loading zone.

10.15.040    Use of passenger loading zone.

10.15.050    Stopping, standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.

10.15.060    Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

10.15.070    Moving vehicle.

10.15.080    Lights on parked vehicle.

10.15.090    Exemption.

10.15.100    Loading and unloading passengers.


10.15.010 Method of parking.

(A) No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of a lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking.

(B) Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than at the indicated direction and within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.

(C) Whenever the owner or driver of a vehicle discovers that such vehicle is parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, he shall immediately remove such vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. [Code 2000 § 7.075.]


10.15.020 Prohibited parking.

In addition to state motor vehicle laws prohibiting parking, no person shall park:

(A) A vehicle upon any bridge, viaduct or other elevated structure used as a street or within a street tunnel in this city.

(B) A vehicle in any alley except to load or unload persons or materials not to exceed 15 consecutive minutes in any one-hour period.

(C) A vehicle where the curb line has been painted with yellow paint pursuant to official action of a city officer.

(D) A vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:

(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.

(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(3) Displaying advertising from such vehicle.

(4) Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under CMC 10.45.015 or any other provision of Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC.

(5) Storage, or as junkage or dead storage, for more than 72 hours.

(E) A vehicle upon any parkway except where specifically authorized.

(F) A vehicle in any reserved parking space in a municipal parking lot without authorization and payment of the required fee.

(G) A vehicle used for commercial purposes and in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW), licensed as a motor truck, truck tractor, or truck trailer as defined under Chapter 801, Oregon Revised Statutes, within the right-of-way of any public street within the city of Cornelius except such trucks making deliveries or providing services. Further, no motor truck, truck tractor or truck trailer shall be parked on any street in such a manner as to obstruct travel lanes or vision of motorists to oncoming or intersection traffic, and no motor trucks, truck tractors, or truck trailers carrying flammable or dangerous material shall stop, stand or park on any city street except while picking up or delivering said material. For purposes of this section, the terms “commercial purposes” shall mean the use of a vehicle to transport for profit a person or persons or property belonging to another.

(H) A vehicle described as a camper, mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, tent trailer, boat trailer, utility trailer, livestock trailer, boat, dune buggy, destruction derby vehicle, pole trailer, special use trailer, balance trailer, bus trailer, bus, fixed load vehicle, self-supporting trailer, semi-trailer, truck trailer, truck tractor, and worker transport bus within the right-of-way of any public street within the city of Cornelius in such a manner that the vehicle:

(1) Remains in one location or area in excess of 72 hours; or

(2) Is inadequately marked with reflectors or parking lights so as to create a hazard to persons or vehicles using the public right-of-way during nighttime hours between sunset and sunrise; or

(3) Is utilized as a dwelling unit; or

(4) Obstructs the vision of persons or vehicles using the public right-of-way to official traffic control devices as defined in ORS 801.540 or intersections; or

(5) Is secured, anchored or leveled in a manner which causes or may cause damage to city streets, curbs or sidewalks, or which renders the vehicle immobile. Movement or relocation of a vehicle within a city block (between the intersections of the two nearest public streets) shall not extend the time limit for parking within the provisions of subsections (D)(5) and (H)(1) of this section. [Ord. 647 § 1, 1986; Ord. 701 § 1, 1990; Code 2000 § 7.080; Ord. 2014-008 § 1, 2014.]


10.15.030 Use of loading zone.

No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, freight or passengers in any place designated as a loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop in a loading zone for loading and unloading of passengers and personal baggage exceed 10 minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. [Code 2000 § 7.095.]


10.15.040 Use of passenger loading zone.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a passenger loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger loading zones are in effect. [Code 2000 § 7.100.]


10.15.050 Stopping, standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.

The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. [Code 2000 § 7.105.]


10.15.060 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such a zone. [Code 2000 § 7.110.]


10.15.070 Moving vehicle.

The moving of any vehicle within the block shall not be deemed to extend the time of parking. [Code 2000 § 7.115.]


10.15.080 Lights on parked vehicle.

No lights need be displayed upon any vehicle parked in accordance with Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC and upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street. [Code 2000 § 7.120.]


10.15.090 Exemption.

Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on the street, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. [Code 2000 § 7.125.]


10.15.100 Loading and unloading passengers.

(A) No person operating a motor vehicle shall load or unload passengers from a moving, parked or stopped motor vehicle in or along any city controlled street, alley or road provided signs or other markings are in place to notify the motor vehicle operator of said prohibition and of the area affected thereby.

(B) After advising the city council in writing of his/her identification of a locale where the above prohibition is to be effective, the city manager shall authorize the public works department to install such signs and other markings necessary to implement the above prohibition.

(C) The prohibition authorized by this section may be removed if, in the opinion of the city manager or the city council, it becomes unnecessary. [Ord. 785 § 1, 1997; Code 2000 § 7.130.]


Chapter 10.20 PEDESTRIANS

Sections:

10.20.010    Use of sidewalks.

10.20.020    Crossing at right angles.

10.20.030    Repealed.


10.20.010 Use of sidewalks.

Pedestrians shall not use any roadway for travel when sidewalks abutting the same are available. [Code 2000 § 7.145.]


10.20.020 Crossing at right angles.

No pedestrian shall cross a street at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. [Code 2000 § 7.150.]


10.20.030 Pedestrians must use crosswalks.

Repealed by Ord. 2015-02. [Code 2000 § 7.155.]


Chapter 10.25 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS

Sections:

10.25.010    Permits required by parades.

10.25.020    Funeral procession.

10.25.030    Drivers in procession.

10.25.040    Driving through procession.


10.25.010 Permits required by parades.

No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the United States Armed Forces and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police. Such permit may be granted where it is found that such parade is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any manner tend to be a breach of the peace, cause damage or unreasonably interfere with the public use of the streets, or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of this city. [Code 2000 § 7.175.]


10.25.020 Funeral procession.

A funeral composed of a procession of 61 or more vehicles shall be escorted by at least one person authorized to direct traffic for such purposes and shall follow routes established by the chief of police. [Code 2000 § 7.180.]


10.25.030 Drivers in procession.

Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. [Code 2000 § 7.185.]


10.25.040 Driving through procession.

No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while in motion, except where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. [Code 2000 § 7.190.]


Chapter 10.30 GENERAL REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.30.010    Speed limits in public parks.

10.30.020    Use of motor vehicles in public parks.

10.30.030    Drunken driving.

10.30.040    Drinking in motor vehicles.

10.30.050    Reckless driving.

10.30.060    Vehicles in motion, right-of-way.

10.30.070    Limitations on backing.

10.30.080    Driving on divided streets.

10.30.090    Emerging from vehicle.

10.30.100    Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

10.30.110    Riding on motorcycles.

10.30.120    Unlawful riding.

10.30.130    Clinging to vehicles.

10.30.140    Use of roller skates restricted.

10.30.150    Skis on streets.

10.30.160    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.30.170    Obstructing streets.

10.30.180    Removing glass and debris.

10.30.190    Debris in public street.


10.30.010 Speed limits in public parks.

No person shall drive a vehicle upon any street in any public park of this city at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, unless signs erected indicate otherwise. [Code 2000 § 7.205.]


10.30.020 Use of motor vehicles in public parks.

No person shall use, drive, operate or ride in or upon a motor vehicle in parks established by resolution of the city council as “public parks.” For purposes of this section, the term “motor vehicle” shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

(A) Parking areas within said parks, which parking areas are designated by order of the city council; or

(B) The use and operation of public maintenance motor vehicles. [Code 2000 § 7.210.]


10.30.030 Drunken driving.

No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street in this city while being a habitual user of narcotic drugs or while intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. [Code 2000 § 7.215.]


10.30.040 Drinking in motor vehicles.

It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor while an occupant of a motor vehicle on any street in this city. [Code 2000 § 7.220.]


10.30.050 Reckless driving.

No person shall drive any vehicle upon a street carelessly and heedlessly in willful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. [Code 2000 § 7.225.]


10.30.060 Vehicles in motion, right-of-way.

A vehicle which has stopped or parked at the curb shall yield to moving traffic. [Code 2000 § 7.230.]


10.30.070 Limitations on backing.

The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic, and shall in every case yield the right-of-way to moving traffic and pedestrians. [Code 2000 § 7.235.]


10.30.080 Driving on divided streets.

Whenever any street has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space provided for vehicular movement or at an intersection. [Code 2000 § 7.240.]


10.30.090 Emerging from vehicle.

No person shall open the door of, or enter or emerge from, any vehicle in the path of any approaching vehicle. [Code 2000 § 7.245.]


10.30.100 Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. [Code 2000 § 7.250.]


10.30.110 Riding on motorcycles.

A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is equipped to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if equipped for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached at the rear of the seat of the operator. [Code 2000 § 7.255.]


10.30.120 Unlawful riding.

No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person or persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. [Code 2000 § 7.260.]


10.30.130 Clinging to vehicles.

(A) No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon the streets.

(B) No person driving any vehicle shall permit any of the articles listed in subsection (A) of this section to be attached to the vehicle for the purpose of pulling along the streets. [Code 2000 § 7.265.]


10.30.140 Use of roller skates restricted.

No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any street except while crossing at a crosswalk, or upon a playstreet. [Code 2000 § 7.270.]


10.30.150 Skis on streets.

No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices except upon playstreets. [Code 2000 § 7.275.]


10.30.160 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

(A) The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

(B) No person shall place any dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of any street with the intention of using the same as a driveway.

(C) No person shall remove or damage in any way any portion of any curb or move any heavy vehicle or thing over or upon a curb or sidewalk without first notifying the city engineer, and such person shall be held responsible for any and all damage. [Code 2000 § 7.280.]


10.30.170 Obstructing streets.

No person shall park or leave any vehicle or any part thereof, or any trailer, box, ware or merchandise of any description, or any other thing that in any way impedes traffic, or obstructs the view, upon any street, including an alley, parking strip, sidewalk or curb, except by such lawful use and parking of vehicles upon streets and alleys as is allowed by Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC or other provisions of the code of this city. [Code 2000 § 7.285.]


10.30.180 Removing glass and debris.

Any person causing glass to be broken upon, or any party to a collision or other vehicle accident upon, any street in this city shall immediately remove or cause to be removed from such street all glass and other foreign substance. [Code 2000 § 7.290.]


10.30.190 Debris in public street.

No person shall drag, drop, track, or otherwise place or deposit, or permit to be deposited, mud, dirt, rock or other such debris upon a public street. Any such deposit of material shall be immediately removed using hand labor or mechanical means. No material shall be washed or flushed into any part of the storm and surface water system and any such action shall be an additional violation. [Ord. 717 § 7, 1991; Code 2000 § 7.300.]


Chapter 10.35 BICYCLES

Sections:

10.35.010    Effect of regulations.

10.35.020    Brakes.

10.35.030    Riding on bicycles.

10.35.040    Riding on streets and bicycle paths.

10.35.050    Speed.

10.35.060    Racing.

10.35.070    Emerging from alley or driveway.

10.35.080    Carrying articles.

10.35.090    Riding on sidewalks.

10.35.100    Parking.

10.35.110    Secondhand bicycle sales.

10.35.120    Rental licenses.

10.35.130    Responsibility.


10.35.010 Effect of regulations.

(A) No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC.

(B) Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC relating to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. [Code 2000 § 7.345.]


10.35.020 Brakes.

Every bicycle operated upon the streets in this city shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle. [Code 2000 § 7.350.]


10.35.030 Riding on bicycles.

(A) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than with his feet on the pedals and facing the front of the bicycle.

(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. [Code 2000 § 7.355.]


10.35.040 Riding on streets and bicycle paths.

(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.

(B) Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than two abreast except upon paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. [Code 2000 § 7.360.]


10.35.050 Speed.

No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. [Code 2000 § 7.365.]


10.35.060 Racing.

No person shall engage in, or cause others to be engaged in, any bicycle racing upon the streets or other public places in this city. [Code 2000 § 7.370.]


10.35.070 Emerging from alley or driveway.

The operator of a bicycle entering or emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. [Code 2000 § 7.375.]


10.35.080 Carrying articles.

No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars and in full control of such bicycle. [Code 2000 § 7.380.]


10.35.090 Riding on sidewalks.

No person shall ride or operate any bicycle upon a sidewalk in a business district. Any person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. [Code 2000 § 7.385.]


10.35.100 Parking.

No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or upon a sidewalk, except in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. [Code 2000 § 7.390.]


10.35.110 Secondhand bicycle sales.

All persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles within the city of Cornelius shall report to the police department each such purchase within 24 hours after purchase, giving the name and address of the persons from whom each bicycle is purchased and a description of each such bicycle, including the frame number and the license number, if found thereon. [Code 2000 § 7.410.]


10.35.120 Rental licenses.

Any person, firm or corporation who shall rent, hire or loan bicycles within the city shall obtain a license to be used on each such bicycle and shall pay a regular license fee as herein provided. The license plate or plates so obtained may be transferred from one bicycle to another as required by such owner. [Code 2000 § 7.415.]


10.35.130 Responsibility.

No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. [Code 2000 § 7.420.]


Chapter 10.40 TOWING AND DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES

Sections:

10.40.010    Short title.

10.40.020    Purpose.

10.40.030    Definitions.

10.40.040    Possession by person taken into custody – Impoundment when on public property.

10.40.050    Possession by person taken into custody – Impoundment when on private property.

10.40.060    Disturbance by alarm system – Impoundment.

10.40.070    Prohibited parking.

10.40.080    Vehicles subject to immediate towing.

10.40.090    Towing of abandoned and disabled vehicles.

10.40.100    Notice and hearing.

10.40.110    Parking vehicles on the right-of-way for vending purposes.

10.40.120    Moving a tagged vehicle.

10.40.130    Vehicles appraised at less than $1,000.

Prior legislation: Ord. 805; Code 2000 §§ 7.445 – 7.500.


10.40.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as “Ordinance No. 2015-02, an ordinance relating to the towing and disposition of vehicles.” [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.020 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to provide authority and procedures for towing vehicles in addition to that authority granted by Oregon Statutes. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.030 Definitions.

The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

“Abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle to which a law enforcement officer has reason to believe the owner of the vehicle has given up all right and interest in the vehicle with the intent of never again asserting any claim or right. Deputies will normally treat a vehicle as abandoned if it has been left or parked on any public road or right-of-way for more than 24 hours and one or more of the following conditions also exist:

(1) It is not registered to an address near the location where the vehicle is parked;

(2) The law enforcement officer has other reliable information that the vehicle was in fact abandoned by the owner (i.e., a neighbor tells the law enforcement officer that the vehicle was left by persons who moved from the neighborhood).

Deputies will also treat a vehicle as abandoned if the deputy responds to or discovers a vehicle collision or accident or police pursuit which results in the vehicle leaving the roadway and coming to rest upon private property adjacent to a public road or right-of-way, the vehicle has been left unattended on the property, and the law enforcement officer has a reasonable belief that the accident or collision occurred during the previous 72 hours.

“Disabled vehicle” means a vehicle which does not reasonably appear to be currently capable of being legally operated on a public road due to the condition of the vehicle or mechanical issues, including, but not limited to, missing major components such as an engine, transmission, windshield or wheels, flat tires, or other obvious damage or missing equipment which reasonably leads a law enforcement officer to believe the vehicle is inoperable.

“Hazard” means a vehicle standing in such a manner as to jeopardize public safety and the efficient movement of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic including but not limited to those situations described in ORS 819.120.

“In the possession of a person taken into custody” means and includes operating, possessing or exerting control over a vehicle at or just prior to the time the person is taken into custody.

“Owner” means the person responsible for the abandonment of the vehicle and who is liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the abandoned vehicle. The owner for purposes of this chapter shall be presumed to be the person to whom the vehicle is registered according to the State Motor Vehicles Division records, unless other evidence leads a law enforcement officer to reasonably believe that another person is responsible.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal, or emergency purposes.

“Storage” means the holding of a vehicle, with the attendant fees for such holding, at any appropriate facility.

“Towing” means the taking possession of a vehicle and removing it to a storage facility at the request of law enforcement personnel.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any street or highway, and includes any hulk or component thereof, including but not limited to campers, recreational vehicles, pickup truck canopies, utility trailers, boat trailers, and motor homes, except those devices:

(1) Moved exclusively by human power; or

(2) Used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.040 Possession by person taken into custody – Impoundment when on public property.

Any vehicle in the possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement officer shall be impounded and immediately towed from public right-of-way, public parks, or other public roads, property or premises if:

(A) No other licensed driver is immediately available to take possession of the vehicle and the law enforcement officer reasonably believes no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle is available;

(B) The law enforcement officer taking the person into custody reasonably believes that the vehicle constitutes a hazard;

(C) The law enforcement officer reasonably believes that the vehicle is stolen; or

(D) The law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle or its contents constitute evidence of an offense, and the law enforcement officer reasonably believes such towing is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.050 Possession by person taken into custody – Impoundment when on private property.

Any vehicle in the possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement officer shall be impounded and immediately towed from private property only when:

(A) The law enforcement officer reasonably believes that the vehicle is stolen;

(B) The law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle or its contents constitute evidence of an offense, and the law enforcement officer reasonably believes such towing is necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence;

(C) The vehicle is parked or stopped on private property of a person other than the driver as a result of being stopped by the police, and the person in charge of that private property does not consent to the vehicle being left on the property. For purposes of this section, if the owner or person in charge of the property is not present, the law enforcement officer shall presume that the owner or person in charge does not consent to the vehicle being left on the property and shall have it towed pursuant to this section. This section shall not apply if a legal driver is present to remove the vehicle with the vehicle owner’s permission or if the property owner is present and indicates a preference to have the vehicle towed at their discretion and expense. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.060 Disturbance by alarm system – Impoundment.

Any vehicle in which the vehicle alarm system disturbs, injures or endangers the peace, quiet, comfort, repose, health or safety of the public or any person, shall be subject to immediate towing if no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle can be made and the owner cannot be contacted by reasonable efforts. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.070 Prohibited parking.

The following parking is prohibited in the city of Cornelius.

(A) No person shall live, sleep, or reside in a vehicle that is parked upon a public street or public right-of-way.

(1) A person may temporarily occupy a recreational vehicle legally parked on a public street as long as:

(a) The period of occupancy is no longer than five consecutive days in any two calendar weeks. For purposes of this section, if a vehicle is tagged for towing, and is found to be in the same location after the fifth day, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the vehicle remained in the location for five consecutive days in violation of this chapter. The vehicle owner shall have the burden of disproving the presumption.

(b) The recreational vehicle is owned by the resident, or guest of the resident, and is parked immediately in front of or immediately adjacent to the residence.

(c) The recreational vehicle is parked in a manner that does not violate subsection (D) of this section.

(B) No person shall park in front of the entrance of any place where mail is received or within 10 feet of a mailbox during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on days when mail is delivered.

(C) A vehicle shall not be parked on a public street or public right-of-way without license plates, with expired tags, with expired registration, or with an expired temporary licensing permit.

(D) No person shall park a vehicle in a manner which interferes with the safe flow of traffic or creates a safety hazard by obstructing the view of other drivers. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.080 Vehicles subject to immediate towing.

The following vehicles shall be subject to immediate towing:

(A) Any vehicle parked in violation of a temporary or permanent parking restriction;

(B) Any vehicle parked on city-owned or operated property without express written permission from the city of Cornelius;

(C) Any vehicle reported stolen;

(D) Any vehicle parked in a space that is marked as reserved for disabled or handicapped persons, unless such vehicle conspicuously displays appropriate decals, insignia or license plate as required by Oregon State statutes;

(E) Any vehicle illegally parked in a conspicuously posted restricted space, zone or traffic lane where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicle or is prohibited in excess of a designated time period, or at any time and where the vehicle is interfering or reasonably likely to interfere with the intended use of such space, zone or traffic lane;

(F) Any vehicle impounded under CMC 10.40.040 or 10.40.050;

(G) Any vehicle tagged with a notice that the vehicle will be towed as a disabled vehicle or tagged with a notice that the vehicle will be towed because the vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter, and the 24-hour period has expired, if the vehicle is subsequently moved to another public road or public right-of-way within the city of Cornelius, and the vehicle remains in the same condition or remains parked in violation of this chapter. No vehicle may be towed under this section unless the notice affixed to the vehicle clearly states that the vehicle will be towed under this section if moved to another public road or public right-of-way and the condition of the vehicle or violation remains the same. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.090 Towing of abandoned and disabled vehicles.

In addition to the authority to tow abandoned and disabled vehicles under the provisions of ORS Chapter 819, deputies shall have authority to tow abandoned and disabled vehicles as defined in this chapter in the same manner as abandoned and disabled vehicles towed under state statute. If a law enforcement officer becomes aware of information that the owner or another person with a right to possession of the vehicle continues to assert an interest in the vehicle at any time prior to the vehicle actually being towed, including but not limited to moving the vehicle to another location or contacting the law enforcement officer to tell him/her that the vehicle is not in fact abandoned, the law enforcement officer will not tow the vehicle as an abandoned vehicle. In some circumstances, the vehicle may also meet the definition of a disabled vehicle which may result in notice and towing under those provisions. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.100 Notice and hearing.

Any vehicle towed or impounded under this chapter shall be treated as if it were towed under the provisions of Oregon State statutes, and the statutory provisions including liens, disposition and hearing will be applicable. Any vehicle towed as an abandoned or disabled vehicle shall be subject to the statutory provisions regarding liens, notice, disposition and hearing in ORS Chapter 819. Any other vehicle towed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the statutory provisions regarding liens, notice, disposition and hearing in ORS Chapter 809 for impounded vehicles. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.110 Parking vehicles on the right-of-way for vending purposes.

(A) A person commits the offense of unlawful parking for vending purposes if the person parks or leaves standing a vehicle on a right-of-way of any public road within the city for more than 24 hours for the purpose of advertising, selling or offering for sale any merchandise, including the vehicle itself, without written permission of the city of Cornelius, or if the person parks or leaves standing a vehicle on a right-of-way of any public road within the city for vending purposes if the vehicle creates an impediment to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or creates a safety hazard.

(B) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle, as shown in the records of the Oregon Department of Motor Vehicles, parked the vehicle in the right-of-way. The burden of proof shall lie with the registered owner to show that someone other than the registered owner parked the vehicle in the right-of-way in violation of this section. For purposes of this section, if the law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that someone other than the registered owner parked the vehicle in the right-of-way for vending purposes in violation of this chapter, the law enforcement officer may issue a citation to that person.

(C) Any vehicle left on the public right-of-way displaying a sign or other device advertising the vehicle for sale for more than 24 hours shall be presumed to be parked in the right-of-way for the purpose of selling the vehicle and this will be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. The burden of demonstrating that the vehicle was parked in the right-of-way for a purpose other than selling the vehicle shall lie with the person cited.

(D) A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of up to $250.00.

(E) Notwithstanding subsection (D) of this section, any person who has been convicted of a prior violation of this section within the past year shall be subject to a maximum fine of up to $500.00.

(F) Each day that a vehicle remains in the right-of-way in violation of this section shall be a separate offense and a new citation may be issued each day.

(G) Any vehicle that has been cited for a violation of this section and which has not been removed from public right-of-way within 72 hours of the citation being issued may be towed. The procedures for towing a vehicle under this section will be the same as those procedures provided by state statute for the towing of illegally parked vehicles.

(H) It shall be an affirmative defense to this section that the vehicle was parked in public right-of-way which is immediately adjacent to the residence or principal place of employment of the vehicle’s owner; provided, however, that the affirmative defense shall not apply to any violation for impeding traffic or creating a safety hazard as provided in subsection (A) of this section. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.120 Moving a tagged vehicle.

(A) Any vehicle to which notice has been affixed pursuant to ORS 819.110, stating that the vehicle will be towed if not removed, shall not be moved to any real property within the city of Cornelius if placing the vehicle on that property would result in a violation of the city of Cornelius Municipal Code.

(B) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle, as shown in the records of the Oregon Department of Motor Vehicles, parked the vehicle in violation of this section. The burden of proof shall lie with the registered owner to show that someone other than the registered owner parked the vehicle in violation of this section. Notwithstanding the presumption above, if a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a person other than the registered owner parked the vehicle in violation of this section, the law enforcement officer may cite that person instead of the registered owner.

(C) A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of up to $250.00.

(D) Notwithstanding subsection (C) of this section, any person who has been convicted of a prior violation of this section within the past year shall be subject to a maximum fine of up to $500.00.

(E) If more than one vehicle is moved onto real property in violation of this section, each vehicle shall be a separate violation of this section.

(F) Any vehicle that has been cited for a violation of this section and which remains in violation of the municipal code for more than 72 hours or is returned to the right-of-way in violation of the original notice under ORS 819.110 may be towed. The procedures for towing a vehicle under this section will be the same as those procedures provided by state statute for the towing of illegally parked vehicles. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


10.40.130 Vehicles appraised at less than $1,000.

If a vehicle taken into custody under ORS 819.110 is appraised at a value of more than $500.00 but less than $1,000, or a vehicle taken into custody under ORS 819.120 is appraised at a value of less than $1,000, then the tow company that towed the vehicle shall sell and dispose of the vehicle under ORS 819.160 and 87.152. [Ord. 2015-02 § 2 (Exh. A), 2015.]


Chapter 10.45 EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

10.45.010    Emergency vehicles.

10.45.015    Mobile vendors.


10.45.010 Emergency vehicles.

Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC regarding the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles except as provided by state law and as follows:

(A) A driver when operating such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person, may park or stand notwithstanding Chapters 10.05 through 10.50 CMC.

(B) A driver of a police vehicle or fire department or patrol vehicle when operating such vehicle in an emergency may disregard regulations governing turning in specified directions as long as he does not endanger life or property.

(C) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others. [Code 2000 § 7.475.]


10.45.015 Mobile vendors.

(A) CMC 10.15.020(D)(4) does not prohibit any person from parking a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of selling merchandise from such vehicle provided:

(1) The sale of merchandise occurs only from the side of the vehicle away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or edge of the street;

(2) The vehicle is located more than 500 feet from any public school; and

(3) The vehicle:

(a) Is parked on a street with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less;

(b) Is parked during daylight savings time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.;

(c) Has at least one operating flashing yellow beacon affixed to the vehicle’s roof, which is activated when parked; and

(d) Is parked for less than 15 minutes in any single location.

(B) Any vendor who seeks to sell merchandise from a parked vehicle pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section shall obtain a permit from the office of the city recorder in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 5.35 CMC before doing so.

(C) Nothing in this section exempts any person or a vehicle parked for the principal purpose of selling merchandise from complying with all other applicable provisions of the CMC. [Ord. 2014-008 § 2, 2014.]


Chapter 10.50 TRAFFIC CITATIONS

Sections:

10.50.010    Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.

10.50.020    Citation.

10.50.030    Repealed.


10.50.010 Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner except where approved by the municipal judge. [Code 2000 § 7.505.]


10.50.020 Citation.

For the violation of Chapter 10.05 CMC through this chapter, a police officer may issue a citation which shall be in the nature of a notice to appear at a time and place certain. [Code 2000 § 7.510.]


10.50.030 When warrant to be issued.

Repealed by Ord. 2013-001. [Code 2000 § 7.515.]


Chapter 10.55 PROPERTY INVENTORY – ARRESTED PERSONS AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.55.010    Purpose.

10.55.020    Definitions.

10.55.030    Inventories of impounded vehicles.

10.55.040    Inventories.


10.55.010 Purpose.

This chapter is meant to exclusively apply to the process for conducting an inventory of the personal property in an impounded vehicle and the personal possessions of a person in police custody and shall not be interpreted to affect any other statutory or constitutional rights that police officers may employ to search persons or search or seize possessions for other purposes. [Code 2000 § 7.520; Ord. 877 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


10.55.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(A) “Valuable” means:

(1) Cash money of an aggregate amount of $50.00 or more; or

(2) Individual items of personal property with a value of over $500.00.

(B) “Open container” means a container which is unsecured or incompletely secured in such a fashion that the container’s contents are exposed to view.

(C) “Closed container” means a container whose contents are not exposed to view to include containers which by their very nature and design are used to carry or possess valuables, including, but not limited to, wallets, coin purses, fanny packs, cell phone cases, briefcases, camera bags, backpacks, etc.

(D) “Police custody” means:

(1) The imposition of restraint as a result of an arrest as that term is defined at ORS 133.005(1); or

(2) The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer pursuant to a court order; or

(3) The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer pursuant to ORS Chapter 426; or

(4) The imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer for purposes of taking the restrained person to an approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon law.

(E) “Police officer” means any peace officer as defined by ORS 161.015(4). [Code 2000 § 7.525; Ord. 877 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


10.55.030 Inventories of impounded vehicles.

(A) The contents of all vehicles impounded by a police officer will be inventoried. The inventory shall be conducted before constructive custody of the vehicle is released to a third-party towing company except under the following circumstances:

(1) If there is a reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or any other person is at risk, a required inventory will be done as soon as safely practical; or

(2) If the vehicle is being impounded for evidentiary purposes in connection with the investigation of a criminal offense, the inventory will be done after such investigation is completed.

(B) The purpose for the inventory of an impounded vehicle will be to:

(1) Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property; and

(2) Assist in the prevention of theft of property; locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; or deduce the danger to persons and property.

(3) Inventories of impounded vehicles will be conducted according to the following procedures:

(a) An inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will be conducted throughout the passenger and engine compartments of the vehicle including, but not limited to, accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, in any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front seat, in any console between the seats, under any floor mats and under the seats;

(b) In addition to the passenger and engine compartments as described above, an inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will also be conducted in the following locations:

(i) Any other type of unlocked compartments that are a part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, unlocked vehicle trunks and unlocked car-top containers; and

(ii) Any locked compartments including, but not limited to, locked vehicle trunks, locked hatchbacks and locked car-top containers, if either the keys are available to be released with the vehicle to the third-party towing company or an unlocking mechanism for such compartment is available within the vehicle.

(C) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, closed containers located either within the vehicle or any of the vehicle’s compartments will not be opened for inventory purposes. Upon completion of the inventory, the police officer will complete a report as directed by the chief of police.

(D) Any valuables located during the inventory process will be listed on a property receipt. A copy of the property receipt will either be left in the vehicle or tendered to the person in control of the vehicle if such person is present. The valuables will be dealt with in such a manner as directed by the chief of police. [Code 2000 § 7.530; Ord. 877 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


10.55.040 Inventories.

(A) A police officer will inventory the personal property in the possession of a person taken into police custody, and such inventory will be conducted whenever:

(1) Such person will be either placed in a secure police holding room or transported in the secure portion of a police vehicle; or

(2) Custody of the person will be transferred to another law enforcement agency, correctional facility, or “treatment facility” as that phrase is used in ORS 426.460 or such other lawfully approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes.

(B) The purpose of the inventory of a person in police custody will be to:

(1) Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property; or

(2) Fulfill the requirements of ORS 133.455 to the extent that such statute may apply to certain property held by the police officer for safekeeping; or

(3) Assist in the prevention of theft of property; or

(4) Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; or

(5) Locate weapons and instruments that may facilitate an escape from custody or endanger law enforcement personnel; or

(6) Reduce the danger to persons and property.

(C) Inventories of the personal property in the possession of such persons will be conducted according to the following procedures:

(1) An inventory will occur prior to placing such person into a holding room or a police vehicle, whichever occurs first. However, if reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or the person in custody or both are at risk, an inventory will be done as soon as safely practical prior to the transfer of custody to another law enforcement agency or facility.

(2) To complete the inventory of the personal property in the possession of such person, the police officer will remove all items of personal property from the clothing worn by such person. In addition, the officer will also remove all items of such personal property from all open containers in the possession of such person.

(3) A closed container in the possession of such person will have its contents inventoried only when:

(a) The closed container is to be placed in the immediate possession of such person at the time that person is placed in the secure portion of a custodial facility, police vehicle or secure police holding room; or

(b) Such person requests that the closed container be with them in the secure portion of a police vehicle or a secure police holding room; or

(c) The closed container is designed for carrying money and/or small valuables on or about the person including, but not limited to, closed purses, closed coin purses, closed wallets and closed fanny packs.

(D) Valuables found during the inventory process will be noted by the police officer in a report as directed by the chief of police.

(E) All items of personal property neither left in the immediate possession of the person in custody nor left with the facility or agency accepting custody of the person will be handled in the following manner:

(1) A property receipt will be prepared listing the property to be retained in the possession of the respective police department, and a copy of that receipt will be tendered to the person in custody when such person is released to the facility or agency accepting custody of such person; or

(2) The property will be dealt with in such manner as directed by the chief of police.

(F) All items of personal property neither left in the immediate possession of the person in custody nor dealt with as provided in subsection (E) of this section will be released to the facility or agency accepting custody of the person so that they may:

(1) Hold the property for safekeeping on behalf of the person in custody; and

(2) Prepare and deliver a receipt, as may be required by ORS 133.455, for any valuables held on behalf of the person in custody. [Code 2000 § 7.535; Ord. 877 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006.]


Schedule A SCHEDULE OF STOP STREETS

	Ordinance Number	Date of Enactment	Location

	354	1/2/73	S Alpine St. entering S 14th Ave. from east and west

	 	 	S Beech St. entering S 14th Ave. from east and west

	 	 	S Cherry St. entering S 14th Ave. from east and west

	 	 	S 14th Ave. entering Dogwood St. from the north

	 	 	S Ivy St. entering S 12th Ave. from the east

	 	 	S Ivy St. entering S 10th Ave. from the east

	 	 	S Jasper St. entering S 10th Ave. from the east

	 	 	8th Ave. entering S Heather St. from the north

	 	 	N Barlow St. entering N 10th Ave. from the east

	 	 	N Clark St. entering N 10th Ave. from the east

	 	 	N Davis St. entering N 10th Ave. from the east

	 	 	N 11th Ave. entering N Davis St. from the S 

	 	 	N Davis St. entering N l9th Ave. from the west

	 	 	S Magnolia St. entering S 10th Ave. from the west

	 	 	N Barlow entering N 13th Ave. from east and west

	 	 	N Clark St. entering N 13th Ave. from east and west

	406	9/2/75	SW quadrant, intersection of N 10th Ave. and N Davis St.

	 	 	SW quadrant, intersection of S 10th Ave. and S Linden St.

	475	9/6/77	All streets entering N Davis St. from the south 

	 	 	N 13th Ave. and N 14th Ave. entering N Davis St. from the south 

	 	 	N Barlow St. entering N 14th Ave. from the east

	490	2/6/78	S 10th Ave. entering intersection with Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way from north and south 

	 	 	S 11th Ave. entering intersection with Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way from north and south 

	 	 	S 12th Ave. entering intersection with Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way from north and south 

	 	 	S 14th Ave. entering intersection with Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way from north and south 

	 	 	S 15th Ave. entering S Dogwood St. from the south 

	 	 	N 13th Ave. entering intersection with Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-way from north and south 

	530	6/4/79	NE corner of roadway that intersects S 1st Ave. north of S Cherry Dr.

	 	 	NE corner, intersection of S Cherry Dr. at S 1st Ave.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of N Barlow Ct. at 29th Ave.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of N Clark Ct. at N 29th Ave.

	 	 	SW corner, first cul-de-sac west of S 4th Ave. intersecting with S Dogwood Dr.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S 2nd Ave. at S Dogwood Dr.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of S 2nd Ave. at S Tarrybrooke Dr.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S Tarrybrooke Dr. at S 2nd Ave.

	 	 	SW corner, first cul-de-sac on S Tarrybrooke Dr., S west of 2nd Ave.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S Tarrybrooke Dr. at Heather St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 2nd Ct. at S Heather St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 4th Ave. at S Heather St.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S 5th Ave. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 5th Ave. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NE corner, intersection of S Dogwood St. at S 4th Ave.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of S Cherry Dr. at S 5th Ave.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S 6th Ave. at S Alpine St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 4th Pl. at S Cherry Dr.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S 4th Pl. at S Alpine St.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S 18th Ave. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S 19th Ave. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 19th Pl. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 23rd Ave. at S Ginger St. 

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 22nd Ct. at S Ginger St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 21st Ct. at S Ginger St.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of S Ginger St. at S 20th Ave.

	 	 	NE corner, intersection of S Beech St. at S 19th Ave.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 19th Ct. at S Ginger St.

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of S 19th Ave. at S Ginger St.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of S Emerald Loop at S 18th Ave. (north end Emerald Loop)

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of S Emerald Loop at S 18th Ave. (S end Emerald Loop)

	 	 	NW corner, intersection of Lee Ct. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	SE corner, intersection of S Julie Ct. at S Dogwood St.

	 	 	SW corner, intersection of S Dogwood St. at S Webb Rd.

	 	 	SW corner, Tract C in Tarrybrooke III Subdivision

	 	 	SW corner, Tract 3 in Tarrybrooke III Subdivision

	706	12/3/90	NW corner and SE corner of the intersection of S 5th Ave. and S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NW corner and SE corner of the intersection of S 6th Ave. and S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NE corner of the intersection of S 6th Ct. and S 6th Ave.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S 7th Cir. and S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NW corner of the intersection of S 7th Ct. and S Dogwood St.

	 	 	NW corner and SE corner of the intersection of S 8th Ave. and S Dogwood St.

	715	11/4/91	NW corner and SE corner of the intersection of S 9th Ave. and S Dogwood St.

	720	4/6/92	NE corner of the intersection of N 4th Ave. and N Holladay St.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of N 7th Ct. and N Holladay St.

	 	 	SW corner of the intersection of N 10th Ave. and N Holladay St.

	723	5/4/92	NW corner of the intersection of S 19th Ave. and S Alpine St.

	731	3/1/93	SW corner of the intersection of S 1st Ave. and S Linden St.

	 	 	NW corner of the intersection of S 2nd Ave. and S Linden St.

	 	 	NW corner of the intersection of S 3rd Ct. and S Linden St.

	 	 	NE and SW corners of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Linden St.

	 	 	SW corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Magnolia St.

	 	 	NE corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S 5th Ave.

	 	 	SW corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Ivy St.

	 	 	NW corner of the intersection of S 25th Ct. and S Ginger St.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S 25th Pl. and S Ginger St.

	 	 	SW corner of the intersection of S Ginger St. and S 26th Ave. (SW Webb Rd.)

	739	10/4/93	NE corner of the intersection of S 26th Ave. and S Cherry St.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S 27th Ave. and S Cherry St.

	746	5/16/94	NE corner of the intersection of S Beech Cir. and S 6th Ave.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S 6th Ave. and S Alpine St.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S 7th Cir. and S Alpine St.

	 	 	NW corner of the intersection of S Alpine St. and S 8th Ave.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S Alpine St. and S 8th Ave.

	 	 	SE corner of the intersection of S 9th Ave. and S Alpine St.

	 	 	NE corner of the intersection of S Alpine St. and S 8th Ave.

	 	 	SW corner of the intersection of S Alpine St. and S 8th Ave.

	770	11/20/95	At the NE corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Heather St.

	 	 	At the SE corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Heather St.

	 	 	At the SW corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Heather St.

	 	 	At the NW corner of the intersection of S 4th Ave. and S Heather St.


Schedule B SCHEDULE OF PROHIBITED PARKING

	Ordinance Number	Date of Enactment	Location

	368	10/1/73	S Dogwood St., S 12th Ave. to S 14th Ave.

	373	2/4/74	N 17th Ave., Adair St. to N Clark St., more than three hours, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

	 	 	N Barlow St., N 19th Ave. to N 14th Ave., more than three hours, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

	377	4/1/74	South side Adair St., 14th Ave. to 17th Ave.

	465A	6/6/77	Horse trailers:

	 	 	S 9th St., S Linden Ave. to S Nectarine Ave.

	 	 	S 10th St., S Nectarine Ave. to S Linden Ave.

	 	 	S 10th St., S Linden St. to S Jasper St.

	 	 	S Linden Ave., S 10th Ave. west to city limits

	 	 	S Magnolia Ave., S 10th St. west to city limits

	 	 	S Nectarine Ave., S 10th Ave. west to city limits

	 	 	S 12th St., Flax Plant Rd. to S Ivy Ave.

	475	9/6/77	North side Baseline Rd., N Barlow St. to N 14th Ave.

	492	3/6/78	Western half of S 4th Ave., Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way to SW Dogwood Dr.

	 	 	N 17th Ave., Adair St. to 30.0 feet north

	 	 	N 17th Ave., 30.0 feet north of Adair St. to 174 feet north (30-minute limit)

	497	6/5/78	14th Ave., Adair St. to Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way

	517	2/5/79	Boats or trailers upon any public St. or highway more than 72 hours

	555	2/19/80	[See Exhibit B attached to ordinance for locations]

	648	4/7/86	East of center line, S 12th Ave. between south right-of-way line of S Ginger St. and north right-of-way line of S Ivy St.

	705	10/16/90	West of the center line of S 10th Ave. from the south right-of-way line of S Jasper St. to a point 25 feet north of said right-of-way line

	 	 	East of the center line of S 10th Ave. from the south right-of-way line of S Jasper St. to a point 20 feet south of said right-of-way line

	725	8/3/92	West of the center line of S 12th Ave. between a point 150 feet south of the south right-of-way line of S Ginger St. and the north right-of-way line of S Flax Plant Rd.

	732	3/15/93	On the radius of the cul-de-sac on S Alpine St. near S 19th Ave. between the driveways to 1900 S Alpine and 1902 S Alpine

	 	 	On the radius of the cul-de-sac on S Alpine St. near S 19th Ave. between the driveways to 1898 S Alpine and 1900 S Alpine

	 	 	On the radius of the cul-de-sac on S Alpine St. near S 19th Ave. between the driveways of 1896 S Alpine and 1898 S Alpine

	738	9/7/93	West of the center line of N 14th Ave. between a point 12 feet north of the south right-of-way line of N Barlow St. and a point 48 feet south of said right-of-way line

	 	 	West of the center line of N 4th Ave. between a point 78 feet north of the north right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad and a point 158 feet north of said right-of-way line

	738	9/7/93	East of the center line of N 4th Ave. between a point 82 feet north of the north right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad and a point 202 feet north of said right-of-way line

	747	5/16/94	North of the center line of S Alpine Dr. between a point 91 feet west of the west right-of-way lines of S 4th Ave. and a point 116 feet west of the west right-of-way line of S 4th Ave.

	 	 	South of the center line of S Alpine Dr. between a point 91 feet west of the west right-of-way line of S 4th Ave. and a point 111 feet west of the west right-of-way line of S 4th Ave.


Schedule C SCHEDULE OF LOADING ZONE DESIGNATIONS

	Ordinance Number	Date of Enactment	Location

	361	7/2/73	Portion of Baseline Rd. south of traveled portion of said road, west of west right-of-way line of S 14th Ave. for a distance of 100.0 feet, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday

 


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Chapters:

12.05    Improvement Procedure and Special Assessment

12.10    Connection Fees in Lieu of Assessments

12.15    Sewer Extensions

12.20    Street Lighting

12.25    Sidewalks

12.30    Curb Cuts

12.35    Public Improvement Completion Requirements

12.40    Systems Development Charges

12.45    Reimbursement Districts

12.50    Parks and Recreation


Chapter 12.05 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT

Sections:

12.05.010    Initiating improvements.

12.05.020    Engineer’s report.

12.05.030    Action on engineer’s report.

12.05.040    Resolution and notice of hearing.

12.05.050    Manner of doing work.

12.05.060    Hearing.

12.05.070    Call for bids.

12.05.080    Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.

12.05.090    Assessment ordinance.

12.05.100    Notice of assessment.

12.05.110    Lien records and foreclosure proceedings.

12.05.120    Errors in assessment calculations.

12.05.130    Supplemental assessment.

12.05.140    Rebates.

12.05.150    Remedies.

12.05.160    Abandonment of proceedings.

12.05.170    Curative provisions.

12.05.180    Reassessment.

12.05.190    Deferral of payment for senior citizens.


12.05.010 Initiating improvements.

(A) When the council considers it necessary to make any street, sewer, water, sidewalk, parking, curbing, drain or any other public improvement defined in ORS 223.387 to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, then the council shall by resolution declare its intention to make the improvement and direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report for the improvement and file it with the recorder.

(B) When the owners of two-thirds of the property to be benefited by any of the improvements defined in subsection (A) of this section request by written petition that the council initiate an improvement, then the council shall by resolution declare its intention to make the improvement and direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report for the improvement and file it with the recorder. [Code 2000 § 3.005.]


12.05.020 Engineer’s report.

Unless the council directs otherwise, the engineer’s report referred to in CMC 12.05.010 shall contain the following:

(A) A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost.

(B) Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done. However, when the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the engineer may adopt the plans, specifications and estimates of that agency.

(C) An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including legal, administrative and engineering costs.

(D) An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties, per square foot, per front foot, or whatever unit of cost is to be used.

(E) A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefited.

(F) The description of each lot, parcel of land, or portion of land to be specially benefited, with the names of the record owners and, when readily available, the names of the contract purchasers, as shown on the books and records of the Washington County department of revenue and taxation. For purposes of describing each lot or parcel of land under the provisions of this section, it shall be sufficient to use the tax account number assigned to the property and issued by the department of revenue and taxation or the book and page designations as shown on the books and records of the Washington County clerk.

(G) A recommendation regarding the rate of interest, not to exceed 10 percent per annum, to be paid on assessments bonded under the Bancroft Bonding Act and ORS Chapter 223. [Code 2000 § 3.010.]


12.05.030 Action on engineer’s report.

After the engineer’s report is filed with the recorder, the council may by resolution approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the engineer to supply additional or different information for the improvement, or it may abandon the improvement. [Code 2000 § 3.015.]


12.05.040 Resolution and notice of hearing.

After the council has approved the engineer’s report as submitted or modified, the council shall by resolution declare its intention to make the improvement and direct the recorder to give notice of the council’s intention to make the improvement by two publications, one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall contain the following:

(A) That the report of the engineer is on file in the office of the recorder and is subject to public examination.

(B) That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date, which shall not be less than 10 days following the first publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to such improvement will be heard by the council; and that, if prior to or at the hearing there are written remonstrances of the owners of two-thirds of the frontage of the property to be specially affected by the improvement, then the improvement will be abandoned for not less than six months.

(C) A description of the property to be specially benefited by the improvement, the owners of the property as shown on the books and records of the Washington County department of revenue and taxation, and the engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the improvement to be paid for by special assessment to benefited properties. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be sufficient to describe the property to be specially benefited by tax account number assigned to the property and used by the department of revenue and taxation or the book and page designation as shown on the books and records of the Washington County clerk. [Code 2000 § 3.020.]


12.05.050 Manner of doing work.

The council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction work may be done in whole or in part by the city, by a contract, by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. [Code 2000 § 3.025.]


12.05.060 Hearing.

If the written remonstrances represent less than the amount of property required to defeat the proposed improvement, then, on the basis of hearing written remonstrances and oral objections, if any, the council may by motion at the time of the hearing or within 60 days thereafter order the improvement to be carried out in accordance with the resolution or, if the project was initiated by the council’s motion and not the petition of property owners, abandon the improvement. [Code 2000 § 3.030.]


12.05.070 Call for bids.

The council may direct the recorder to advertise for bids for construction of all or any part of the improvement project. If any part of the work of the improvement is to be done under contract bids, then the council shall proceed in accordance with the procedures of state law for public contracting. [Code 2000 § 3.035.]


12.05.080 Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.

(A) The council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement, may:

(1) Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.

(2) Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed that is just and reasonable among the properties determined to be specially benefited.

(3) Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of any improvement, when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work involved warrants only a partial payment of or no payment by the benefited property of the costs of the improvement.

(B) Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using any other available means of financing improvements, including federal and state grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance. In the event that such other means of financing improvements are used, the council may levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of the improvement. [Code 2000 § 3.040.]


12.05.090 Assessment ordinance.

(A) If the council determines that the public improvement shall be made, when the estimated cost is ascertained on the basis of the contract award or city departmental cost, or after the work is done and the cost has been actually determined, the council shall determine whether the property benefited shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The recorder or other person designated by the council shall prepare the proposed assessment to the respective lots within the assessment district and file it in the recorder’s office.

(B) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the owner’s address as shown on the Washington County tax assessor’s rolls. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the owner’s property and shall fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder. Any such objection shall state the grounds for objection.

(C) Within 60 days of the date fixed for the filing of objections, the council shall:

(1) Consider the objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments;

(2) Determine the amount of assessment to be charged against each lot within the district according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement; and

(3) By ordinance spread the assessment. [Code 2000 § 3.045.]


12.05.100 Notice of assessment.

(A) Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the recorder shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property and shall publish notice of the assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication of which shall be not later than 20 days after the date of the assessment ordinance.

(B) The notice of assessment shall recite the date of the assessment ordinance and shall state that upon the failure of the owner of the property assessed to make application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days from the date of the first publication of notice, or upon the failure of the owner to pay the assessment in full within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance, then interest will begin to run on the assessment and that the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure. The notice shall also contain a description of the property assessed, the name of the owner of the property and the amount of each assessment. [Code 2000 § 3.050.]


12.05.110 Lien records and foreclosure proceedings.

After passage of the assessment ordinance by the council, the recorder shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the amount assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land or portion of land, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land or portions of land which have been assessed for improvement. All assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits. Interest shall be charged at a rate not to exceed 10 percent per annum until paid on all amounts not paid within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance. After expiration of 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance, the city may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the manner provided by state law. However, the city may enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under state law to redeem the property. [Code 2000 § 3.055.]


12.05.120 Errors in assessment calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the recorder finds that there has been an error in fact, he shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. Upon enactment of the amendment, the recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send a correct notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. [Code 2000 § 3.060.]


12.05.130 Supplemental assessment.

If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained, and if it is found that the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the council may by motion declare the insufficiency and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The council shall set a time for hearing of objections to the supplemental assessment and shall direct the city manager to publish one notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the hearing, the council shall make a just and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of city liens as provided by CMC 12.05.110. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be published and mailed, and the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with CMC 12.05.110 and 12.05.120. [Code 2000 § 3.065.]


12.05.140 Rebates.

If, upon the completion of the improvement project, it is found that the assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the costs of the improvement, then the council must ascertain and declare the excess by ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered on the lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the person who paid it or his legal representative shall be entitled to the repayment of the rebate credit, or the portion which exceeds the amount unpaid on the original assessment. [Code 2000 § 3.070.]


12.05.150 Remedies.

(A) Subject to the curative provisions of CMC 12.05.170 and the rights of the city to reassess as provided in CMC 12.05.180, proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed not earlier than 30 days nor later than 60 days after the filing of written objections, as provided by CMC 12.05.090.

(B) A property owner who has filed written objection with the recorder prior to the public hearing may have the right to apply for a writ of review based upon the council’s exercising its functions erroneously or arbitrarily or exceeding its jurisdiction to the injury of some substantial right of the owner if the facts supporting the claim have been specifically set forth in the written objection.

(C) A property owner who has filed written objection with the recorder prior to the public hearing may begin a suit for equitable relief based upon a total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the city. If notice of the improvement was not sent to the owner and if the owner did not have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the hearing, then the owner may file written objection alleging lack of jurisdiction with the recorder within 30 days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement.

(D) A provision of this section shall not be construed to lengthen any period of redemption or to affect the running of any statute of limitation. A proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the council to remedy or cure the alleged errors or defects. [Code 2000 § 3.075.]


12.05.160 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council may abandon proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at any time prior to the final completion of the improvements. If liens have been assessed upon any property under this procedure, they shall be canceled and any payments made on the assessments shall be refunded to the person paying them, his assigns or legal representatives. [Code 2000 § 3.080.]


12.05.170 Curative provisions.

(A) An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:

(1) A failure of the engineer’s report to contain all of the information required by CMC 12.05.020.

(2) A failure to have all of the information required to be in the improvement resolution, the assessment ordinance, the lien docket, or notices required to be published and mailed.

(3) A failure to list the name of or mail notice to the owner of any property as required by CMC 12.05.090 and 12.05.100.

(4) Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining.

(B) The council shall have the authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. [Code 2000 § 3.085.]


12.05.180 Reassessment.

When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for any improvement which has been made by the city has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of this state, or any federal court having jurisdiction, or when the council is in doubt as to the validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment, or any part of it, the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law. [Code 2000 § 3.090.]


12.05.190 Deferral of payment for senior citizens.

Senior citizens may apply for deferral of payment of special assessments for improvements as provided by ORS 311.702 to 311.735. [Code 2000 § 3.095.]


Chapter 12.10 CONNECTION FEES IN LIEU OF ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

12.10.010    Connection charge in lieu of assessment.

12.10.020    Determination.

12.10.030    Collection prior to connection – Amount.

12.10.040    Disbursement requirements.


12.10.010 Connection charge in lieu of assessment.

There is hereby established a connection charge in lieu of assessment, which shall be paid by the owner of property located outside the boundaries of a local improvement assessment district if the property is specially benefited by the construction of public improvements within a local improvement assessment district. [Code 2000 § 3.205.]


12.10.020 Determination.

At the time of application for the connection to a public improvement constructed within a local improvement assessment district, the manager shall determine:

(A) Whether the property for which the connection is sought is located outside the boundaries of the local improvement assessment district; and

(B) Whether the property is specially benefited by the construction of the improvement. [Code 2000 § 3.210.]


12.10.030 Collection prior to connection – Amount.

If the manager finds that the property for which the connection to public improvements is sought meets the criteria specified in CMC 12.10.020, he shall collect from the applicant prior to connection of the property to the public improvement a charge in an amount equal to the assessment which would have been assessed and levied against the applicant’s property had the property been located in the assessment district at the time the assessment was levied. [Code 2000 § 3.215.]


12.10.040 Disbursement requirements.

(A) If the charge in lieu of assessment collected under the provisions of CMC 12.10.030 is imposed within five years from the date of the ordinance levying the assessment for improvements within the applicable local improvement assessment district, then the city shall apply the amount of the charge received pro rata to the benefit of the person to whom the assessment was made in the local improvement assessment district proceedings.

(B) If the assessment was paid in cash, then the pro rata share shall be reimbursed to the person who made the cash payment.

(C) If the party being assessed made application to pay the assessment under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act, then the pro rata credit shall be applied to the indebtedness of the applicant under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding application.

(D) If the charge in lieu of assessment collected under the provisions of CMC 12.10.030 is imposed after five years from the date of the assessment ordinance, then the charge shall be deposited by the city into the appropriate account for the development of the type of utility and public improvements for which the assessment was originally made. [Code 2000 § 3.220.]


Chapter 12.15 SEWER EXTENSIONS

Sections:

12.15.010    Refunds of costs.


12.15.010 Refunds of costs.

(A) If a person pays all or any part of the cost of extending a sewer line to serve his property, and the extension is across from or adjacent to property other than his own, so that service is available to such property without further extension of the line, the owner or owners of such other property may be required to pay to the person who paid for the extension a pro rata share of the cost of the extension. The right to require the refund shall expire 10 years after the date of installation of the service. The amount to be refunded in each case shall be determined by the city, and the determination shall be final.

(B) If the property owner who pays the original cost of extending the sewer service wishes the city to require that other property owners pay their pro rata shares, he must, within 30 days of the completion of the improvement, file a request with the manager, together with a verified and sworn statement of the costs of making the sewer extension, including copies of vouchers, statements, or any other form of documentation of the costs required by the manager. [Code 2000 § 3.255.]


Chapter 12.20 STREET LIGHTING

Sections:

12.20.010    Street lighting required.

12.20.020    City option.


12.20.010 Street lighting required.

In all local improvement street and alley assessment district proceedings, the public improvements to be constructed shall include a provision for street lighting at locations prescribed by the manager in accordance with a street lighting plan approved by the manager. The design and type of lights shall conform to standards adopted by the planning commission. [Code 2000 § 3.305.]


12.20.020 City option.

If the city elects to have the street lights installed by Portland General Electric Company or its contractor and rent the monthly use of the street light or lights, the cost of improvements within the local improvement assessment district shall include an amount equal to the cost of each street lighting unit, as determined by the manager, which shall be assessed against the abutting and benefited owners of property within the assessment district as a cost equivalent to the actual cost of construction of the street lighting unit. [Code 2000 § 3.310.]


Chapter 12.25 SIDEWALKS

Sections:

12.25.010    Maintenance required.

12.25.020    Declaration of nuisance.

12.25.030    Notice to repair.


12.25.010 Maintenance required.

Every person owing, controlling, or in possession of any premises shall maintain an improved sidewalk abutting the premises in good repair and in accordance with the width, materials and surface standards of the city. [Code 2000 § 3.355.]


12.25.020 Declaration of nuisance.

Every improved sidewalk located within the city which does not conform to the sidewalk standards of the city as adopted and established by ordinance is declared to be a nuisance affecting the public safety and welfare and may be abated in the manner prescribed in CMC 8.10.120 to 8.10.160. [Code 2000 § 3.360.]


12.25.030 Notice to repair.

In addition to other requirements of CMC 8.10.120 the council shall:

(A) Notify the owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the nuisance of the defects in the sidewalk and what repairs must be undertaken in order to abate and correct the nuisance; and

(B) Provide the owner or agent in charge of the abutting property a written estimate of the cost of making the repair if the repair is to be performed by the city under CMC 8.10.140. [Code 2000 § 3.365.]


Chapter 12.30 CURB CUTS

Sections:

12.30.010    Definitions.

12.30.020    Excavation permit.

12.30.030    Permit application and fees.

12.30.040    Insurance required.

12.30.050    Indemnification.

12.30.060    Restoration.

12.30.070    Exemption from resurfacing fee.

12.30.080    Damage to substructures.

12.30.090    Protection of adjoining property.

12.30.100    Care of excavated material.

12.30.110    Construction standards.

12.30.120    Limitations of liability.


12.30.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, inclusive, the following terms shall have the indicated meaning:

(A) “Excavation” shall mean any opening or filling in the surface of a public place.

(B) “City manager” shall mean city manager of the city of Cornelius or designee.

(C) “Public place” shall mean any public street, street right-of-way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza, or other public property owned or controlled by the city.

(D) “Person” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.405.]


12.30.020 Excavation permit.

No person shall make an excavation of paved surface or fill an excavation in a public place without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.406.]


12.30.030 Permit application and fees.

The application for an excavation permit shall be filed in the office of the city recorder on a form furnished by the recorder. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

(A) For each cut, opening or interruption of paved surface made generally parallel with the right-of-way line, a resurfacing fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council shall apply.

(B) For all other cuts, openings, or interruptions of paved surface, a resurfacing fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council shall apply.

(C) Plans, drawings, and specifications disclosing the location of the proposed excavation, materials to be used and other matters which may be required by the public works superintendent or city engineer.

(D) A fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council which shall be used in connection with the administration and inspection of work done pursuant to the excavation permit. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.407; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


12.30.040 Insurance required.

Prior to issuance of an excavation permit, the applicant shall deposit with the city manager a certificate of comprehensive public liability insurance covering the work to be done by the applicant under the excavation permit. The policy of insurance shall provide for not less than $300,000 for any injury sustained in one occurrence and property damage coverage in an amount not less than $100,000. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.408.]


12.30.050 Indemnification.

As a condition of the issuance of an excavation permit, the applicant shall indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees, representatives, and agents harmless from and against any and all claims, demands, judgments, expenses, costs, or charges arising out of or related to the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit. The application shall defend and pay all costs of defending the city, its agents, officers, employees, and representatives in any action or other proceeding which may be filed against them, and/or of them, as a result of the applicant’s work and activities under the excavation permit. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.409.]


12.30.060 Restoration.

The permit holder shall be required by the terms of the permit to restore the surface of public places to the condition existing prior to the interruption and in accordance with restoration standards contained in the permit. The permit shall contain a provision authorizing the city to restore the public place surface to its existing condition if the applicant or permit holder fails to do so and assess the costs of the restoration against the permit holder. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.410.]


12.30.070 Exemption from resurfacing fee.

The city of Cornelius or any of its departments or divisions and any person to whom a franchise to use public places has been granted by the city council shall not be required to pay a resurfacing fee under the provisions of CMC 12.30.030(A) or (B). Any such person shall be required to make application for and secure an excavation permit and pay all other fees provided for in CMC 12.30.030(D). [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.411.]


12.30.080 Damage to substructures.

In the event any pipe, conduit, manhole, vault, buried cable, wire, or any other structure located below the surface of any public place should be damaged by the permit holder or his agents, representatives or designees, the substructure shall be repaired by the owner thereof and the expense of such repair shall be charged to the permit holder. The permit holder shall be liable for any damage caused to any public property, including but not limited to the damage to water lines, sewer lines, and other city-owned utilities. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.412.]


12.30.090 Protection of adjoining property.

The permit holder shall at all times, at his own expense, preserve and protect from damage any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for that purpose. Wherein the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permit holder shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property. The permit holder shall, at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage resulting from his failure to protect such structures. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.413.]


12.30.100 Care of excavated material.

All material excavated from trenches shall be placed by permit holder in a location which shall not constitute a hazard or danger to persons lawfully using the public place or places being excavated, and shall not be placed within a public right-of-way without prior written approval from the city. During the work performed under any excavation permit, the permit holder shall keep all streets and public places thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, or other debris and dust resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permit holder. In the event the permit holder fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section, the city manager, after notice to the permit holder, may direct the cleanup and removal of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, or other debris and dust and assess the cost thereof against the permit holder. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Ord. 716 § 1, 1991; Code 2000 § 3.414.]


12.30.110 Construction standards.

All work performed by the permit holder under the provisions of the excavation permit shall be in accordance with standards established by the city engineer which standards may include but not be limited to methods of excavation, backfilling, restoration of surface, and restoration standards. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.415.]


12.30.120 Limitations of liability.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall cause the city or its employees, agents, or representatives to be liable for damages or injury to any person or property which may result from or arise out of the performance of any excavation work under an excavation permit. [Ord. 592 § 2, 1982; Code 2000 § 3.416.]


Chapter 12.35 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

12.35.010    Occupancy of new or remodeled structures.

12.35.020    Definitions.

12.35.030    Exceptions.

12.35.040    Variances.


12.35.010 Occupancy of new or remodeled structures.

Subject to the provisions of CMC 12.35.030, no person, firm or corporation shall occupy a new or remodeled structure, or any portion thereof, which is located within a commercial or industrial zoning district unless the property is served by existing public improvements, or until all public improvements have been constructed and accepted by the city engineer. [Ord. 2019-05 § 1, 2019; Code 2000 § 3.455.]


12.35.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Commercial zoning district” and “industrial zoning district” means property classified with any commercial or industrial zone classification under the provisions of the city of Cornelius zoning ordinance.

(B) “Public improvements” mean:

(1) Streets, including street lights, sidewalks and storm sewer facilities, in accordance with city standards as determined by the city engineer.

(2) Public water service.

(3) Public sanitary sewer service.

(C) “Remodeled structure” means the remodeling of an existing structure where square footage is added to the floor surface of the structure. [Code 2000 § 3.460.]


12.35.030 Exceptions.

The following exceptions shall apply to the provisions of CMC 12.35.010:

(A) In the case of construction of new structures which occupy only a portion of a tract or parcel of land owned by the developer, public street improvements, including street lights, sidewalks and storm sewers, shall be required only in and upon that portion of the public right-of-way abutting that portion of a tract or parcel of land upon which the new or remodeled structure is located. Prior to acceptance of such improvements by the council, the owner of that portion of the property abutting the public right-of-way where such improvements are not constructed or provided shall enter into a contract with the city under the terms of which the owner shall agree to construct such improvements to serve the unimproved portion of the tract or parcel prior to occupancy of any structure built or extended upon said unimproved portion. The promise of the owner shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and the contract shall be approved by the city attorney and recorded in the records of Washington County, Oregon.

(B) In the case of the remodeling of an existing structure, the cost of required public improvements shall not exceed one-half of the cost of remodeling construction. The cost of remodeling construction shall be determined by the city building official, whose determination shall be final. If it is determined that the cost of public improvements exceeds one-half the cost of remodeling construction, the city manager shall determine which public improvements shall be constructed or provided prior to occupancy of the remodeled structure.

(C) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, no public improvements shall be required until and unless:

(1) The remodeling causes the building to have 50 percent more square feet than it had at the time of the adoption of this chapter; or

(2) In the case of a new structure, the square footage of a new structure exceeds 50 percent of the square footage of the existing structure or structures. For purposes of determining added square footage, remodeling projects shall be cumulative; that is, the total number of square feet added by each remodeling of an existing building shall be totaled until the increased square footage equals the indicated 50 percent.

(D) In cases where there is an existing asphaltic concrete or concrete surface at the location where public sidewalks would otherwise be required, the required public street improvements shall not include the construction of sidewalks. [Code 2000 § 3.465.]


12.35.040 Variances.

The property owner or an agent of the owner may request a variance from the requirements of CMC 12.35.010 and 12.35.030. The variance request shall be in writing and state the grounds thereof. The written request shall be filed in the office of the city recorder not more than 10 days after the owner or agent of the owner makes application for a building permit. Fees, criteria, standards and procedures for processing the variance shall be the same as those established for variance proceedings under the city’s zoning ordinance, excepting that the initial hearing shall be before the council and not the planning commission. The variance request shall be scheduled for public hearing before the council not more than 30 days following receipt of the request. [Code 2000 § 3.470.]


Chapter 12.40 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

12.40.010    Purpose.

12.40.020    Scope.

12.40.030    Definitions.

12.40.040    System development charge.

12.40.050    Authorized expenditures.

12.40.060    Expenditure restrictions.

12.40.070    Installment payment.

12.40.080    Exemptions.

12.40.090    Credits.

12.40.100    Segregation and use of revenue.

12.40.110    Appeal procedure.

12.40.120    Prohibited connection.

12.40.130    Severability.


12.40.010 Purpose.

This chapter provides authorization for the imposition of system development charges (SDCs) for capital improvements consistent with ORS 223.297 through 223.314 thereby creating funding source(s) to pay for the installation, construction, expansion and extension of capital improvements necessitated by impacts from growth and development on the city’s capital improvements. [Code 2000 § 3.500; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.020 Scope.

The system development charges authorized by this chapter are separate from and in addition to any tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. [Code 2000 § 3.505; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.030 Definitions.

Except where the context requires some other meaning, the terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them at ORS 223.299 and as otherwise used in ORS 223.297 through 223.314. [Code 2000 § 3.510; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.040 System development charge.

(A) Unless exempted by the provisions of CMC 12.40.080 or state law, there are hereby imposed systems development charges (SDCs) upon all qualifying development in the city for the use of the city’s capital improvements. The SDCs shall be collected at such time(s) as determined by the city manager or his designate to be appropriate such that development is responsible for payment at or near the time the capital improvement(s) are to be utilized by the development (i.e., issuance of a building permit, etc.).

(B) Systems development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the resolution prior to its adoption. [Code 2000 § 3.515; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.050 Authorized expenditures.

(A) The reimbursement fee portion of the system development charge shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

(B) The improvement fee portion of the system development charge shall be spent only on capacity-increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for such improvements. A “capacity-increasing capital improvement” is one which increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvement(s) funded by improvement fees must be related to the increased demands created by projected development.

(C) Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter and ORS 223.297 through 223.314 including the cost(s) of developing system development charge methodologies for each capital improvement, staff costs and legal review associated with analysis and defense of the city’s system development charges and the provision of annual accounting of system development charge funds. [Code 2000 § 3.520; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.060 Expenditure restrictions.

(A) System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

(B) System development charges shall not be expended on costs for the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. [Code 2000 § 3.525; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.070 Installment payment.

When a system development charge is due and payable, a permittee may, consistent with the limitations imposed under ORS 223.207 and 223.208, apply for payment of the system development charge in 20 semiannual installments. [Code 2000 § 3.530; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.080 Exemptions.

An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of a capital improvement are exempt from all portions of the system development charge. [Code 2000 § 3.535; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.090 Credits.

(A) When development occurs that is subject to a system development charge for a capital improvement, the charge for the existing use (if relevant) shall be calculated and if less than the system development charge applicable to the proposed use, the difference between the two shall be the imposed SDC.

(B) If the change in the use results in a system development charge for the proposed use being less than the system development charge would be for the existing use, no system development charge shall be sought; however, no refund or credit shall be given unless provided for by another subsection of this section.

(C) A credit shall be given to a developer or applicant for the cost of a qualified public improvement upon acceptance by the city of the affected capital improvement if the improvement meets the qualifications set out in ORS 223.304(4) and (5).

(D) The credit shall be only for the improvement fee portion of the system development charge charged for the type of improvement being constructed, and credit for qualified public improvement(s) may be granted only for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. An applicant for a credit shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit. The request for credit shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city.

(E) When establishing a methodology for a system development charge, the city may provide for a credit against the improvement fee, the reimbursement fee, or both, for capital improvements constructed as part of the development which reduce the development’s demand upon existing capital improvements and/or the need for future capital improvements.

(F) When the construction of a qualified capital improvement gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be imposed against the project, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project.

(G) Credits shall not be transferable from one type of system development charge to another.

(H) Credits shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit is given. [Code 2000 § 3.540; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.100 Segregation and use of revenue.

(A) All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds by the city. That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in this chapter.

(B) The city council shall provide an annual accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, of system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type of charge and the projects funded from each account. [Code 2000 § 3.545; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.110 Appeal procedure.

A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the city council under this chapter or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenue(s) may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the city council by filing a written request with the city council describing with particularity the decision of the city council or the expenditure from which the person appeals. Any such challenge must be made by a party recognized as having standing under ORS 34.010 through 34.100 and the time limitations imposed by ORS 223.302 and/or 223.304. [Code 2000 § 3.550; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.120 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid. [Code 2000 § 3.555; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


12.40.130 Severability.

The invalidity of a section or subsection of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or subsections. [Code 2000 § 3.560; Ord. 898 § 1, 2008.]


Chapter 12.45 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

12.45.010    Definitions.

12.45.020    Application for a reimbursement district.

12.45.030    City engineer’s report.

12.45.040    Amount to be reimbursed.

12.45.050    Public hearing.

12.45.060    City council action.

12.45.070    Reimbursement agreement.

12.45.080    Annual fee adjustment.

12.45.090    Notice of adoption of resolution.

12.45.100    Recording the resolution.

12.45.110    Contesting the reimbursement district.

12.45.120    Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.

12.45.130    Public improvements become property of the city.

12.45.140    Collection and payment – Other fees and charges.


12.45.010 Definitions.

The following terms are definitions for the purposes of this chapter:

(A) “City engineer” or “engineer” means the person holding the position of director of public works or such other officer, employee or agent designated by the council or city manager to perform the duties set out for the city engineer in this chapter.

(B) “City” means the city of Cornelius.

(C) “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or any other legal entity, be it public or private and/or any agent, employee or representative thereof.

(D) “Applicant” means a person who is required or chooses to finance some or all of the cost of a street, water or sanitary sewer or storm water improvement which improvement is also available to serve or benefit property other than by the applicant’s and who, in turn, applies to the city for reimbursement of the expense of the improvement.

(E) “Street improvement,” “water improvement,” “sewer improvement” and “storm water improvement” mean, respectively:

(1) A street or street improvement including but not limited to streets, storm drains, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike paths, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs and public right-of-way;

(2) A water or water line improvement including, but not limited to, extending a water line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that water service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line;

(3) A sanitary sewer or sewer line improvement and including but not limited to extending a sewer line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that sewer service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line;

(4) A storm water improvement including but not limited to extending a storm water line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that storm water disposal for such other property can be provided without further extension of the line, conforming with standards and specifications set by the city.

(F) “Public improvement” means, as appropriate, water, sanitary sewer, storm water, street (including bicycle lane), and/or sidewalk facilities or the undergrounding of public utilities.

(G) “Reimbursement agreement” means the agreement between an applicant and the city (as authorized by the city council and executed by the city manager) providing for the installation of and payment for public improvements within a reimbursement district.

(H) “Reimbursement district” means the area determined by the city council to derive a benefit from the construction of public improvements financed in whole or in part by an applicant.

(I) “Reimbursement fee” means the fee established by resolution of the city council and required to be paid by persons within a reimbursement district once they utilize the public improvement.

(J) “Utilize” means to use or benefit from a public improvement, to apply for a building permit which will allow for the use or increase in the use of a public improvement, or to connect to a public improvement. [Code 2000 § 3.600.]


12.45.020 Application for a reimbursement district.

(A) Any applicant who finances some or all of the cost of a public improvement available to provide service or benefit to property other than property owned by that person may, by written application filed with the city engineer, request the city establish a reimbursement district. The improvement(s) must be in a size greater than that which would otherwise ordinarily be required and must be available to provide service to property other than property owned by the applicant(s). Examples include (but are not limited to):

(1) Full street improvements instead of half street improvements;

(2) Off-site sidewalks;

(3) Connection of street sections for continuity;

(4) Extension of water lines; and

(5) Extension of sewer lines.

(B) All applications shall include the following:

(1) A description of the location, type, size and cost of the public improvement eligible for reimbursement;

(2) A map showing the properties to be included in a proposed reimbursement district;

(3) The zoning for the properties;

(4) The front or square footage of said properties (or similar data appropriate for calculating the apportionment of the cost of the improvement among the properties); and

(5) A listing of the property(ies) owned by applicant. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and notice required by this chapter as established by city council resolution.

(C) Actual Versus Estimated Costs.

(1) In the event an application is submitted after the construction of the public improvement, the application shall also include information as to when the city accepted the public improvement as well as the actual cost of the improvement, evidenced by receipts, invoices or other similar documents. Until receipt of said information, the affected application will be deemed incomplete.

(2) In the event an application is submitted prior to the construction of the improvements, the application shall be accompanied by an estimate of the cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projections, or similar data. The application shall also include the estimated date of completion of the public improvement(s). Until the receipt of said information, the affected application will be deemed incomplete.

(D) An application may be submitted at any time prior to the installation of the public improvement but in no event later than 180 days after acceptance of the improvement for which reimbursement is sought, unless the city engineer, in his/her sole discretion, waives this requirement. [Code 2000 § 3.605.]


12.45.030 City engineer’s report.

The city engineer shall review the application and the other material submitted therewith and prepare a written report for the council which will address (to the extent relevant) the following factors:

(A) Whether the public improvement for which reimbursement is sought has capacity sufficient to allow use thereof by property other than property owned by the applicant;

(B) The area proposed to be included in the reimbursement district;

(C) The actual or estimated cost of the improvements within the area of the proposed reimbursement district and the portion thereof for which the applicant should be reimbursed;

(D) A methodology for allocating the cost among the parcels within the proposed district and, where appropriate, defining a “unit” for applying the reimbursement fee to property which may be partitioned, subdivided or otherwise modified at some future date. The methodology should include consideration of the cost of the improvement(s), prior contributions by property owners, the value of the unused capacity, rate-making principles associated with the financing of public improvements and such other factors as deemed relevant by the city engineer;

(E) The amount to be charged by the city for administration of the agreement which is to be fixed by the city council and included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. The fee is due and payable to the city at the time the reimbursement agreement is signed;

(F) The period of time that the right to reimbursement exists if the period is less than 10 years;

(G) Whether the street, water and sewer improvements will or have met city standards. [Code 2000 § 3.610.]


12.45.040 Amount to be reimbursed.

(A) The potential amount of the reimbursement is limited to the following:

(1) The costs of construction;

(2) Engineering (including surveying and inspection) costs in an amount not to exceed 15 percent of the construction costs;

(3) Off-site right-of-way purchase costs, limited to the reasonable market value of land or easements purchased by the applicant from third parties to complete off-site improvements;

(4) Financing costs associated with the improvement to the extent the financing costs are not attributable to the applicant’s property or project; and

(5) Legal and other expenses incurred by the applicant to the extent said expenses relate to the preparation and filing of the application, the preparation of the report required by CMC 12.45.030 and the hearing process set out in CMC 12.45.050 to 12.45.060.

(B) Costs reimbursable or eligible for traffic impact fee credits or systems development charge credits or, regardless of amount or category, which cannot be clearly documented or which are attributable to the applicant’s property or project are not reimbursable.

(C) By submitting an application that seeks reimbursement of legal expenses, the applicant thereby waives any attorney/client or attorney work product privilege that may exist in attorney billing statements or records in support thereof.

(D) A reimbursement fee shall be determined for all properties which fall within the proposed reimbursement district, including applicant’s; however, the applicant shall not be reimbursed for that portion of the fee representing the benefit to the applicant’s property.

(E) The applicant shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the reimbursement fee computed for property owned by the city. [Code 2000 § 3.615.]


12.45.050 Public hearing.

(A) Within a reasonable time after the city engineer has completed the report required in CMC 12.45.030, the city council shall hold an informational public hearing in which persons impacted by the creation of the reimbursement district shall be given the opportunity to comment thereon.

(B) Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to the public hearing date. Notice shall be given to the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district, with notification by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. Notice shall be deemed complete as of the date notice is mailed or served; failure to receive actual notice of the hearing shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any action of the city relative to the creation of the reimbursement district and/or the costs associated therewith.

(C) Formation of a district does not result in an assessment or lien against property; as a result, the hearing is informational only and the district is not subject to termination as a result of remonstrances to the formation thereof. The city council has the sole discretion, after the public hearing, to decide whether the district is to be formed or not. If a district is to be formed, a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.

(D) If a reimbursement district is formed prior to construction of the improvement(s), a second public hearing shall be held after the improvement has been accepted by the city when the council may modify the resolution to reflect the cost of the improvement(s). [Code 2000 § 3.620.]


12.45.060 City council action.

(A) At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall approve, reject or modify the recommendations contained in the city engineer’s report and manifest its action in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include a copy of the city engineer’s report as approved or modified and specify that payment of the appropriate fee as determined by the council for each parcel is a precondition to receipt of any city permit necessary for development of that parcel.

(B) If a reimbursement district is established it shall be deemed formed as of the date the council adopts the resolution referred to in subsection (A) of this section. [Code 2000 § 3.625.]


12.45.070 Reimbursement agreement.

If the council approves the city engineer’s report and thereby creates a district, the city manager shall cause the creation of an agreement between the applicant and the city containing at a minimum provisions relating to the following:

(A) That the public improvement(s) will or do meet all applicable city standards;

(B) The amount of the potential reimbursement the applicant can expect along with a caveat that the total amount of any reimbursement will not exceed the actual cost of the public improvement(s);

(C) Reserved;

(D) The annual fee adjustment, if any;

(E) That the applicant will guarantee the quality of the public improvement(s) for a period of not less than 12 months after the date of their installation;

(F) That the applicant will defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expenses arising as a result of or related to the city’s establishment of the district; and

(G) That the applicant acknowledges the city is not obligated to collect the reimbursement fee from affected property owners.

Such other provisions as the city council determines necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter. [Code 2000 § 3.630.]


12.45.080 Annual fee adjustment.

The city council may, in its discretion, grant an annual adjustment to the amounts established as the reimbursement fee at the time of the hearing on the engineer’s report. In the event such an adjustment is deemed appropriate, it shall be applicable to the fee beginning on the first anniversary of the date of the council’s approval of the application, be fixed and computed against the reimbursement fee as simple interest and remain the same for each year the district exists. [Code 2000 § 3.635.]


12.45.090 Notice of adoption of resolution.

The city shall notify all property owners within the district and the applicant of the adoption of the resolution manifesting the creation of the reimbursement district by way of resolution. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was adopted and a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the reimbursement fee and the amount of the fee and any adjustments thereto. [Code 2000 § 3.640.]


12.45.100 Recording the resolution.

The city recorder shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to be filed in the office of the Washington County recorder to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district or of the existence of the district, or in the city’s records. Failure to make such recording shall not affect the legality of the resolution or the obligation to pay the fee. [Code 2000 § 3.645.]


12.45.110 Contesting the reimbursement district.

Any legal action intended to contest the formation of the reimbursement district or fee must be filed, if at all, within 60 days of the council’s hearing on the application consistent with the terms of ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (Writ of Review). [Code 2000 § 3.650.]


12.45.120 Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.

(A) A person applying for a permit related to property within a reimbursement district shall pay to the city, in addition to all other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the city council if, within the time specified in the resolution establishing the district, the person applies for and receives approval from the city for any of the following activities:

(1) A building permit for a new building or a permit for an addition, modification, repair or alteration to an existing building exceeding 25 percent of the value thereof within any 12-month period (not due to damage or destruction of the building by fire or natural disaster). “Value” as used above means the amount shown on the county’s department of assessment and taxation for the building’s real market value;

(2) Any alteration, modification or change in the use of real property, which increases the number of parking spaces required under Title 18 of the Cornelius Municipal Code in effect at the time of permit application;

(3) Connection to or use of a water, sanitary sewer, storm water or street improvement, if the district is based on that improvement.

(B) The obligation to pay the reimbursement fee arises and accrues as of the time property within the district utilizes the affected public improvement regardless of whether a person applies for and/or receives a permit connected with that utilization.

(C) The city’s determination of which properties shall be liable for payment of the fee is final. Neither the city nor any officer or employee of the city shall be liable for payment of any reimbursement fee or portion thereof as a result of this determination.

(D) A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a benefit from the construction of street improvements, regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street at any time. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or limit the authority of the city to provide or require access management.

(E) No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid, unless such payment was for a different type of improvement.

(F) The right to reimbursement shall not extend beyond 10 years from the district formation date, subject to being renewed at the option of the council for one additional 10-year period. [Code 2000 § 3.655.]


12.45.130 Public improvements become property of the city.

Public improvements installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city. More than one public improvement may be the subject of a reimbursement district. [Code 2000 § 3.660.]


12.45.140 Collection and payment – Other fees and charges.

(A) Applicants shall receive all reimbursement monies collected by the city for the public improvements they install. Such reimbursement shall be delivered to the developer for as long as the reimbursement district agreement is in effect. Such payments shall be made by the city within 90 days of receipt of the reimbursements monies.

(B) The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit any other existing fees or charges collected by the city. [Code 2000 § 3.665.]


Chapter 12.50 PARKS AND RECREATION

Sections:

12.50.010    Definitions.

12.50.020    Powers of the city council.

12.50.030    Permits required for park uses.

12.50.040    Applications.

12.50.050    Objection to permit denial or conditional permit – Council hearing.

12.50.060    Permits to be exhibited.

12.50.070    Permits subject to ordinances and regulations – Indemnification.

12.50.080    Permits nontransferable.

12.50.090    Alcoholic liquor.

12.50.100    Parks to be kept free of rubbish.

12.50.110    Vandalism – Possession of flowers and shrubs.

12.50.120    Animals in parks.

12.50.130    Emergency conditions.

12.50.140    Damaging park property.

12.50.150    Prohibited park activities.


12.50.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions apply:

(A) “Applicant” includes any natural person, entity or organization capable of using parks in the city.

(B) “City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(C) “City manager” or “manager” means the Cornelius city manager. Wherever this chapter grants authority to the manager, that authority may be exercised by any person designated by the manager.

(D) “Council” means the Cornelius city council.

(E) “Park” means any publicly owned real property, and the buildings, structures and facilities thereon, placed under the control of the city and used and/or intended for park or recreational purposes and including parks, squares, openings, public grounds, and grounds surrounding public buildings.

(F) “Parks reservation center,” “reservation center” or “center” means the person(s) authorized by the city manager to receive, process, issue or deny permits for the use of any park. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.020 Powers of the city council.

The council may adopt such rules and regulations for the use, management, and supervision of the parks as the council may deem reasonable and necessary or delegate such function to the manager.

The city manager is authorized to make such rules and regulations not in conflict with the city’s ordinances as the manager finds necessary for the control and management of city parks. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.030 Permits required for park uses.

A permit is required for any activity in a park under any one or more of the following circumstances:

(A) The activity is intended to involve, or actually involves, as participants and/or spectators, at any one time, 25 or more persons;

(B) The activity includes the placement of any temporary or permanent structure or equipment that may cause damage to the park or create potential liability risk;

(C) The activity is likely to or requires provision of additional city services, including but not limited to: police or fire protection; water; sewer; placing, removing, opening or closing bollards, gates or fences; or, the preparation of fields or other park facilities;

(D) The person or persons engaged in the activity seek to exclude, or to have the right to exclude, member(s) of the public from their activity, park or area thereof;

(E) The activity includes using the park or park area for purposes such as conducting business, charging admission or otherwise receiving payment for goods or services related to the activity or involving the consumption of alcoholic beverages;

(F) The operation and/or sales of fixed or mobile concessions on any city property, except by approved city permit or license, is prohibited. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.040 Applications.

(A) Any person desiring a park permit shall apply to the parks reservation center on forms prepared by the city. Permit fees shall be established by council resolution. Every application shall include information as to the following:

(1) The purpose for which the park is proposed to be used;

(2) The date and time of the proposed use;

(3) The name of the park and the area thereof that would be used;

(4) The anticipated number of persons who would be present at the activity;

(5) Whether alcoholic beverages are anticipated to be served or consumed;

(6) Whether amplified sound devices are or may be used during the course of the event;

(7) The name and mailing address of the applicant;

(8) Whether the applicant will provide insurance coverage for the activity and the amount(s) thereof;

(9) Such other information relating to the proposed use of the park as the manager may require.

(B) The center shall issue the permit if a complete application is filed and all of the following conditions are met:

(1) The proposed activity is lawful and consistent with the size of the park and any specialized purpose(s) for which it is normally used, or for which the park can be adapted;

(2) The proposed activity will not create adverse impact(s) from noise, litter or traffic on the park or surrounding neighborhood;

(3) The proposed activity does not pose a risk to public health or safety or to the physical integrity of the park;

(4) The applicant pays all required fees and agrees to comply with all conditions of the permit;

(5) The proposed activity does not conflict with an activity scheduled for the park or for which a different permit has been applied for or issued.

(C) The parks reservation center with concurrence of the manager may allow for the use of a park during hours when the park is typically closed.

(D) Provided the proposed use as set in the application meets all criteria set out in subsection (B) of this section, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. In the event the proposed use does not meet all relevant criteria set out in subsection (B) of this section, the center may deny the application; impose conditions on the applicant or issue a permit for a different date, time, park or park area so as to meet such criteria.

(E) Actions by the reservation center shall be completed within seven days after a completed application is deemed filed. Any final action by the center concerning issuance or denial of a permit application will be done in writing and be sent by first class mail to the applicant. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.050 Objection to permit denial or conditional permit – Council hearing.

(A) Any applicant whose application is denied, is issued a permit other than as applied for or who otherwise objects to the conditions imposed in the permit for use of the park may appeal to the council. The appeal shall:

(1) Be in writing;

(2) Delivered to and filed with the office of the city recorder within five business days of the applicant’s receipt of notice of the city’s action;

(3) Set out in general terms the nature of any objection(s) the applicant may have to the city’s action;

(4) Include a copy of the permit, any conditions attached thereto and the notice of the city’s denial; and

(5) Any other information which the applicant believes is relevant to the council’s review of the city’s action on the permit.

(B) Upon receipt of an appeal the recorder shall schedule the appeal before the council, which shall hear the matter within 30 days after the city recorder schedules the hearing. At the hearing, the council may take testimony and argument from the applicant and others who the council believes may have an interest in the matter and, at the close of the hearing, affirm, reverse or modify the city’s decision consistent with the criteria set out in CMC 12.50.040(B).

(C) In determining whether the criteria of CMC 12.50.040(B) are met no consideration by either the center or the council shall be given to constitutionally protected expression or activity. No permit shall be required under this chapter, nor condition imposed, if doing so would violate rights protected by either the Oregon or Federal Constitutions.

(D) No permit shall be required under this chapter in order for any person to participate in any activity programmed by or sponsored by the city of Cornelius or a duly authorized agent thereof. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.060 Permits to be exhibited.

Any applicant will ensure that a permit is readily available or displayed for any activity for which a permit is required under the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.070 Permits subject to ordinances and regulations – Indemnification.

All permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to any rules and regulations relating to park use as prepared by the city manager and such other city, state or federal regulations as may apply to the activity or person(s) involved therein.

Any applicant issued a permit under this chapter shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall be issued, as well as for any breach of such rules, regulations, and ordinances, to the person or persons so suffering damages or injury, and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents from any and all claims, demands, actions and suits (including all attorney fees and costs, through trial and on appeal) arising from the permittee’s use of the park under the permit. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.080 Permits nontransferable.

Any permit issued under this chapter shall be personal to the permittee, and shall be void if transferred or assigned in any manner, except with the written consent of the manager. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.090 Alcoholic liquor.

It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any park, except by specific written permit issued by the city manager on this topic and after proof of compliance with Oregon Liquor Control Commission regulation (if necessary) is first shown to the manager. A copy of any OLCC permit shall be included in the city records relating to issuance of a permit under this chapter. A permit granted under this section may contain such conditions as, in the judgment of the manager, are deemed appropriate. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.100 Parks to be kept free of rubbish.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to obstruct the free use and enjoyment of any park, or place any straw, dirt, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes, swill, or garbage, or other rubbish, or refuse or debris, in or upon any park.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to enter any park with straw, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes, swill, or garbage, or other rubbish or refuse or debris that has originated from outside the park, for the purpose of disposing of any of the rubbish, refuse, or debris in the park; provided, however, the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the disposal of garbage or refuse that results from the normal use of the park for recreational or other lawful purposes. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.110 Vandalism – Possession of flowers and shrubs.

It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, break, injure, mutilate, or deface in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower, or other property in any park.

It is unlawful for any person other than an employee of the city to bring upon any of the parks or have in his possession while therein any tree, shrub, or plant, or any newly plucked branch or leaf or tree, shrub or plant. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.120 Animals in parks.

(A) Unless otherwise provided by permit or rule of the city manager, it is unlawful for the owner, possessor, or keeper of any animal to permit such animal to enter any lake, pond, fountain, or stream, or to roam at large in any park, and, if such animal is found in any lake, pond, fountain, or stream or in any park it may be impounded.

For purposes of this section, a dog is deemed to “roam at large” if it is not held on a leash, except in such parks or portions of parks as the manager or council designates as off-leash areas. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the manager to terminate, alter or amend the designation of any off-leash area.

(B) Owners of dogs or other animals damaging or destroying park property will be held liable for the full value of the property damaged or destroyed, in addition to any impounding fees and the penalty imposed for violation of this section.

(C) Domestic animal waste shall be immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.130 Emergency conditions.

In case of an emergency, or in cases where life and property are endangered, all persons, if requested to do so by the manager, shall depart from the portion of the grounds specified and shall remain off the same until permission by the manager is given to return. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.140 Damaging park property.

It is unlawful for any person to cut, remove, deface, injure, damage, or destroy any property in any city park, or any fence, gate, or other enclosure, or part thereof, around any city park. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


12.50.150 Prohibited park activities.

It is unlawful to conduct or perform the following activities in any city park:

(A) Use or possession of fireworks and firearms in any city parks, except as may be permitted by the city. “Firearms” shall include, but not be limited to, B-B guns, air guns, slingshots, rifles, pistols and other similar devices.

(B) Fires, except in Underwriters Laboratory (UL) approved portable barbecues or large commercial barbecues as permitted by the city.

(C) Hitting golf balls.

(D) The use of any discus, shot put, javelin, golf ball, hammer, arrow, boomerang or other object not intended to be caught or intercepted, except in an approved designated area (i.e., horseshoe pits) and/or permitted game/sports event.

(E) The use of amplified sound or public address systems at sound levels extending the sound beyond the boundaries of the city park, except as may be otherwise allowed in a permit issued under Chapter 9.20 CMC (Noise Regulations).

(F) Operation of motorized model rockets and aircraft, unless permitted by the city.

(G) Staying overnight in any vehicle in any city park or an adjacent public parking lot.

(H) Use of bicycles, scooters, roller-skates/blades and skateboards other than on paved paths or such areas posted for their use. [Ord. 906 § 1, 2009.]


Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES

Chapters:

13.05    Water System

13.10    Water Main Extension

13.15    Water Supply Cross-Connection Control

13.20    Sewer Regulations

13.25    Sewer Connections

13.30    Storm Drainage System

13.35    Telecommunications Facilities

13.40    General Service Fee

13.45    Repealed

13.50    Utility Definitions


Chapter 13.05 WATER SYSTEM

Sections:

13.05.010    Rates.

13.05.020    Connection charges.

13.05.030    System development charge.

13.05.040    Metering, billing and payments.

13.05.050    Fire protection system connections.

13.05.060    Management regulations.


13.05.010 Rates.

The water rates for water consumption from the system of the city shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 632 § 1, 1985; Ord. 697 § 1, 1990; Code 2000 § 4.105.]


13.05.020 Connection charges.

Charges established from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be made prior to and for connections to the city water distribution system and water meter installation. [Ord. 697 § 1, 1990; Code 2000 § 4.110.]


13.05.030 System development charge.

(A) No connection shall be made or permitted to the city water distribution system without payment of a system development charge established from time to time by resolution of the city council.

(B) Any connections made or permitted without the city having first received payment of the system development charge shall be disconnected and service terminated immediately. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to do all things necessary to effect such disconnection of service.

(C) The system development charge imposed above shall be in addition to all other fees, charges and costs of connection to the water distribution system. [Ord. 687 § 1, 1989; Ord. 697 § 1, 1990; Code 2000 § 4.115.]


13.05.040 Metering, billing and payments.

(A) An applicant for a new utility service connection shall pay to the city a nonrefundable account set-up fee which shall be first set and adjusted thereafter from time to time by resolution of the city council.

(B) Service to apartments and multiple-user structures shall be billed to the property owner(s) unless individual users are separately metered at the property owner(s)’ expense. Multiple-user structures that share a meter shall be charged based on the meter size and consumption rates for the multi-family class. Multiple-user structures that do not share a meter shall be charged based on the meter size and consumption rates for the single-family class.

(C) Each meter shall be read at least monthly by the city.

(D) All charges for water furnished by the city shall be due and payable to the city by the tenth day following the billing cycle. If payment is not received by the city by the due date, it shall be deemed delinquent and service to the affected structure may thereafter be discontinued, provided the city gives both the owner and occupant (if different) notice by first class mail (postage prepaid) that the services may be discontinued if payment is not received by the city by the date specified in that notice, and that if the owner and/or occupant believe discontinuance of the water service might be in error, that they have the right to contest said discontinuance as set out in subsection (E) of this section.

(E) Except in cases where there is an imminent threat to the public’s health, safety and welfare, prior to terminating water service an owner or occupant (if different) shall be given the opportunity to be heard before the city manager (or their designate) on why termination of water service would be illegal or otherwise improper consistent with the following procedures:

(1) In the event the person believes termination of water service would be illegal or otherwise improper, the person must, within three business days of receiving a notice of termination from the city, deliver a written notice to the offices of the manager with the following information:

(a) Customer’s name and address where termination of water service is to occur;

(b) Address and telephone number where customer can be reached; and

(c) A brief explanation why the customer believes water service should not be terminated.

(2) Within three business days of the receipt of the notice challenging termination of water service, the city manager shall set a time for a hearing on the customer’s notice informing the customer of said time in writing at the address given in the customer’s notice. At the time of the hearing, the city manager shall review the city’s files and afford the person an opportunity to explain why termination would be illegal or otherwise improper. The city manager shall then determine whether to terminate service, condition continuation of service or take such other actions as he/she deems, in their sound discretion, to be appropriate under the circumstances. The determination of the city manager shall be final.

(F) In the event a water service is disconnected for nonpayment of water charges or fees, water service shall not be reestablished until the full amount of all unpaid charges, fees, delinquency and interest (if any) fees are paid, including a disconnection fee and reconnection fee. Such disconnection and reconnection fees are to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council.

(G) No failure to read meters or bill customers shall operate to relieve the customer or property served from liability for payment of water charges at the established rates.

(H)(1) Whenever the city’s water consumption records indicate water use as measured at a particular meter is abnormal the city shall check the meter to ensure that it is functioning properly.

(2) If it is determined by the city that the increased water consumption may be due to a leak within the customer’s service line or otherwise on property that is under the control of the customer, they shall be notified of said issue in writing.

(3) Each customer is responsible, at the customer’s expense, to repair, maintain and/or replace the service line(s) and all parts of the water distribution system from the meter to and within the customer’s premises.

(I) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a “temporary water service connection” may be made to the city water distribution system without payment of an account setup fee by an applicant. For purposes of this subsection, a temporary water service connection means a connection for a period not to exceed 30 days. Not more than six temporary water service connections shall be made to a single premises within any one single calendar year.

(J) The city may refuse payment by personal check for water service and payment of any service, charges or fees billed with the water service if, during any six-month period, three or more payments by a personal check have been returned for lack of sufficient funds. If the city recorder elects to refuse further payment by personal check, then the city recorder shall notify the customer by registered mail that personal checks will not be accepted.

(K) Any customer who feels that his or her meter is not working properly may request that the city test the meter. If it is found that the meter is not working properly, then the city shall replace the meter. 

(L) No water service connection shall be made until such time as the applicant for such service has paid all outstanding charges and fees imposed under this title and Chapter 8.05 CMC, if any, owing by the applicant for service provided at any structure, location or premises within the city of Cornelius. 

(M)(1) Adjustments for the billing or billings for water consumption based upon a water loss resulting from a leak or leaks in any portion of the user’s water distribution system or plumbing on or within the user’s property may be made one time per calendar year.

(2) Prior to filing a request for a billing adjustment for water losses resulting from leaks in the user’s system or plumbing, the user shall:

(a) Cause all leaks to be repaired within 30 days of the date such leak(s) are discovered;

(b) File a written request for billing adjustment in which the cause of the water loss is described, and the repair or repairs made to the user’s system or plumbing.

(3) If it is determined by the city manager, or his or her designee, that a water loss has occurred by reason of a leak or leaks in the user’s system or plumbing, and the user has complied with the procedures set forth in subsection (M)(2) of this section, then an adjustment shall be calculated in accordance with the following criteria:

(a) The city manager, or his or her designee, shall determine the amount of water consumed by the user during the period of the water loss in excess of the amount of water used for the same period in the calendar year preceding the water loss. For purposes of calculating the water loss adjustment, it shall be deemed that the amount of water consumed in the same period of the preceding calendar year shall be the ordinary and normal water usage by the user. If no preceding year usage information is available, the system-wide average of 6,000 gallons per month is to be considered normal.

(b) The cost of water for the user’s ordinary and normal usage shall be deducted from the billing or billings for water consumed during the period of loss.

(c) During the loss period, the peaking charges for consumption are excused. The billing or billings to the user shall be adjusted in an amount based upon the utility charges in effect for the loss period.

(4) The adjustment allowance will be applied to the calculated water loss set as follows:

(a) Complete repairs [full or partial replacement of customer service line within 30 days]: 50 percent of excess.

(b) Toilet leaks [within 30 days]: 50 percent of excess.

(c) Irrigation systems [complete or partial repairs made on an underground irrigation system within 30 days]: 50 percent.

(5) All adjustments for water leaks will be applied to the user’s account. Any credit balances caused by said adjustment will be applied to future billings. No cash refunds will be issued, unless the account is closed and there are no anticipated future billings. [Ord. 832 § 1, 2002; Code 2000 § 4.120; Ord. 847 § 1, 2004; Ord. 896 § 1, 2007; Ord. 905 §§ 1, 2, 2008.]


13.05.050 Fire protection system connections.

(A) Connection to the city water distribution system may be permitted for a water line exclusively serving a fire protection system; provided, that an approved flow detector is installed on any water line servicing a building fire sprinkler system. Such water connections shall be exempt from the charges specified in CMC 13.05.020 and 13.05.030, except that an installation inspection fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be charged.

(B) No connection shall be made or permitted to a water line exclusively serving a fire protection system without installation of a water meter and payment of the charges specified in CMC 13.05.020 and 13.05.030. [Ord. 700 § 1, 1990; Code 2000 § 4.121.]


13.05.060 Management regulations.

(A) No connection shall be made to the city’s distribution system except under city supervision.

(B) The city may refuse connection or service to any premises which is found by the city manager to be in violation of or not in compliance with the State Building Code or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the city relating to the use and occupancy of the premises or structures located on said premises.

(C) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to in any manner tamper with the distribution lines or meters of the city, or to pipe around the same or otherwise divert water from the system except through approved outlets, and anyone convicted of a such a violation shall be fined a graduated fine for the first, second and third offense which shall be first set and adjusted thereafter from time to time by resolution of the city council.

(D) The applicant for water service shall keep the water meter and the access thereto free from all obstructions which impair the city’s ability to read, repair, maintain or replace the water meter for the applicant’s water service. If the applicant fails to remove any such obstructions within five days of the date of a written request from the city to do so, then the city is authorized to enter the premises and remove such obstructions. The city’s authorization to enter the premises for such purposes is a condition of providing water service to the premises. [Ord. 611, 1983; Ord. 631 § 1, 1985; Code 2000 § 4.125; Ord. 896 § 2, 2007.]


Chapter 13.10 WATER MAIN EXTENSION

Sections:

13.10.010    Reimbursement for costs.

13.10.020    Statement of costs.


13.10.010 Reimbursement for costs.

If any person is required by the city to pay the cost of extending a water main adjacent to property other than his own so that water service for domestic use is provided for such other property without further extension of the water main, the city shall require the owner of the other property, prior to providing water service to that property, to refund to the person required to pay the cost of extending the water main a pro rata portion of the cost of the extension. The right to require such refund shall not continue for more than 10 years after the date of installation of the extension of the water main. The amount to be refunded shall be determined by the city, and such determination shall be final. [Code 2000 § 4.155.]


13.10.020 Statement of costs.

Any person required by the city to pay the cost of extending a water main adjacent to property other than his own who wishes the city to require the owner of the other property to refund a pro rata portion of the cost of the extension of such a water main shall, within 30 days of the completion of the improvement of a water main, file with the city manager a verified and sworn statement of costs of making such water main line extension. The verified and sworn statement shall include copies of vouchers, statements, or any other form of documentation of the costs as required by the city manager. [Code 2000 § 4.160.]


Chapter 13.15 WATER SUPPLY CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL

Sections:

13.15.010    Purposes and objectives.

13.15.020    Responsibility.

13.15.030    Definitions.

13.15.040    Requirements.

13.15.050    Cross-connection inspections.

13.15.060    Backflow preventer testing program.

13.15.070    Liability.


13.15.010 Purposes and objectives.

The purposes and objectives of water supply cross-connection control provisions set forth below are:

(A) To protect the public potable water supply of Cornelius from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer’s internal distribution system(s) or the consumer’s private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems.

(B) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the consumer’s in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems.

(C) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.200.]


13.15.020 Responsibility.

The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the city manager or his designee, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the customer’s water service connection; or, within the customer’s private water system for the safety of the water system, the city manager or his designee shall give notice in writing to the customer to install approved backflow prevention assembly(ies) at specific location(s) on the customer’s premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(ies) at the customer’s own expense; and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested, and maintain such assembly(ies) shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.205.]


13.15.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the following mean:

(A) “Air-gap” means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing, fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case less than one inch.

(B) “Approved” means accepted by the Oregon State Health Division applicable specifications stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use.

(C) Auxiliary Water Supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s approved public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, etc., or “used waters” or “industrial fluids.” These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.

(D) “Backflow” means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage.

(E) “Backpressure” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source.

(F) “Backsiphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source.

(G) “Backflow preventer” means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.

(H) “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste fluids, compounds, or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.

(I) “Cross-connection” means any actual or potential physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections or pipe, swivels or change-over devices or sliding multiport tubes.

(J) “Cross-connection-controlled” means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

(K) “Cross-connection control by containment” means the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer’s premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer’s water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of the customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection.

(L) “Double check valve assembly” means an assembly of two independently operating, approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field evaluation program resulting in an approval by recognized and State Health Division-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance.

(M) Hazard, Degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.

(1) “Hazard, health” means any condition, device, or practice in the water system and its operation which could create, or, in the judgment of the director, may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer.

(2) “Hazard, plumbing” means a plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air-gap or approved backflow prevention assembly.

(3) “Hazard, pollutional” means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer’s water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.

(4) “Hazard, systems” means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.

(N) “Industrial fluids systems” means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and “used waters” originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalines; circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes.

(O) “Pollution” means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.

(P) “Reduced pressure principle assembly” means an assembly of two independently acting, approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve, located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field evaluation program resulting in an approval by a recognized and Oregon State Health Division-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at an acceptable level less than the pressure between the pressure on the public water supply side of the assembly. At cessation of a normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of the assembly will be submerged.

(Q) “Water, potable” means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption.

(R) “Water, nonpotable” means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability.

(S) “Water, service connection” means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer’s water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or any backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer’s water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.

(T) “Water, used” means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.210.]


13.15.040 Requirements.

(A) Water System.

(1) The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer system.

(2) The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer’s system begins.

(3) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system.

(4) The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer’s system.

(5) The customer’s system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered water to points of use.

(B) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this code. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention assembly required by this code is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions are corrected.

(C) An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each domestic, fire or irrigation service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:

(1) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable to the city manager or his designee as an additional source, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line(s) appropriate to the degree of hazard.

(2) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.

(3) In the case of premises having (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.

(D) The type of protective assembly required under subsection (C) of this section shall meet all standards of the Oregon State Health Division in addition to any and all requirements stated herein. The type of protective devices required will depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:

(1) In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (C)(1) of this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

(2) In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly.

(3) In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.

(4) In the case of any premises where there are “uncontrolled” cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.

(5) In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises.

(E) Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the city manager and the State Health Division. The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.) entitled:

A.W.W.A. 0506-84, Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices, or latest revisions; and, have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection and Hydraulic Research (F.C.C.C. & H.R.) of the University of Southern California established by specifications of backflow prevention assemblies, Section 10 of the most current issue of the “Manual of Cross-Connection Control.”

The A.W.W.A. and F.C.C.C. & H.R. standards and specifications have been adopted by the State of Oregon Health Division and are hereby adopted by the city of Cornelius.

(F) It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the city manager deems the hazard to be great enough he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals.

These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the assembly manufacturer’s representative, water department personnel, or by a certified tester approved by the State Health Division. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer-user shall notify the city manager or his designee in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official representative may witness the tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever such assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and copies given to the city manager or his designee.

(G) All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this code but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection (F) of this section be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the city manager or his designee is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the city manager or his designee finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this code.

(H) The city manager or his designee may specify the location and methods of installation of all backflow prevention devices.

(I) Any installation, corrective measure, disconnection or other change to a backflow prevention device shall be at the sole expense of the owner or water customer. The cost of any change required in the city’s system outside the property (i.e., between the meter and the supply line) and any charges for cut-off or disconnection shall be added to the charges against the premises which necessitated the expenditures.

(J) Any person operating any mobile apparatus which uses the city water system or water from any premises within the city must provide for backflow prevention. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.215.]


13.15.050 Cross-connection inspections.

(A) No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the city or within areas served by city water until the same shall have been inspected by the city for possible cross-connections and been approved as being free of same.

(B) The customer’s system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitation hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such conditions become known, the city manager or his designee shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with the state and city laws relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All inspections as stipulated in this section shall be made by and at the expense of the city.

(C) Authorized employees of the city shall have free access, at proper hours of the day, to all parts of buildings or premises for the purpose of inspecting the condition of the pipes, fixtures and other appurtenances, and the manner in which the water is being used.

(D) If access to the premises is refused, the city shall discontinue water service to the premises. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.220.]


13.15.060 Backflow preventer testing program.

(A) Any backflow prevention device which may be required by the city or the state to be installed on property for the protection of the water supply shall be tested at the time of installation and, any time the device is moved or relocated, immediately after relocation or moving. The property owner must forward the results of such testing to the city manager within 10 days of the date of installation or relocation.

(B) The property owner must order and cause to be performed a test of each backflow prevention device annually, or within 30 days after, the anniversary date of the initial testing. The city may require more frequent testing in order to assure that the device is properly functioning in those installations which represent a serious health hazard as determined by the city.

(C) If the city manager has not received the results of the test within 30 days of the anniversary date for annual testing or within 10 days of the date of the device, or the date of the city’s discovery that the device was installed without testing as applicable, the city may order the test and add the cost of the test onto the property owner’s water bill.

(D) If the results of the test ordered by the city or the property owner indicate that repairs are necessary, the repairs must be made and a new test made and results of the test forwarded to the city manager within 10 days of the date of the first test.

If the city manager has not received evidence of the repairs and the results of the second test within 10 days of the first test, the city may have the repairs made and second test made and add the cost to the property owner’s water bill.

This section shall apply to all test and repairs until the test shows the backflow preventer device is functioning properly.

(E) The city may discontinue the water service of any person who refuses or fails to pay such testing or repair, and have the charges added to the customer’s water bill.

(F) All tests required to be performed under this section must be performed by a tester certified by the state. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.225.]


13.15.070 Liability.

This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of this inspection or testing herein, or the failure to inspect or test. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1987; Code 2000 § 4.230.]


Chapter 13.20 SEWER REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Sewerage system.

13.20.020    Service charges.

13.20.030    Establishment of charges.

13.20.040    Collection of charges.

13.20.050    Enforcement.

13.20.060    Penalty charge.

13.20.070    Sewer charge account.


13.20.010 Sewerage system.

Pursuant to the general laws of the state and the powers of the city under its Charter, the council declares its intention to acquire, own, construct, equip, operate and maintain, within and without the city limits, sewerage equipment and appurtenances necessary, useful, or convenient for a complete sewerage system, and to provide for the maintenance and extension of the same and its reconstruction as may be deemed necessary or proper by the council. [Code 2000 § 5.105.]


13.20.020 Service charges.

There is hereby levied and imposed upon all water users from the Cornelius water system inside the city as now or hereafter bounded, and also upon premises within the city as now or hereafter bounded served by sewer, either or both, just and equitable charges for service or subsequent service, maintenance, operation, extension, and reconstruction, to establish funds for sewer purposes, and to be used as hereinafter provided, except such water users situated below the grade for sewer service or inaccessible to it as the sewer may be built or hereafter installed. [Code 2000 § 5.110.]


13.20.030 Establishment of charges.

Sewer charges for connection to, provision and maintenance of sewerage services within the city shall be established from time to time by resolution of the council. [Ord. 597 § 3, 1982; Code 2000 § 5.115.]


13.20.040 Collection of charges.

The water department of the city is hereby directed to collect the rates and charges provided for herein from each user of the sewerage facilities or of water from the city water system, and all charges shall be shown on the regular monthly water bill, followed by the symbol “SC.” Said charges, as and when collected by the water department, shall be paid to the treasurer of the city and placed into a fund designated as “Sewer Charge Account, Special.” The water department may withhold amounts equivalent to administrative costs for sewer collections. [Code 2000 § 5.120.]


13.20.050 Enforcement.

The water department may enforce the collection of rates and charges for use of sewage facilities by withholding delivery of water to any premises the sewage facility rates for which are delinquent, and may use such other and further means of collection thereof as may be provided by the laws of the state, or permitted by the Charter, this code and ordinances of the city, including certification to the tax assessor of Washington County, in the manner provided by law. Rates and charges for sewage facilities as herein provided shall be collected monthly; and if not paid on or before 15 days from and after the date of billing, the rates and charges shall be deemed to be delinquent. Any charge due which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the city. [Code 2000 § 5.125.]


13.20.060 Penalty charge.

In the event that it becomes necessary to undertake collection procedures, or to certify the service charges established because of nonpayment, there shall be added to the charges a penalty in the amount of 10 percent, and the same shall bear, when the action is brought or the collection procedure undertaken or the certification made, interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of delinquency. If court action is brought to collect delinquent service charges, the same penalties and interest charges above set out shall apply. [Code 2000 § 5.130.]


13.20.070 Sewer charge account.

The city treasurer, upon receipt of funds from the water department, is hereby directed to credit all revenue received from such charges and rates collected to a fund designated “Sewer Charge Account, Special.” Thereafter, the council, by resolution or motion duly adopted, shall from time to time and not less than once each fiscal year, direct the treasurer to transfer and pay from said account funds as follows:

(A) Funds to cover the costs of operating the sewer system and disposal plant.

(B) Funds for the payment of principal and interest on maturing sewer bonds.

(C) Funds to be added to create and add to a sinking fund to meet future interest and principal obligations on sewer bonds. [Code 2000 § 5.135.]


Chapter 13.25 SEWER CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.25.010    Connection required.

13.25.020    Duty of owners.

13.25.030    Power of inspector.

13.25.040    Permit and connection requirements.

13.25.050    Location – Separate connections.

13.25.060    Quality and size of drains.

13.25.070    Grades and changes.

13.25.080    Refilling trenches.

13.25.090    Tampering with manholes or public sewers.

13.25.100    Wastes to be excluded from sewer system.

13.25.110    Private sewage disposal.

13.25.120    Permit application and inspection fees.


13.25.010 Connection required.

Every residence, building or place where human beings reside, assemble or are employed, within the city, shall be required to connect to the city sanitary sewer system where such connection is available within 200 feet. In areas where city sanitary sewers are not available for connection, every residence, building or place where human beings reside, assemble or are employed shall be required to have a sanitary method for disposal of sewage. [Code 2000 § 5.205.]


13.25.020 Duty of owners.

It shall be the duty of the owner of any property upon which facilities for which sewage disposal are required by CMC 13.25.010 to provide such facilities. [Code 2000 § 5.210.]


13.25.030 Power of inspector.

The city, through the city manager and authorized employees, shall have general supervision over the installation and construction of all building connections to the sanitary sewer system, which are now constructed or hereafter may be built in the city, or which may be constructed or installed by its authority, and shall have charge of all alterations and repairs of the same, and all matters in connection with the general sewerage system of the city. Authorized employees of the city shall have full power to suspend the work of any drain layer for neglect to properly perform the work as required by Chapter 13.20 CMC and this chapter. [Code 2000 § 5.215.]


13.25.040 Permit and connection requirements.

No connection shall be made with any sewers or drains except by persons authorized to perform the work by a permit issued after application to the city manager. All work related to a sewer connection must meet the standards fixed by the city and shall not be undertaken until the permit has been issued and the connection shall not be covered or back-filled until it has been inspected and approved by an authorized representative of the city. [Code 2000 § 5.220.]


13.25.050 Location – Separate connections.

Applications for state the location of the property in lot and block numbers within platted areas, the name of the owner, number of the building to be connected, and how occupied. Every house or building shall be separately and independently connected with the public sewer to existing wyes unless permission is granted by an authorized city employee to do otherwise. [Code 2000 § 5.225.]


13.25.060 Quality and size of drains.

The materials of all house drains laid in any streets, alleys or public or private places shall be of good quality, glazed vitrified-clay (rubber-ring type), cast iron pipe, or asbestos cement, not less than four inches in diameter, the size of the pipe to be used in a given installation to be determined by the authorized city agent, extending from the public sewer to a point about five feet outside of the exterior wall of the building to be connected with said sewer. Only cast iron pipe shall be used when any building is constructed over any sewer pipe. All floor drains installed in public garages, repair shops and similar places shall be provided with a catch basin through which the drainage shall pass before entering the sewer. The basin shall not be less than two feet, six inches, in cross sectional dimension and two inches in depth below outlet connection, when a four-inch drain is installed. A trap shall be provided in the outlet connection between the catch basin and the main drain, and said trap shall be vented. Such plumbing shall comply with the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code. No septic tanks, cesspools or dry wells shall be used between buildings and the sanitary sewer. A property owner in whose plumbing installation catch basins are required shall keep such catch basins clean and remove sediment regularly. The city shall be authorized to inspect all catch basins periodically and may order the cleaning of the same any time deemed necessary. All floor drains shall be provided with suitable and accessible cleanout and the same shall never be removed except for purpose of opening stoppages and cleaning the drain. [Code 2000 § 5.230.]


13.25.070 Grades and changes.

All drains and private sewers laid in any street, alley or public place shall conform to such grades and lines as may be approved by the city, and as little as possible of the trench shall be dug until the branch pipe is found in the public sewer. All drains shall be laid as nearly as possible in straight lines and uniform grades, and any change in direction or grades shall be made with fittings or curves as may be approved by the authorized agent of the city. [Code 2000 § 5.235.]


13.25.080 Refilling trenches.

The material used for back-filling around and to a point six inches over the top of the pipe shall be free from stones and tamped with the utmost care so as not to displace or damage the drain pipe and to obtain the greatest compactness and solidity possible. After the back-filling is completed, the surplus material must be removed and the street, alleys or public places left in as good condition as they were previous to the commencement of the work. Any settlement over the drain in any street, alley or public place shall be repaired by the drain layer upon notification. [Code 2000 § 5.250.]


13.25.090 Tampering with manholes or public sewers.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation, without authority from the city or its authorized agents, to open any manhole or interfere with or tamper with any manhole or public sewer of the city. [Code 2000 § 5.255.]


13.25.100 Wastes to be excluded from sewer system.

The following substances shall not be deposited in the sewer system:

(A) Petroleum, coal tar, vegetable and mineral oils and products, and their derivatives and wastes.

(B) Greases, oils and sludges from service stations, garages, repair shops, machine shops, cleaning establishments or other industries.

(C) Explosive or inflammable liquids and gases.

(D) Acids, alkalis or other corrosive liquids, gases or substances of sufficient strength to damage sewers, manholes, pumping stations or treatment plant units.

(E) Paints or waste products from paint manufacturers.

(F) Substances that will form deposits or obstructions in sewers or which when mixed with sewage will precipitate material and thus form deposits in sewers.

(G) Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, rubbish or metals of any kind.

(H) Live steam, exhaust steam or water having a temperature above 140 degrees Fahrenheit.

(I) Ground or unground fruit peelings and cores from canneries or packing plants.

(J) Cull fruits and vegetables.

(K) Fruit and vegetable pits and seeds such as those from peaches, apricots, cherries, prunes, pumpkins and squash. However, materials included in subsections (I), (J) and (K) of this section may be released from residential establishments into the sewer system if they have been ground through an authorized and approved installation of a garbage grinder. [Code 2000 § 5.260.]


13.25.110 Private sewage disposal.

(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner within the city any human or animal excretion, garbage or other objectionable wastes.

(B) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this chapter, the building sewer may be connected to a private disposal system complying with all of the regulations and requirements imposed by the Department of Environmental Quality.

(C) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city manager. The application for the permit shall include information considered necessary by the city manager.

If the application is acceptable, a permit will be issued for a fee of $5.00.

(D) The type, capacity, location and layout of a private disposal plant shall comply with the regulations of the Department of Environmental Quality.

(E) When a public sewer is available to a property, a direct connection shall be made to the same in compliance with this chapter and any septic tank or similar private disposal facility shall be abandoned; and when, in the judgment of the city manager, there exists an unsafe condition the city may require any underground cavities of abandoned disposal systems to be pumped and filled with suitable material.

(F) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be made by the state or Washington County. [Code 2000 § 5.265.]


13.25.120 Permit application and inspection fees.

(A) No connection shall be made to the city sewerage collection system without first obtaining a permit as required under the terms and provisions of this chapter, in addition to the payment of a sum established by resolution of the city council as and for a connection charge which connection charge shall be payable at the time of issuance of the building permit. In addition to the connection charge, plan check fees to cover the cost of review and approval of subdivision maps of street names and other elements of the local sewage collection system, not including house connections, and inspection of sewer construction, except house connections, shall be established by resolution of the council.

(B) Permit Fees.

(1) In addition to all other charges, the applicant for connection shall pay permit fees to cover the cost of processing the permit application and performing the inspection of property connections to the sewer system as follows:

	Single-family residential	$25.00

	Multiple-residential	$3.00 per unit, but not less than $35.00

	Commercial	$35.00

	Industrial	$50.00

(2) If anyone making a connection applies for an inspection on a day other than a regular working date for the inspectors, the applicant shall be charged with and pay an additional inspection fee of $5.00 for each inspection. If additional inspections are required due to failure of the building sewer to pass the requirements for the installation of the sewer, the applicant shall be charged with and pay an additional inspection fee of $5.00 for each inspection. The additional inspection fee shall be paid prior to final approval of the connection being inspected.

(C) For the purpose of making payment of the connection charges established by subsection (A) of this section, “a connection” shall mean: (1) each single-family residential unit, (2) each living unit in multiple-family residential structures, and (3) each mobile trailer unit located in and upon a mobile trailer park.

(D) No connection shall be made to the city sewerage collection system until such time as the applicant for such service has paid all outstanding charges and fees imposed under CMC Titles 8 and 13, if any, owing by the applicant for service provided at any structure, location or premises within the city. [Ord. 597 § 1, 1982; Ord. 606 § 1, 1983; Ord. 616, 1984; Ord. 621 § 1, 1984; Ord. 630 § 2, 1984; Code 2000 § 5.270.]


Chapter 13.30 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM

Sections:

13.30.010    Definitions.

13.30.020    Clean Water Services of Washington County rules adopted.

13.30.030    Storm drainage fund.

13.30.040    Collection of surface water management user charge.

13.30.050    Violation declared a nuisance – Immediate remedial action required.

13.30.060    Penalty.


13.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter and CMC 10.30.190, “responsible party” means the person responsible for curing or remedying a violation of this chapter, which includes:

(A) The owner of the property, or the owner’s manager or agent or other person in control of the property on behalf of the owner;

(B) The person occupying the property, including lessee, tenant or other person having possession;

(C) The person who is alleged to have committed the acts or omissions, created or allowed the condition to exist, or placed or transported the eroding soil. [Ord. 717 § 1, 1991; Code 2000 § 4.305.]


13.30.020 Clean Water Services of Washington County rules adopted.

Clean Water Services of Washington County Resolution and Order No. 01-34 are adopted and shall be in force and effect as part of this code. The city manager, without prior council approval, may adopt and enforce amendments and revisions to these resolutions and orders promulgated by the agency for a single temporary period not to exceed 90 days. [Ord. 809 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.310; amended during 2007 recodification.]


13.30.030 Storm drainage fund.

There is hereby established a storm drainage fund, and the recorder is authorized and directed to deposit and transfer into the fund all money received by the city and dedicated to use for storm drainage purposes. [Ord. 717 § 3, 1991; Code 2000 § 4.315.]


13.30.040 Collection of surface water management user charge.

The surface water management user charge established by the unified sewerage agency shall be collected by the city on behalf of the agency from those persons made responsible for payment by agency ordinances, resolutions and orders with the monthly water bill of water customers of the city, and collection shall be subject to all delinquencies and collection procedures established for water customers of the city. In the event that the monthly surface water management user charge is not paid prior to becoming delinquent, the city manager is authorized to disconnect the water service to any premises subject to the payment of the user charge. The city manager shall establish a collection procedure for persons subject to the user charge that are not water customers that is similar to the procedures used for water bill collection. [Ord. 717 § 4, 1991; Code 2000 § 4.320.]


13.30.050 Violation declared a nuisance – Immediate remedial action required.

A violation of the provisions of the resolution and orders adopted by CMC 13.30.020 is declared to be a public nuisance. If the city manager determines that there has been a violation that causes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the manager may require immediate remedial action by the responsible party. If the city manager is unable to serve a notice of violation on the responsible party or, if after such service the responsible party refuses or is unable to remedy the violation, the city may proceed to remedy the violation as provided in CMC 8.10.160. [Ord. 717 § 5, 1991; Code 2000 § 4.325.]


13.30.060 Penalty.

(A) A finding of a violation of CMC 13.30.020 and imposition of a fine pursuant to this code shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the violation. A civil fine imposed pursuant to this section is in addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies available to the city.

(B) If a provision of CMC 13.30.020 is violated by a firm or corporation, the officer or officers, or person or persons responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this code. [Ord. 717 § 6, 1991; Ord. 745 § 5, 1994; Code 2000 § 4.330.]


Chapter 13.35 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

13.35.010    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

13.35.020    Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

13.35.030    Definitions.

13.35.040    Registration of telecommunications carriers.

13.35.050    Construction standards.

13.35.060    Location of telecommunications facilities.

13.35.070    Telecommunications franchise.

13.35.080    General franchise terms.

13.35.090    General provisions.


13.35.010 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

(A) The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the City Charter and state law.

(B) Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.

(C) The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory management of each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

(D) No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

(E) The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

(F) The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency. [Code 2000 § 4.400.]


13.35.020 Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

(A) The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local, and city charges as may be levied, imposed, or due from a telecommunications carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of telecommunications services.

(B) The city has determined that any fee provided for by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners, and these fees are not new or increased fees.

(C) The fees and costs provided for in this chapter are subject to applicable federal and state laws. [Code 2000 § 4.405.]


13.35.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

(1) Aboveground Facilities. See “overhead facilities.”

(2) “Affiliated interest” shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.

(3) “Cable act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

(4) “Cable service” is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

(5) “City” means the city of Cornelius, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

(6) “City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

(7) “Control” or “controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

(8) “City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.

(9) “Conduit” means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.

(10) “Construction” means any activity in the public rights-of-way resulting in physical change thereto, including excavation or placement of structures, but excluding routine maintenance or repair of existing facilities.

(11) “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

(12) “Duct” means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.

(13) “Emergency” has the meaning provided for in ORS 401.025.

(14) “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

(15) “Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

(16) “Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

(17) “Oregon Public Utilities Commission” or “OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain telecommunications carriers as set forth in Oregon law, or its lawful successor.

(18) “Overhead or aboveground facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

(19) “Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

(20) “Private telecommunications network” means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. “Private telecommunications network” includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

(21) “Public rights-of-way” include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas. This definition applies only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas for telecommunications facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below.

(22) “State” means the state of Oregon.

(23) “Telecommunications” means the transmission between and among points specified by the user of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

(24) “Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. Section 151 et seq.) and as hereafter amended.

(25) “Telecommunications carrier” means any provider of telecommunications services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities within the city.

(26) “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier.

(27) “Telecommunications service” means two-way switched access and transport of voice communications but does not include:

(a) Services provided by radio common carrier;

(b) One-way transmission of television signals;

(c) Surveying;

(d) Private telecommunications networks; or

(e) Communications of the customer which take place on the customer side of on-premises equipment.

(28) Telecommunications System. See “telecommunications facilities.”

(29) “Telecommunications utility” has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1).

(30) “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for “overhead facilities.”

(31) “Usable space” means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.

(32) “Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

(33) “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. [Ord. 814 § 1, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.410.]


13.35.040 Registration of telecommunications carriers.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of registration is:

(1) To assure that all telecommunications carriers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

(2) To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers who offer to provide telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the city.

(3) To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

(B) Registration Required. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all telecommunications carriers that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within the city, shall register. The appropriate application and license from: (a) the Oregon Public Utilities Commission (OPUC); or (b) the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) qualify as necessary registration information. Applicants also have the option of providing the following information:

(1) The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the name, address, and telephone number of the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information.

(2) The name, address, and telephone number for the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee to be contacted in case of an emergency.

(3) A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the city, a description of the telecommunications facilities that the registrant intends to construct, and a description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide to persons, firms, businesses, or institutions within the city.

(4) Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided, or to be provided, by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business license requirements. A copy of the business license or the license number must be provided.

(C) Registration Fee. Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council.

(D) Exceptions to Registration. The following telecommunications carriers are excepted from registration:

(1) Telecommunications facilities that are owned and operated exclusively for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state.

(2) A private telecommunications network; provided, that such network does not occupy any public rights-of-way of the city. [Ord. 814 § 2, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.415; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


13.35.050 Construction standards.

(A) General. No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in Sections 12 through 28, and with all applicable codes, rules, and regulations.

(B) Construction Codes. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code.

(C) Construction Permits. No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in subsection (G) of this section. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way:

(1) Unless the telecommunications carrier has first filed a registration statement with the city pursuant to CMC 13.35.040; and if applicable

(2) Unless the telecommunications carrier has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to CMC 13.35.070(F) through (M).

(D) Permit Applications. Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

(1) That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

(2) That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

(3) The location and route of all facilities to be installed aboveground or on existing poles.

(4) The location and route of all new facilities on or in the public rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Applicant’s existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

(5) The location of all of applicant’s existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

(6) The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

(E) Applicant’s Verification. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the verification of a registered professional engineer, or other qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant, that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.

(F) Construction Schedule. All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the city’s public works department.

(G) Construction Permit Fee. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount consistent with CMC 12.30.030 or as otherwise determined by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be designed to defray the costs of city administration of the requirements of this chapter.

(H) Issuance of Permit. If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement, the city shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

(I) Notice of Construction. Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the city public works department not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or construction in the public rights-of-way.

(J) Compliance with Permit. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The city and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

(K) Noncomplying Work. Subject to the notice requirements in subsection (D) of this section, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee.

(L) Completion of Construction. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by subsection (O) of this section.

(M) As-Built Drawings. If requested by the city for a necessary public purpose as determined by the city, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. These plans shall be submitted to the city engineer or designee within 60 days after completion of construction, in a format mutually acceptable to the permittee and the city.

(N) Restoration of Public Rights-of-Way and City Property.

(1) When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to good order and condition unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer or designee.

(2) If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the city.

(3) If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to good order and condition, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

(4) A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property.

(O) Performance and Completion Bond. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the city equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing permittee’s telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city shall be provided before construction is commenced.

(1) The surety shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

(2) The surety shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

(a) Timely completion of construction;

(b) Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

(c) Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

(d) Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction; and

(e) Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material, or services provided in connection with the work. [Ord. 814 §§ 3, 4, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.420.]


13.35.060 Location of telecommunications facilities.

(A) Location of Facilities. All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:

(1) Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way shall locate its facilities underground at its own expense. In such locations, no grantee may install overhead facilities or attach facilities or equipment to any overhead facilities or structures unless the installation or attachment is authorized in writing by the city in its sole discretion.

(2) Whenever all new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall, at its own expense, relocate its facilities underground, or to an alternate aboveground location if authorized in writing by the city in its sole discretion, concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city in its sole discretion and consistent with applicable state and federal law.

(3) The requirements of subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not apply to a grantee’s pedestals, cabinets or other above-ground equipment that is not intended to be attached to poles and that cannot feasibly be placed underground. The city reserves the right to require written approval of the location of any such above-ground equipment in the right-of-way. Facilities used for transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 35,000 volts shall not be considered existing electric utilities for purposes of subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, and shall not be required to locate or relocate underground.

(B) Interference with the Public Rights-of-Way. No grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations.

(C) Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Except in the case of an emergency, within 90 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at no expense to grantor, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

(1) The construction, repairs, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.

(2) The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.

(3) The public interest.

(D) Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility, or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

(1) One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s telecommunications franchise.

(2) Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced. The city shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the telecommunications carrier before concluding that a facility is abandoned. A facility may be abandoned in place and not removed if there is no apparent risk to the public safety, health or welfare.

(3) If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the appropriate prior authority at the time of installation.

(4) If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications franchise or other legally sufficient permit.

(E) Coordination of Construction Activities. All grantees are required to make a good faith effort to cooperate with the city.

(1) By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their known proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

(2) If requested by the city, each grantee shall meet with the city annually or as determined by the city, to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way. At that time, the city will provide available information on plans for local, state, and/or federal construction projects.

(3) All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer or designee, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. [Ord. 814 § 5, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.425; Ord. 2016-007 § 1, 2016.]


13.35.070 Telecommunications franchise.

(A) Telecommunications Franchise. A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city.

(B) Application. Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise must register as a telecommunications carrier and shall file an application with the city public works department which includes the following information:

(1) The identity of the applicant.

(2) A description of the telecommunications services that are to be offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities.

(3) Engineering plans, specifications, and a network map in a form customarily used by the applicant of the facilities located or to be located within the public rights-of-way in the city, including the location and route requested for applicant’s proposed telecommunications facilities.

(4) The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

(5) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services proposed.



(6) An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

(C) Application and Review Fee.

(1) Subject to applicable state law, applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

(2) An application and review fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise.

(D) Determination by the City. The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.

(E) Rights Granted. No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement.

(F) Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of years.

(G) Franchise Territory. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas, and may include the entire city.

(H) Franchise Fee. Each franchise granted by the city is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement and applicable state and federal laws.

(I) Amendment of Grant – Conditions for Amending a Franchise.

(1) A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

(2) If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

(3) A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

(J) Renewal Applications. A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

(1) The information required pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

(2) Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee.

(K) Renewal Determinations. Within 90 days after receiving a complete application, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

(1) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

(2) The legal ability of the applicant.

(3) The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities.

(4) The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

(5) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.

(6) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest.

(L) Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city.

(M) Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise. Ownership or control of a majority interest in a telecommunications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

(1) Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the franchise.

(2) No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this code.

(3) Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications franchise.

(4) Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this code or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise.

(N) Revocation or Termination of Franchise. A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked for the following reasons:

(1) Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit.

(2) Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

(3) Failure to comply with subsection (M) of this section with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a telecommunications system or franchise.

(4) Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

(5) Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way.

(6) Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this code.

(7) Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city under this code.

(8) Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

(9) Violation of material provisions of this code.

(10) Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.

(O) Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding 30 days, to furnish evidence that:

(1) Corrective action has been or is being actively and expeditiously pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance;

(2) Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or

(3) It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.

(P) Public Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in subsection (O) of this section, the city manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The city council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.

(Q) Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions. If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors. Whether:

(1) The misconduct was egregious.

(2) Substantial harm resulted.

(3) The violation was intentional.

(4) There is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

(5) There is a history of overall compliance.

(6) The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.

(R) Other City Costs. All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all reasonable direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement consistent with applicable state and federal laws. [Ord. 814 § 5, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.430; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


13.35.080 General franchise terms.

(A) Unless already provided by the grantee, upon request each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities with the public rights-of-way. If necessary for a public purpose and upon request, each grantee shall provide updated maps.

(B) Damage to Grantee’s Facilities. Unless directly and proximately caused by negligent, careless, wrongful, willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, and consistent with Oregon law the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom.

(C) Duty to Provide Information. Except in emergencies, within 60 days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

(1) That grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.

(2) All books, records, maps, and other documents maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals.

(D) Service to the City. If the city contracts for the use of telecommunication facilities, telecommunications services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to similar users within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the city’s permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate agreement between the city and grantee.

(E) Compensation for City Property. If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city.

(F) Cable Franchise. Telecommunications carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the separate cable franchise requirements of the city and other applicable authority.

(G) Leased Capacity. A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee.

(H) Grantee Insurance. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

(a) Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

(b) Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and

(c) Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

(2) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

(3) Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

(4) Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

(5) The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

(6) Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee meets requirements of this section.

(7) As an alternative to the insurance requirements contained herein, a grantee may provide evidence of self-insurance subject to review and acceptance by the city.

(I) General Indemnification. Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this code or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this code.

(J) Performance Surety. Before a franchise granted pursuant to this code is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this code, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required for construction of facilities. [Ord. 814 §§ 5, 6, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.435.]


13.35.090 General provisions.

(A) Governing Law. Any franchise granted under this code is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city.

(B) Written Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing.

(C) Nonexclusive Grant. No franchise granted under this code shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.

(D) Severability and Preemption. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of the code shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this code shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this code, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and/or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city, and any amendments hereto.

(E) Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs. The enforcement of this provision shall be consistent with CMC Title 1 on code enforcement.

(F) Other Remedies. Nothing in this code shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this code.

(G) Captions. The captions to sections throughout this code are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this code.

(H) Compliance with Laws. Any grantee under this code shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of any franchise granted under this code, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system.

(I) Consent. Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this code or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld.

(J) Application to Existing Ordinance and Agreements. To the extent that this code is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing code and franchise agreements, this code shall apply to all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right-of-way for telecommunications.

(K) Confidentiality. The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon public records law. [Ord. 814 § 5, 2000; Code 2000 § 4.435.]


Chapter 13.40 GENERAL SERVICE FEE

Sections:

13.40.010    Definition.

13.40.020    General service fee imposed.

13.40.030    Rate.

13.40.040    Uses of revenue.


13.40.010 Definition.

As used in this chapter, “general service fee” or “fee” means a charge placed on all residential housing units and commercial, industrial and institutional dwelling unit equivalents. [Ord. 870 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.605.]


13.40.020 General service fee imposed.

(A) There is imposed on all users of city utilities a charge known as the general service fee. The general service fee is imposed by the city monthly on all utility accounts connected to city utilities. The general service fee is at a uniform rate and based on each residential housing unit or dwelling unit equivalent for that account.

(B) The person responsible for paying city utility charges is responsible for payment of the general service fee unless another person has otherwise assumed that obligation in writing. No lien will attach to the real property at which the account is located because of the nonpayment of the general service fee.

(C) The fee will be included with the monthly utility bill as a separate and distinct charge and listed on the bill as the general service fee. It is due and payable at the same time as monthly utility charges. [Ord. 870 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.610.]


13.40.030 Rate.

The rate for the general service fee is $8.00 per “residential dwelling unit” and $24.00 per “dwelling unit equivalents” for commercial, industrial and institutional buildings or land uses.

The city council may revise the amount of the fee imposed by the terms of this chapter by resolution at any time the council deems appropriate. The city council shall review the amount of the fee annually prior to the adoption of the annual budget. [Ord. 870 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.615.]


13.40.040 Uses of revenue.

All revenues generated by the fee will be used for city general public services including public safety and administration. [Ord. 870 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 4.620.]


Chapter 13.45 STREET LIGHTING FEE

(Repealed by Ord. 918)


Chapter 13.50 UTILITY DEFINITIONS

Sections:

13.50.010    Utility definitions – Applicability.


13.50.010 Utility definitions – Applicability.

The abbreviations DU, DUE, and EDU are used interchangeably in this title. For purposes of this title, the following mean: 

“Dwelling unit (DU)” means a separate residential unit with kitchen, bed and bathroom facilities including those in multiple dwellings, apartments, motels, hotels, mobile homes or trailers. Where allowed by zoning regulations, a dwelling unit shall also include an ancillary dwelling unit located on the same lot, when such ancillary dwelling unit does not exceed 1,000 square feet in gross floor area. 

“Dwelling unit equivalent; equivalent dwelling unit (DUE or EDU)” means a nonresidential unit which is deemed equivalent to a dwelling unit as provided herein or as provided in the State Plumbing Code. 

“Equivalent service unit (ESU)” means a measurement unit based on the impervious surface area of an average improved single dwelling lot or parcel, determined by a statistically significant sampling of such parcels. One equivalent service unit shall be deemed to be 2,640 square feet of impervious surface. [Ord. 902 § 1, 2008.]


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Code

15.10    Dangerous Buildings

15.15    Swimming Pools

15.20    Fire Zones

15.25    Fire Prevention

15.30    Smoke Detectors

15.35    Moving of Buildings

15.40    Deleted


Chapter 15.05 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

15.05.010    Title.

15.05.020    Definitions.

15.05.030    State codes adopted.

15.05.040    Administration.

15.05.050    Permit requirements.

15.05.060    Violation – Penalty – Remedies.

15.05.070    Recreation parks and organization camps.

15.05.080    Plumbing specialty code.


15.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the Cornelius building code. [Ord. 801 § 1, 1999; Code 2000 § 10.005.]


15.05.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of CMC 15.05.010 through 15.05.050, the following terms shall mean:

(A) “Building official” means that person appointed by the city manager or city council (either directly or through an intergovernmental agreement authorized by CMC 15.10.040) as the person responsible for building inspections and enforcement of the State Building Code.

(B) “State Building Code” means the combined specialty codes as listed in ORS 455.010(7) and CMC 15.05.030. [Ord. 801 § 1, 1999; Code 2000 § 10.010.]


15.05.030 State codes adopted.

The following codes, standards and rules are adopted and shall be in force and effect as part of the Cornelius Municipal Code:

(A) The current edition of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code including appendix chapters adopted by the state of Oregon;

(B) The current edition of the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code including appendix chapters and installation standards adopted by the state of Oregon;

(C) The current edition of the Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code including appendix chapters and references adopted by the state of Oregon;

(D) The most current edition of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code including appendix chapters and installation standards adopted by the state of Oregon;

(E) The most current edition of the Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Standards including appendix chapters and references adopted by the state of Oregon;

(F) The current edition of the Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code adopted by the state of Oregon;

(G) The current edition of the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code adopted by the state of Oregon;

(H) The most current edition of the Oregon Fire Code including appendix chapters and references adopted by the state of Oregon; and

(I) The Grading Appendix J of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. [Ord. 2015-01 § 1, 2015.]


15.05.040 Administration.

(A) The city shall provide a program of building code administration, including plan review, permit issuing and inspection for structural, mechanical, electrical and plumbing work. The program shall be administered by the building official. The program shall operate pursuant to the state specialty codes listed in CMC 15.05.030 and the remainder of this chapter.

(B) Administration and enforcement of Appendix Chapter 33, Excavation and Grading, as adopted by CMC 15.05.030(H) shall be by the building official and/or the city engineer. Where the term “building official” is used in Appendix Chapter 33, it shall mean either the building official or city engineer. [Ord. 801 § 1, 1999; Code 2000 § 10.020; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.05.050 Permit requirements.

(A) In addition to the requirements found elsewhere in this code and imposed in the Oregon Building Code for the issuance of a building permit, no such permit shall be valid unless:

(1) Domestic water supply, sanitary sewer and storm water facilities are installed and approved of by the city engineer or public works director for service to the premises for which the permit is sought; and

(2) Street improvements, street lighting, required sidewalks, if any, have been installed and approved by the city engineer and according to the city’s standards and specifications; or, in the alternative, the applicant has agreed in writing to provide the city with an improvements guarantee along with sufficient monetary assurances (in form, manner and amount approved of by the city attorney, city manager and city engineer) sufficient to cover the costs associated with the design, construction and maintenance of those improvements.

(B) In addition to the conditions noted in subsection (A) of this section, the city’s building official, community development director and/or the city manager have the authority to condition issuance of (or revoke or stop work under) any building permit required by any of the specialty codes comprising the State Building Code upon proof of payment of all appropriate building permit fees as well as proof of payment of any or all of the following fees, liens and taxes:

(1) Payment of business license taxes imposed under the terms of CMC Title 5 on any contractor or subcontractor working on a structure in the city;

(2) Payment of all system development charges that may be due as a result of the building activity required by the permit;

(3) Payment of any outstanding nuisance or other liens levied on the property for which the building permit is issued; and

(4) Payment of the construction excise tax imposed by the Forest Grove School District and/or Hillsboro School District and the Metro Council. [Ord. 801 § 1, 1999; Code 2000 § 10.025; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 899 § 1, 2008.]


15.05.060 Violation – Penalty – Remedies.

(A) No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of this chapter.

(B) No person shall install, alter, replace, improve, convert, equip or maintain any mechanical equipment, electrical equipment or related system(s) in the city, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of this chapter.

(C) No person shall install, alter, replace, improve, convert, equip or maintain any plumbing or drainage piping work or any fixture or water heating or treating equipment in the city, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of this chapter.

(D) Each day a violation of this chapter (and the State Building Code it adopts) exists shall constitute a separate violation and subjects the person violating the same to the imposition of a civil penalty in an amount of up to $500.00 a day, said amount being left to the discretion of the court.

(E) Notwithstanding that other remedies exist and are available under the terms of the Cornelius Municipal Code or state statute, if the building official determines in his sole discretion that any building under construction, mechanical work, electrical or plumbing work on any building or any structure within the city poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, he is hereby authorized to order the work halted and/or the building or structure vacated pending further action by the city.

(F) The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available under city code or state statute. [Ord. 801 § 1, 1999; Code 2000 § 10.030.]


15.05.070 Recreation parks and organization camps.

Pursuant to ORS 455.153, the Recreation Parks and Organization Camps Administrative Rules, Chapter 918, Division 650, “General Rules,” and any amendments thereto, is hereby adopted. [Ord. 2015-01 § 1, 2015.]


15.05.080 Plumbing specialty code.

The Plumbing Specialty Code is hereby added to the Cornelius Municipal Code to read as follows:

Pursuant to ORS 455.153, the Uniform Plumbing Code, also known as the State of Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code and Plumbing Fire and Life Safety Code, 2005 Edition, and any amendments thereto, is hereby adopted.

[Ord. 775 § 5, 1996; Code 2000 § 10.070; amended during 2007 recodification.]


Chapter 15.10 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.10.010    Abatement of dangerous buildings code.


15.10.010 Abatement of dangerous buildings code.

The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1991 Edition, is hereby adopted and shall be known and referred to as the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings of the City of Cornelius, 1991 Edition. [Ord. 744 § 2, 1994; Code 2000 § 10.100.]


Chapter 15.15 SWIMMING POOLS

Sections:

15.15.010    Definitions.

15.15.020    Permit required.

15.15.030    Application for permit.

15.15.040    Fence standards.


15.15.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Building code” means a code of the city adopted by ordinance which regulates the construction of buildings and structures within the city.

(B) “Swimming pool” means a private residential swimming pool with a depth of 24 inches or more, permanently situated on private property, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by family members or invited guests; and a public swimming pool which contains a water depth of 24 inches or more, with a surface area of 1,800 square feet or more, which is used or intended to be used for swimming or recreational bathing by the public; and a semi-public pool which contains a water depth of 24 inches or more and with a surface area of 1,800 square feet or more which is used or intended to be used for swimming or recreational bathing and to which two or more families have access. [Code 2000 § 10.205.]


15.15.020 Permit required.

No person shall construct, install, enlarge or remodel any swimming pool without first having obtained a permit from the city recorder. This permit is in addition to any other permit or license required by the state or Washington County or any other governmental agency. [Code 2000 § 10.210.]


15.15.030 Application for permit.

(A) The application shall include:

(1) Complete and accurate plans and specifications drawn to scale and as otherwise required by the building code, prepared or approved by a professional engineer or architect registered in the state.

(2) A description of the sources of water supply, amount and quality of water available and intended to be used, method and manner of water purification, treatment, disinfection, heating, regulation and cleaning, lifesaving apparatus and safety measures.

(3) A description of storm and sanitary sewer service available at the site, including a subsurface disposal system plan if applicable.

(4) Pump performance data for recirculation of swimming pool water.

(B) The application must be accompanied by the permit fee in the amount of $45.00.

(C) If the application is disapproved, the city recorder shall furnish a written statement to the applicant setting forth the reasons for disapproval and shall indicate, when feasible, what changes are necessary before the application can be approved. Denial may be appealed to the council; provided, that notice is given by the applicant to the city recorder within 10 days after denial.

(D) Swimming pools shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. [Code 2000 § 10.215.]


15.15.040 Fence standards.

All swimming pools constructed, installed, enlarged or remodeled within the city shall conform to and include the following pool fencing standards:

(A) A fence shall surround all swimming pools and shall be constructed to conform with the requirements of this section.

(B) The following materials shall be used for fencing purposes:

(1) Wood. Redwood, cedar or pressure-treated posts not less than four inches by four inches, set not more than 10 feet apart, embedded at least 18 inches in the ground. Vertical boards at least one-half inch thick shall be fastened securely to and outside of not less than two horizontal rails at least two inches by four inches in dimension. The outside face of the fence shall have no horizontal projections or recesses.

(2) Wire. Galvanized chain link fencing, minimum 11 gauge, with galvanized pipe posts of at least one-and-one-quarter-inch diameter, spaced not more than 10 feet apart. Posts shall be set not less than 12 inches in diameter and 18 inches deep.

(3) Masonry. Solid walls of brick, concrete block or stone, with no projections, recesses or other openings less than four feet from the ground surface.

(4) Wrought Iron. Steel tube posts with a minimum one-and-one-half-inch section and a minimum one-eighth inch steel shall be spaced not more than eight feet on center. Vertical steel bars of a minimum one-half inch section shall be spaced not more than four inches on center. Horizontal rails shall be at least one inch channel steel, with a minimum vertical separation of four feet.

(5) Height. Fences shall be not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height, measured from the outside ground level at a point 12 inches horizontal from the base of the fence.

(C) Any gate in a protective fence shall meet fence requirements for height and durability. It shall be equipped with a self-closing device and a self-latching device located not less than three feet, six inches above the ground.

(D) Any fence material and method of construction other than specified above shall be submitted to the city manager for consideration prior to erection. If, in the opinion of the city manager, the material and method of construction conform to the general design for safety and durability as set forth in this section, the city manager may approve the fence. [Code 2000 § 10.220.]


Chapter 15.20 FIRE ZONES

Sections:

15.20.010    Fire zones established.


15.20.010 Fire zones established.

The following fire zones are established within the city:

(A) Fire Zone I. That area bounded and described in red on the “Official Fire Zone Map of the City of Cornelius, Oregon,” revised September 2, 1975, on file in the office of the city recorder.

(B) Fire Zone II. That area bounded and described in blue on the “Official Fire Zone Map of the City of Cornelius, Oregon,” revised September 2, 1975, on file in the office of the city recorder.

(C) Fire Zone III. That area bounded and described in yellow on the “Official Fire Zone Map of the City of Cornelius, Oregon,” revised September 2, 1975, on file in the office of the city recorder. [Code 2000 § 10.305.]


Chapter 15.25 FIRE PREVENTION

Sections:

15.25.010    Fire code adopted.

15.25.020    Bureau of fire prevention.

15.25.030    Definitions.

15.25.040    Storage of flammable liquids.

15.25.050    Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.

15.25.060    Storage of explosives and blasting agents.

15.25.070    Modifications.

15.25.080    Appeals.

15.25.090    Materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits.

15.25.100    Penalties.


15.25.010 Fire code adopted.

For the purpose of prescribing regulations hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the city adopts that certain code known and published as the “Oregon Fire Code, 2003 Edition.” A copy of the fire code shall be on file in the office of the city recorder and shall be inscribed with this code section and the date of its adoption. [Ord. 776 § 1, 1996; Code 2000 § 8.005; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.25.020 Bureau of fire prevention.

The Oregon Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. [Code 2000 § 8.010; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.25.030 Definitions.

(A) Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the Oregon Fire Code, it means the city of Cornelius.

(B) Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the Oregon Fire Code, it means the city attorney for the city. [Code 2000 § 8.015; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.25.040 Storage of flammable liquids.

(A) The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the Oregon Fire Code, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are all areas except those zoned for industrial use.

(B) The limits referred to in section of the Oregon Fire Code in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are all areas except areas zoned for industrial use. [Code 2000 § 8.020; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 2015-01 § 1, 2015.]


15.25.050 Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.

The limits referred to in the Oregon Fire Code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are all areas except areas zoned for industrial use. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is not to exceed 2,000 water gallons. [Code 2000 § 8.025; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.25.060 Storage of explosives and blasting agents.

The limits referred to in the Oregon Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are the city limits of the city. [Code 2000 § 8.030; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.25.070 Modifications.

The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Oregon Fire Code upon application in writing by an owner or lessee, or duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of a modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. [Code 2000 § 8.040; amended during 2007 recodification.]


15.25.080 Appeals.

Whenever the chief of the fire department disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to the council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. [Code 2000 § 8.045.]


15.25.090 Materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits.

The city manager, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post the list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies to interested persons. [Code 2000 § 8.050.]


15.25.100 Penalties.

Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the Oregon Fire Code or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans made and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with an order that is affirmed or modified by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, is in violation of the mandatory requirements of this code. The application of penalties imposed by this code shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. [Ord. 745 § 8, 1994; Code 2000 § 8.055; amended during 2007 recodification.]


Chapter 15.30 SMOKE DETECTORS

Sections:

15.30.010    Definitions.

15.30.020    Location of smoke detectors.

15.30.030    Certification at change in occupancy.

15.30.040    Mobile home smoke detectors.

15.30.050    Responsibility.

15.30.060    Operation of other than AC current units.

15.30.070    Remodeling.

15.30.080    Electrical permit and information data.

15.30.090    Enforcement.


15.30.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(A) “Approved smoke detector” means a detection device for the products of combustion other than heat which conforms to the Uniform Building Code Standard No. 43-6 or its successor standard and is listed by the Underwriters Laboratories, Factory Mutual, Underwriters Laboratories of Canada, or any other recognized testing laboratory.

(B) “Apartment house” means a building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence for three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, and shall include buildings containing three or more flats or apartments.

(C) “Dwelling” means a building, or any portion thereof, which is not an apartment house, lodging house, or a hotel as defined in this section, which contains one or two dwelling units or guest rooms used, intended or designed to be built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for living purposes.

(D) “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

(E) “Hotel” means a building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.

(F) “Lodging house” means a building, or portion thereof, containing not more than five guest rooms, which are used by not more than five guests, where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise.

(G) “Mobile home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, each built on a permanent chassis, and which is designed to be used for human occupancy as a dwelling. [Code 2000 § 8.205.]


15.30.020 Location of smoke detectors.

(A) All smoke detectors required by this code shall be mounted on a ceiling or wall. If wall mounted they shall be within 12 inches of but not closer than six inches to the ceiling. They shall be located in any corridor or interior area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.

(B) Where sleeping areas are widely separated (i.e., on different levels or opposite ends of the structure) and/or where a single smoke detector will not adequately service all sleeping areas, there shall be a smoke detector installed adjacent to each sleeping area.

(C) Every dwelling unit within an apartment house and every guest room in a hotel used for sleeping purposes shall be provided with smoke detectors conforming to U.B.C. Standard No. 43-6. In dwelling units, detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. In any efficiency dwelling unit, hotel sleeping rooms and in hotel suites, the detector shall be centrally located on the ceiling of the main room or hotel sleeping room. Wall mounted detectors shall be located between six and 12 inches of the ceiling. Where sleeping rooms are on an upper level, the detector shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the stairway. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the installation will not interfere with the operation characteristics of the detector. When actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm in the dwelling unit or guest room. [Code 2000 § 8.210.]


15.30.030 Certification at change in occupancy.

(A) At every change of occupancy of an owner-occupied dwelling unit occasioned by or incidental to sale, it shall be the duty of the seller to certify to the buyer that all smoke detectors as required by this code or other applicable laws are installed and in proper working condition. This duty shall be performed and certified by both parties before completion of the sale or occupancy of the new owner.

(B) At every change of occupancy occasioned by or incidental to the rental, lease or sublease of a dwelling unit, except hotels and lodging houses, it shall be the duty of the grantor, lessor or sublessor, as the case may be, to certify before occupancy to the new occupant that all smoke detectors as required by this code or other applicable laws are installed and in proper working condition.

(C) It shall be the responsibility of the owner, or his duly appointed agent, of hotels and lodging houses to test and maintain as per manufacturer’s instructions, those smoke detectors within each guest room, efficiency unit or sleeping room on a regular monthly basis. Tests and maintenance shall be documented with data being made available for fire department inspection at any time.

(D) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all occupancies occasioned by or incidental to rent, lease or sublease to comply with the code.

(E) Nothing herein shall be construed to vitiate or render void any contract, lease or sublease subject to this code. [Code 2000 § 8.215.]


15.30.040 Mobile home smoke detectors.

Prior to the placement, location or relocation of a mobile home on real property in the city for purposes of human occupancy, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupier of the mobile home to install a smoke detector in the unit and thereafter maintain the detector during the period of occupancy. The requirements of this section are in addition to those contained in CMC 15.30.030. [Code 2000 § 8.220.]


15.30.050 Responsibility.

(A) The owner shall be responsible for supplying the smoke detector and the maintenance instruction required by subsection (C) of this section, and the tenant shall be responsible for maintaining the smoke detector on a monthly basis.

(B) It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner, his authorized agent, member of the fire department or building division, except in case of fire, to remove or tamper with fire extinguishers, fire escapes, fire hoses, nozzles, or other fire control or fire extinguishing equipment, or fire reporting equipment, including smoke detector systems, in or about any building or other premises in the city.

(C) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his authorized agent to supply a copy of the manufacturer’s maintenance, testing and cleaning instructions to each tenant. [Code 2000 § 8.225.]


15.30.060 Operation of other than AC current units.

Smoke detection systems may operate on approved power supplies other than an AC primary source when approved by the fire prevention bureau. Smoke detectors other than AC primary source may be powered by self-monitored battery or operated in a plug-in outlet which is fitted with a plug restrainer device, provided the outlet is not controlled by any switch other than the main power source. [Code 2000 § 8.230.]


15.30.070 Remodeling.

The owner of any occupancy must install approved smoke detectors in accordance with this code as a condition to receiving a building permit for any significant remodeling, alterations or other construction to the interior living areas of an occupancy. For the purpose of this section, any remodeling, alterations, additions or other construction to the interior living areas of an occupancy shall be considered significant if the total cost is in excess of $1,000. [Code 2000 § 8.235.]


15.30.080 Electrical permit and information data.

(A) In all residential occupancies, a nonfee, noninspection informational form shall be completed for the fire department for the purpose of obtaining copies of the testing and maintenance instructions, compilation of a list of complying occupancies and use in cross-referencing data with other prevention activities.

(B) The installation of all wired-in smoke detectors in all occupancy groups will require electrical permits and inspections by the state.

(C) After January 1, 1980, regular electrical permit fees will be required for the installation of all wired-in smoke detectors. [Code 2000 § 8.240.]


15.30.090 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the fire department to inspect, on an annual basis, random samples of the occupancies listed in this code to ascertain compliance with this code. It shall be the duty of the fire department to inspect those smoke detector units identified through a complaint to the fire department. The discovery of electrical problems or malfunctions will be reported to the building department. [Code 2000 § 8.245.]


Chapter 15.35 MOVING OF BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.35.010    Permit required.

15.35.020    Application for permit.

15.35.030    Additional requirements.

15.35.040    Conformance to permit.

15.35.050    Conformance to codes – Bond.

15.35.060    Insurance.

15.35.070    Liability.


15.35.010 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move, or permit to be moved, any building, shed or part thereof, which shall be over-width or over-height for moving upon and along the highways of the state within the corporate limits of the city without first applying for and obtaining a permit and filing a certificate as hereinafter required. [Code 2000 § 10.405.]


15.35.020 Application for permit.

Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move any building, shed or part thereof, which has a width greater or a height greater than is specified under the laws and regulations concerning the moving of objects upon and along the highways of the state, along or across any public street within the corporate limits of the city shall first file with the city recorder a written application for a permit. The application shall be signed by the person, firm or corporation or by their duly authorized agent desiring to move the building. It shall specify and describe the building to be moved, its size and site, the route over which it is proposed to move it, the date and hour that they propose to commence their moving operations, which shall be within five days from the date of filing the application, the type of equipment and the means to be used in moving. The application shall also state the location of any light, telephone, power or other wires over and across any of the streets or routes to be used which will be interfered with by the moving of the building, together with the owner thereof, if known to the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount established by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising the conditions of the permit. [Code 2000 § 10.410; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


15.35.030 Additional requirements.

(A) Upon the filing of any application and the deposit of the required fee, the city manager shall review the application and examine the route proposed to be traveled to determine whether or not the movement may be made with reasonable safety, taking into consideration the condition of the street, traffic hazard, or inconvenience to the traffic caused by the moving of the building, or the moving of a light, power, telephone or other utility wire overhead or by the damage to trees and other obstructions along this route. The city manager shall require that the applicant furnish to him receipts and acquittances from the owner of all poles and wires to be affected by the movement, which receipts and acquittances shall acknowledge that any cost or expense involved in moving, altering or changing the wires necessitated by the moving of the building have been paid or that the owner thereof will look exclusively to the person moving the building for the payment of the costs thereof.

(B) If the city manager determines that the building may be moved without undue hazard or damage to the traveling public or to the public streets and highways or without undue damage to trees, poles or other fixtures, and that the cost of moving all wires has been paid or arranged for, then he shall issue a permit to move the building upon and along a route to be designated and upon conditions set forth in the permit. [Code 2000 § 10.415.]


15.35.040 Conformance to permit.

It shall be lawful to move the building in conformity with the permit, but it shall be unlawful to move the building in any other or different manner or upon any other route than is set forth and described in the permit. [Code 2000 § 10.420.]


15.35.050 Conformance to codes – Bond.

Any building proposed to be located or relocated within the city must be made to meet the standards of the city building code and plumbing code and the State Electrical Code. Any person desiring to relocate any buildings or structures within the city shall be required to post a corporate surety bond or a personal bond acceptable and approved by the city manager, in an amount estimated by the city manager that will be required to make the building conform to the codes. [Code 2000 § 10.425.]


15.35.060 Insurance.

In addition to the permit and license required by this chapter, any person, firm or corporation making application for a permit shall provide with the permit fee a certificate of insurance naming the city as party insured upon an appropriate policy of insurance for public liability and property damage, with limits of not less than $100,000 for injury to one person, $300,000 for injury to two or more persons in one occurrence, and $100,000 for damage to property. No permit or license shall be issued unless the city first receives and approves the certificate of insurance. [Code 2000 § 10.430.]


15.35.070 Liability.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the liability or absolve the person who is moving a building from liability to reimburse the city for all damages sustained to the streets or to reimburse the owners of private property for property which is damaged or destroyed by the movement. [Code 2000 § 10.435.]


Chapter 15.40 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED

(Deleted during 2007 codification)


Title 16 (Reserved)


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:

17.05    Land Divisions


Chapter 17.05 LAND DIVISIONS

Sections:

17.05.010    Purpose.

17.05.020    Lot line adjustments.

17.05.030    Land partitioning.

17.05.040    Subdivisions.

17.05.050    Fee ownership subdivision.


17.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of these regulations is to establish procedures and standards for the division of lands within the city of Cornelius.

(A) Authority.

(1) No person shall subdivide or partition land without first complying with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state of Oregon.

(2) The creation of all streets shall be in conformance with requirements for a subdivision or a partition except, however, the community development director may approve the creation of a street to be established by deed without full compliance with the regulations applicable to subdivisions or partitions provided one of the following conditions exists:

(a) The establishment of the street is initiated by the city council; and

(b) The street is declared essential for the purpose of complying with the comprehensive plan, or necessary for adequate traffic circulation; or

(c) The partitioning of land is an incidental effect rather than the primary objective of the street.

(B) Types of Applications. There are four types of land divisions, which are subject to different criteria and procedural requirements:

(1) Lot line adjustments;

(2) Partitions;

(3) Subdivisions;

(4) Fee ownership subdivisions. [Code 2000 § 11.30.21; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


17.05.020 Lot line adjustments.

(A) Procedure Type.

(1) The community development director shall review the request for a lot line adjustment to determine compliance with the standards in subsection (C) of this section. The community development director shall approve or deny the request in writing based on the criteria in subsection (C) of this section, within 45 days of submittal of the request.

(2) If the applicant disagrees with the decision of the community development director, an appeal shall be filed in accordance with CMC 18.15.090(A) within 10 working days.

(B) Application Requirements. The community development director shall provide forms that specify the information required for submission of lot line adjustments. The applicant shall prepare a map together with other supplementary material as may be required and shall submit the necessary number of copies to the community development director.

(C) Approval Criteria. A request for a lot line adjustment must meet all of the following criteria:

(1) An additional lot is not created by the lot line adjustment and the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustments is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by the approved zoning for that district.

(2) By reducing the lot size, the lot or structure(s) on the lot will not be in violation of the site development regulations for that district.

(D) Appeal of a Decision. Any person receiving notice who disagrees with the community development director’s interpretation may appeal that interpretation to the planning commission at its next appropriate regularly scheduled meeting. Any party to the proceeding disagreeing with the planning commission interpretation may appeal that interpretation to the city council at its next appropriate regularly scheduled meeting. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.22; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


17.05.030 Land partitioning.

(A) Requirements for Land Partitioning Actions.

(1) No person shall partition an area, parcel or tract of land without the approval of the planning commission or the community development director in accordance with the standards and regulations contained in this section.

(2) The standards and regulations of this section shall apply to partitions of land as defined in ORS 92.010(9).

(3) The community development director shall coordinate and assemble through the facilities and design review process the reports and data submitted by the applicant, affected city departments and any governmental agencies having an interest in partitions. The community development director shall determine whether the partition meets the criteria in subsection (C) of this section.

(4) The community development director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed partition in writing based on the criteria of subsection (C) of this section, within 45 days of submittal of a complete application.

(5) Notice and review of the community development director’s decision shall be pursuant to CMC 18.15.030.

(6) If the area or tract of land to be partitioned exceeds two acres, and within one calendar year is being partitioned into more than two parcels, any one of which is less than one acre, full compliance with all requirements for subdivision may be required if the community development director or planning commission determines that the entire parcel being partitioned is in the process of being divided into lots or tracts which would otherwise be subject to subdivision regulations if the partitioning did not occur within one calendar year.

(B) Application Requirements. The community development director shall provide forms that specify the information required for submission of land partitions. The applicant shall prepare a map together with other supplementary material as may be required and shall submit the necessary number of copies to the community development director.

(C) Approval Criteria. A request to partition land must meet all of the following criteria:

(1) The proposal conforms with the city’s comprehensive plan; and

(2) The proposal complies with all applicable statutory and ordinance requirements and regulations; and

(3) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposal; and

(4) All proposed lots conform to the size and dimensional requirements of this chapter; and

(5) All proposed improvements meet city standards.

(D) Required Improvements. For any partitioning of land, where applicable, the following design and development standards and requirements may apply to partitions. These standards shall apply at the point of construction of improvements and/or land developments. The community development director shall have the authority to impose any such standards or requirements as conditions of approval.

(E) Streets. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Where location is not shown in the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of the streets in a land division shall either:

(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or

(2) Conform to standards adopted by the city. All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in the adopted Cornelius public works standards.

All streets and alleys within the development and those adjacent streets which directly serve the development shall be fully improved, including grading, base grade, paving, and installation of curbs, all constructed to design specifications as approved by the city engineer. All streets to be constructed and/or improved shall comply with the minimum street improvement standards contained in this title. In cases where physical conditions warrant it, special soils analysis or engineering designs may be required by the city engineer. In addition, where a proposed partition abuts a substandard arterial or collector street, the developer shall provide to the community development director, prior to final plat approval, adequate guarantees that, within one year from the issuance of a building permit for construction within the development, such abutting arterial or collector street or streets shall be improved in a manner which is compatible with the standards for streets contained in this title. Adequate guarantee shall consist of formation of a local improvement district or provision of a security in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated actual improvement cost, plus 15 percent.

(F) Easement.

(1) Utility Lines. Easements for sewers, drainage, water mains, electric lines, or other public utilities shall be dedicated. Easements on interior lot lines shall be 20 feet in width, the center line of which shall be the lot lines. Easements along exterior lot lines shall be 20 feet in width, except no easement will be required for those lot lines paralleling a street or other public way. Tie-back easements shall be six feet wide and 20 feet long along lot side lines at change of direction points of the lot lines.

(2) Watercourses. Where a land division is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose, may be required. Streets or parking ways parallel to watercourses may be required. Watercourse easements and drainage rights-of-way shall be consistent with Clean Water Services (CWS).

(G) Lot Size and Shape. Lot size, width, shape and orientation shall conform to the requirements of this title for the applicable zoning district.

(H) Access. Each lot shall abut upon a public street, for a distance of at least 20 feet, and comply with CMC 18.143.050, Access standards.

(I) Dedications. Public streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bike paths, parks, open space, and other public rights-of-way required by or reasonably related to the development shall be dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the city or the appropriate jurisdiction for maintenance. Further, any park or open space proposed may be required to be dedicated if it is designated on the city’s comprehensive plan. Dedication must be approved by the jurisdiction to whom the park or open space is being dedicated prior to final plat approval.

(J) Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground per standards identified by the city engineer.

(K) Street Trees. Trees shall be installed along street frontages in accordance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards. Actual location and spacing of trees shall be at the discretion of the city engineer.

(L) Compliance with Approvals.

(1) Requirements Prior to Commencement of Work. Prior to any construction, improvements or land development, the developer shall perform the following:

(a) The developer shall file detailed plans and specifications for all public improvements or land development together with a detailed cost estimate and an estimate of time reasonably necessary to complete such improvements for approval by the city engineer or designee.

(b) The developer shall enter into a contract with the city of Cornelius to make, install and complete within the time fixed, but in no case more than two years from the date of execution of said contract without written approval by the city engineer and community development director, all improvements in accordance with the approved plans prior to acceptance of the improvements by the city and/or plat recordation. If the developer chooses to bond for said improvements prior to acceptance of the improvements (to allow plat recordation to occur prior to completion of the public improvements), the developer shall cause to be filed with the city recorder a security acceptable to the community development director payable to the city of Cornelius in a principal sum determined from the approved estimate of the costs of said improvements of this section. The security shall assure the performance of the said contract and the completion of the said improvements, free of liens. Notwithstanding any of the above, a security shall be provided for any improvements to be performed within public rights-of-way and/or public easements, and all erosion control measures.

(c) The amount of the security shall be based on an estimate of the cost of the work approved by the city engineer in accordance with the following schedule:

(i) Public and private improvements within public rights-of-way and/or public easements, and all erosion control measures, in conformance with city and Clean Water Services standards, equals 150 percent of cost estimate.

(2) Improvement Procedures. All improvements shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and any other improvements standards or specifications adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the city. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the land division proposal, such plans may be required before approval of the final plat.

(b) Improvement work shall not be commenced until the developer has secured the appropriate development permit. If work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until the city has been notified and consented in writing.

(c) All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the specifics of the city engineer and Cornelius Municipal Code. The city may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant such change in the interests of the city or the developer. Upon acceptance of the required improvements, the city engineer shall notify the developer that the improvements are acceptable as per Cornelius Municipal Code. Acceptance shall be in writing.

(d) All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, storm drains and cable communication system facilities installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Stubs for service connections for all underground utilities, sanitary sewers and cable communication system facilities shall be placed to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

(e) A map showing all public improvements as built shall be filed with the city engineer upon completion of said improvements.

(3) Improvement Requirements. Improvements to be installed at the expense of the developer are as follows:

(a) Streets.

(i) All streets, including alleys.

(ii) Streets adjacent but only partially within the partition or subdivision.

(iii) The extension of the land division streets to the intercepting paving line of existing streets with which the land division streets intersect.

(iv) Arterial or collector streets which intersect with streets within the development that provide ingress or egress to the development or on which there are traffic impacts reasonably related to the development.

(v) All streets shall be built in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and the adopted Cornelius transportation system plan.

(b) Surface Drainage and Storm Sewer System. Drainage facilities shall be provided within the land division to connect the land division drainage to drainage ways or storm sewers outside the land division. Design of drainage shall be in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and shall allow for the extension of the system to serve other areas.

(c) Sanitary Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and installed to serve the land division and to connect the land division to existing mains.

(d) Water System. Water lines with valves and fire hydrants serving the land division, connecting the land division to city mains, shall be installed in conformance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards. The design and construction by the developer shall take into account provisions for extension beyond the land division and to adequately grid the city system.

(e) Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted along street frontages in accordance with the following:

(i) For all land divisions, the developer shall pay a per tree security to the city. The surety bond shall be based upon the number of trees included in an approved street tree plan.

(ii) Trees shall be planted in accordance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(f) Bike and Pedestrian Ways. Bike and pedestrian ways shall be constructed according to adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(g) Other improvements reasonably related to the impacts of the development which may be required at the partial or total expense of the developer:

(i) Improvement of arterial and collector streets providing primary access to land division streets.

(ii) Signals, traffic control devices, and traffic calming devices.

(iii) Intersection improvements.

(iv) Parks and open space shall be improved as required by the city and/or appropriate jurisdiction.

(h) Street Lights. Street lights shall be installed in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(i) Curb cuts and driveway installations are not required of the developer but, if installed, shall be according to adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(j) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(4) Final Plat Approval. The community development director shall review the final plat for compliance with the approved preliminary plat. If the community development director determines that the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the community development director shall so certify and sign the final plat. If the final plat does not conform, it shall be returned to the developer to correct the deficiencies and must be resubmitted for approval within the time established by the community development director.

(5) Filing of Final Plat. Approval of the final plat by the city as provided by this regulation shall be conditioned on its prompt recording. The developer shall, without delay, submit the final plat for signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 30 days after the date the last required approving signature has been obtained. Prior to issuance of any development permits the applicant shall provide to the planning department one copy of the recorded final plat signed by all public officials.

(M) Time Limit on Approvals.

(1) The developer shall submit a plat, including a survey, within 12 months after approval of the partition.

(2) The community development director may grant time extensions allowing up to 12 additional months for platting of the partition if justifiable cause is shown; however, a time extension cannot be granted to allow platting to be submitted more than two years from the date the partition was approved.

(3) If the developer wishes to proceed with the partition and has not submitted the plat within the required time or approved extensions of time, the developer shall resubmit the preliminary plat to the community development director with appropriate information and a fee for reprocessing the request according to the provisions for partition approval in effect at the time of resubmission.

(N) Appeal of a Decision. Any person receiving notice who disagrees with the community development director’s interpretation may appeal that interpretation to the planning commission at its next appropriate regularly scheduled meeting. Any party to the proceeding disagreeing with the planning commission interpretation may appeal that interpretation to the city council at its next appropriate regularly scheduled meeting. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.23; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


17.05.040 Subdivisions.

(A) Procedure Type – Preliminary Plats. The community development director shall coordinate and assemble through the facilities and design review process the reports and data submitted by the applicant, affected city departments and any governmental agencies having an interest in subdivisions. The community development director shall determine whether the subdivision meets the criteria in subsection (C) of this section. The community development director or the planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed preliminary plat in writing based on the criteria of subsection (C) of this section within 45 days of its submittal.

(B) Scope of Regulations.

(1) This section shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 428, except where there is proposed a replatting or modification of lot sizes or the layout and construction of streets or other land improvements requiring a replatting or survey recording. Nor is this section intended to repeal or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by Ordinance No. 428, or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. However, where this section imposes a greater restriction upon the land than is imposed or required by existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, this section shall control.

(2) Where an application involves no variance request(s) and/or where modifications to the standards specified in this chapter have been previously approved by the planning commission through the planned unit development process, the community development director may take action to approve or deny the land division pursuant to the Type II procedure provided in CMC 18.10.070(A)(2).

(3) In cases where applications involve a variance requiring a public hearing, the planning commission shall make the decision regulating land divisions that the community development director would otherwise make. The community development director shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved including proposed findings, reasons, conclusions and recommendations, and shall place the report on the commission’s agenda in a manner consistent with the commission’s adopted rules for public hearings. If the materials do not meet the applicable requirements, the community development director shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and submit the report to the commission with a recommendation for denial.

(4) Neighborhood Review Meeting. Prior to submitting a land division application that is subject to a variance request, the applicant shall conduct a neighborhood review meeting regarding the proposed land division application. The neighborhood review meeting must be held at an accessible location within the Cornelius city limits.

(5) The applicant may withdraw the application at any time.

(C) Approval Criteria. In order to approve a preliminary plat, findings of fact shall be made to support the following conclusions:

(1) The proposal conforms with the city’s comprehensive plan; and

(2) The proposal complies with all applicable statutory and ordinance requirements and regulations; and

(3) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposal; and

(4) All proposed lots conform to the size and dimensional requirements of this chapter; and

(5) All proposed improvements meet city standards; and

(6) That the phasing plan, if requested, can be carried out in a manner which meets the objectives of the above criteria and provides necessary public improvements for each phase as it develops.

(D) Special Conditions.

(1) No preliminary plat of a subdivision shall be approved which bears a name using a word which is the same as, similar to, or pronounced the same as a word in the name of any other subdivision in Washington County, except for the words “town,” “city,” “place,” “court,” “addition,” or similar words, unless the land platted is contiguous to and platted by the same party that platted the subdivision bearing that name or unless the party files and records the consent of the party that platted the subdivision bearing that name. All plats must continue the block numbers of the plat of the same name last filed.

(2) No preliminary plat shall be approved unless it bears the signature of the chairman of the planning commission and the community development director.

(3) Streets. No preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision shall be approved unless:

(a) General. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Where location is not shown in the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of the streets in a division shall either:

(i) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or

(ii) Conform to standards adopted by the city. All streets shall be designed in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and the adopted Cornelius transportation system plan.

(b) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips or street plugs controlling the access to streets will not be approved unless necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights, and in such cases as they may be required. The control and disposal of the land composed of such strips shall be placed within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions approved by the community development director.

(c) Alignment. As far as practical, all streets other than minor streets or cul-de-sacs shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the center lines thereof.

(d) Future Extension of Streets. In the case of dead-end stub streets that will connect to streets on adjacent sites in the future, notification that the street is planned for future extension shall be posted on the stub street until the street is extended and shall inform the public that the dead-end street may be extended in the future.

(e) Intersection Angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at an angle as near to a right angle as practical except where topography requires a lesser angle, such as for special intersection design.

(f) Existing Streets. Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of land division.

(g) Half Streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where essential to the reasonable development of the land division when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and when the community development director finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is divided. The community development director may require up to an additional 10 feet of right-of-way and improvements to provide for a safe travel surface. Whenever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be divided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets.

(h) Cul-De-Sacs, Hammerheads, and Woonerfs. The use of cul-de-sac designs and closed-end street systems shall be limited to situations where topography, existing development, barriers such as railroads or highways, or environmental constraints such as major streams and rivers prevent full street extensions. If cul-de-sacs are used, they shall be designed in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards. In any instance, no more than 25 dwelling units shall be served by a cul-de-sac. Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, no more than six dwelling units shall be served by a woonerf. In proposed development or where redevelopment potential exists, and a street connection is not proposed, one or more accessways may be required to connect a cul-de-sac to public streets, to other accessways, or to property lines to allow for future connections. Redevelopment potential exists when assessed building value per square foot is less than 50 percent of the mean value per square foot of surrounding buildings on lots within a 500-foot distance as measured from any point of the property line. An accessway will not be required where the impacts from new development, redevelopment or both are low and do not provide reasonable justification for the estimated costs of such accessway.

(i) Accessways linking cul-de-sacs shall be as short as possible and, wherever practical, straight enough to allow one end of the path to be seen from the other.

(ii) Accessways linking cul-de-sacs shall be lighted to a minimum level of one-half foot-candle. Lighting shall have cut-off fixtures so that no glare is emitted beyond the accessway and onto adjacent properties.

(i) Grades and Curves. Grades shall not exceed six percent on major or secondary arterials, 10 percent on collector streets, or 12 percent on any other street. In flat areas, allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope of one-half percent.

(j) Lots Abutting Arterial Streets. Where a land division abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the community development director may require frontage roads, reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear or side property line, or such other treatment as may be part of an approved street design plan or may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties, to provide separation of through and local traffic, and be aesthetically pleasing.

(k) Trees. Trees shall be installed along street frontages in accordance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards. Actual location and spacing of trees shall be at the discretion of the city engineer.

(l) The streets and roads shall be named in accordance with standards and plans established by the planning commission.

(m) The minimum street width shall comply with the standards and design identified in the adopted Cornelius transportation system plan.

The city and the planning commission shall consider in their traffic analysis, congestion management solutions as mandated by Title 6 of the Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan.

(4) Blocks. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be designed with due regard to providing adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated, needs for convenient access circulation, control and safety of street traffic, limitations and opportunities of topography, and conformance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards. Application of conditions in subsections (D)(4)(a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be reviewed and may be approved by the city. Mixed-use and residential development on proposed sites of five acres or greater must submit a site plan that identifies conceptual street connections that are consistent with Figure 3-8 of the TSP.

(a) Physical or topographic conditions make an accessway connection impracticable. Such conditions include but are not limited to freeways, railroads, slopes in excess of city standards for maximum slopes, or wetlands or other bodies of water which make provision of a connection impracticable.

(b) Existing buildings or other development on adjacent lands physically preclude a connection now or in the future considering the potential for redevelopment.

(c) Where accessways would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, or restrictions written and recorded as of May 1, 2000.

(d) Variances. A variance to street spacing standards may be granted pursuant to Chapter 18.115 CMC if resources are present that are mapped on the Natural Resources Map, where street spacing can be achieved at a minimum of 800 feet and no greater than 1,200 feet. Where habitat quality or the length of the crossing required prevents a full street connection, an exception to the street spacing standards may be granted, pursuant to Chapter 18.115 CMC.

(e) An accessway will not be required where the impacts from new development, redevelopment or both are low and do not provide reasonable justification for the estimated costs of such accessway.

(f) Exceptions to the above standards may be granted when blocks are divided by one or more pathways, where spacing is no more than 330 feet as measured from the right-of-way or easement line and in conformance with provisions of Chapter 18.115 CMC (Variances). Pathways shall be located to minimize out-of-direction travel by pedestrians and may be designed to accommodate bicycles.

(5) Easement.

(a) Utility Lines. Easements for sewers, drainage, water mains, electric lines, or other public utilities shall be dedicated. Easements on interior lot lines shall be 20 feet in width, the center line of which shall be the lot lines. Easements along exterior lot lines shall be 20 feet in width, except no easement will be required for those lot lines paralleling a street or other public way. Tie-back easements shall be six feet wide and 20 feet long along lot side lines at change of direction points of the lot lines.

(b) Watercourses. Where a land division is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose, may be required. Streets or parking ways parallel to watercourses may be required. Watercourse easements and drainage rights-of-way shall be consistent with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards.

(6) Lot Size and Shape. Lot size, width, shape and orientation shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for the applicable zoning district.

(a) Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than the minimum lot size under the city zoning regulations, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivisions.

(b) Lot configurations shall meet the provisions of Chapter 18.155 CMC (Solar Access for New Development).

(7) Access. Each lot shall abut upon a public street for a distance of at least 20 feet.

(8) Dedications. Public streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bike paths, parks, open space, and other public rights-of-way required by or reasonably related to the development shall be dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the city or the appropriate jurisdiction for maintenance. Further, any park or open space proposed may be required to be dedicated if it is designated on the city’s comprehensive plan. Dedication must be approved by the jurisdiction to whom the park or open space is being dedicated prior to final plat approval.

(9) Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground per standards identified by the city engineer.

(10) Street Trees. Trees shall be installed along street frontages in accordance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(11) Homeowners’ Associations and Declarations. When a homeowners’ association agreement or other restrictive covenants are to be recorded with the development, a copy of the appropriate documents shall be submitted for review by the city attorney prior to recordation of the final plat. The city shall review such documents to ensure that common areas are properly maintained and that other restrictions required by the city are included.

(12) Variances. The planning commission may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. Application for a variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider, at the time the preliminary plat is filed, for consideration by the planning commission. The variance request shall address the criteria found in Chapter 18.115 CMC. It should also state fully the grounds for the application and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner.

(13) Planned Unit Development (PUD). A planned unit development approved by the planning commission shall not be subject to the provisions of this section, except as identified in Chapter 18.110 CMC, Planned Unit Development (PUD) Conditional Use.

(E) Compliance with Approval.

(1) Requirements Prior to Commencement of Work. Prior to any construction, improvements or land development, the developer shall perform the following:

(a) The developer shall file detailed plans and specifications for all public improvements or land development together with a detailed cost estimate and an estimate of time reasonably necessary to complete such improvements for approval by the city engineer or designee.

(b) These submitted plans shall include a plan for erosion control during construction, which conforms to the standards established by resolution of the city council.

(c) The developer shall enter into a contract with the city of Cornelius to make, install and complete within the time fixed, but in no case more than two years from the date of execution of said contract without written approval by the city engineer and community development director, all improvements in accordance with the approved plans prior to acceptance of the improvements by the city and/or plat recordation. If the developer chooses to bond for said improvements prior to acceptance of the improvements (to allow plat recordation to occur prior to completion of the public improvements), the developer shall cause to be filed with the city recorder a security acceptable to the city manager payable to the city of Cornelius in a principal sum determined from the approved estimate of the costs of said improvements of this section. The security shall assure the performance of the said contract and the completion of the said improvements, free of liens. Notwithstanding any of the above, a security shall be provided for any improvements to be performed within public rights-of-way and/or public easements.

(d) The amount of the security shall be based on an estimate of the cost of the work approved by the city engineer in accordance with the following schedule:

(i) Public and private improvements within public rights-of-way and/or public easements, and all erosion control measures, in conformance with city and Clean Water Services standards, equals 150 percent of cost estimate.

(e) Fees. The fees, deposits and charges to be paid by the subdivider may be established or amended by resolution of the council in accordance with the provisions of CMC 18.05.080, General Provisions.

(2) Improvement Procedures. All improvements shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and any other improvements standards or specifications adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the city. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the land division proposal, such plans may be required before approval of the final plat.

(b) Improvement work shall not be commenced until the developer has secured the appropriate development permit. If work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until the city has been notified and consented in writing.

(c) All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the specifics of the city engineer and Cornelius Municipal Code. The city may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant such change in the interests of the city or the developer. Upon acceptance of the required improvements, the city engineer shall notify the developer that the improvements are acceptable as per Cornelius Municipal Code. Acceptance shall be in writing.

(d) All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, storm drains and cable communication system facilities installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Stubs for service connections for all underground utilities, sanitary sewers and cable communication system facilities shall be placed to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

(e) A map showing all public improvements as built shall be filed with the city engineer upon completion of said improvements.

(3) Improvement Requirements. Improvements to be installed at the expense of the developer are as follows:

(a) Streets.

(i) All streets, including alleys.

(ii) Streets adjacent but only partially within the partition or subdivision.

(iii) The extension of the land division streets to the intercepting paving line of existing streets with which the land division streets intersect.

(iv) Arterial or collector streets which intersect with streets within the development that provide ingress or egress to the development or on which there are traffic impacts reasonably related to the development.

(v) All streets shall be built in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and the adopted Cornelius transportation system plan.

(b) Surface Drainage and Storm Sewer System. Drainage facilities shall be provided within the land division to connect the land division drainage to drainage ways or storm sewers outside the land division. Design of drainage shall be in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and shall allow for the extension of the system to serve other areas.

(c) Sanitary Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards and installed to serve the land division and to connect the land division to existing mains.

(d) Water System. Water lines with valves and fire hydrants serving the land division, connecting the land division to city mains, shall be installed in conformance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards. The design and construction by the developer shall take into account provisions for extension beyond the land division and to adequately grid the city system.

(e) Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted along street frontages in accordance with the following:

(i) For all land divisions, the developer shall pay a per tree security to the city. The surety bond shall be based upon the number of trees included in an approved street tree plan.

(ii) Trees shall be planted in accordance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(f) Bike and Pedestrian Ways. Bike and pedestrian ways shall be constructed according to adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(g) Other improvements reasonably related to the impacts of the development which may be required at the partial or total expense of the developer:

(i) Improvement of arterial and collector streets providing primary access to land division streets.

(ii) Signals, traffic control devices, and traffic calming devices.

(iii) Intersection improvements.

(iv) Parks and open space shall be improved as required by the city and appropriate jurisdiction.

(v) Land parcels to be reserved for any special purpose, other than for sale, are to be distinguished from lots intended for sale.

(h) Street Lights. Street lights shall be installed in accordance with adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(i) Curb cuts and driveway installations are not required of the developer but, if installed, shall be according to adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(j) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(4) Preliminary Approval. After approval of the preliminary plat in the manner indicated in this section, the subdivider may proceed with the final surveying, and preparation of the final plat.

(5) Final Plat Approval. The community development director shall review the final plat for compliance with the approved preliminary plat. If the community development director determines that the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the community development director shall so certify and sign the final plat. If the final plat does not conform, it shall be returned to the developer to correct the deficiencies and must be resubmitted for approval within the time established by the community development director.

(a) Supplemental Information – Final Plat. The following data shall accompany the final plat:

(i) A preliminary lot, book title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties having any record title interest in the premises.

(ii) A copy of deed restrictions, including building setback lines, if any are applicable to the subdivision, and a copy of any dedication which required separate documents.

(iii) A certificate by the city engineer certifying that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives:

A. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the community development director or the planning commission giving tentative approval of the preliminary plat and a maintenance bond posted with the city as provided in this subsection.

B. An agreement has been executed and assurance of performance posted with the city as provided in this subsection.

(b) In subdivisions that are to be served by community water systems and/or community sewage collecting and treatment systems, a certificate from the Washington County department of public health indicating that these systems have had the necessary official public health clearance and approval by the legally responsible regulating agency.

(c) The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate:

(i) The final plat shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided.

(ii) An affidavit signed by the engineer or the surveyor responsible for the survey and final map, the signature of such engineer or surveyor to be accompanied by his seal.

(iii) Provisions for all other certifications now or hereafter required by law.

(6) Filing of Final Plat. Approval of the final plat by the city as provided by this regulation shall be conditioned on its prompt recording. The developer shall, without delay, submit the final plat for signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not submitted to the Washington County recorder for recordation within 30 days after the date the last required approving signature has been obtained. The city may request developer to provide proof that the developer has submitted the final plat to the Washington County recorder for recordation.

(a) Prior to submittal of any building permit applications the applicant shall provide to the planning department one copy of the recorded final plat signed by all public officials.

(F) Modifications. Changes, alterations or enlargements to previously approved preliminary or final subdivision plats shall require a new request for approval through the Type II process.

(G) Time Limit on Approvals – Submission of Final Plat.

(1) The developer shall submit a final plat, including a survey, within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plat. The community development director may grant time extensions allowing up to 12 additional months for final platting if justifiable cause is shown.

(2) If the community development director has authorized a time schedule for phasing the final platting, that schedule shall apply. The community development director may grant time extensions allowing up to 12 additional months for final platting of each phase if justifiable cause is shown; however, a time extension cannot be granted to allow final platting for any phase to be submitted more than five years from the date the preliminary plat was approved.

(3) If the developer wishes to proceed with the land division and has not submitted the final plat within the required time or approved extensions of time, the developer shall resubmit the preliminary plat to the community development director with appropriate information for reprocessing the request according to the provisions for preliminary plat approval in effect at the time of resubmission.

(H) Appeal of a Decision. Appeal of a decision shall be filed in accordance with CMC 18.15.090, and the period for filing the appeal shall be 10 days. [Ord. 696 § 2, 1989; Ord. 695 § 1, 1990; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.24; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2017-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


17.05.050 Fee ownership subdivision.

(A) Purpose. To encourage flexibility in building design, while providing for open space, adequate light, air and safety, development in the multi-family, commercial and industrial zones which features multiple units, spaces or dwellings that may be divided by units to allow fee ownership of individual units.

(B) Procedure Type.

(1) The community development director shall coordinate and assemble through the Facilities review process the reports and data submitted by the applicant, affected city departments and any governmental agencies having an interest in fee ownership in the multi-family, commercial and industrial zones. The community development director shall determine whether the request meets the criteria in CMC 17.05.030 or 17.05.040. The community development director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the request in writing based upon the criteria of CMC 17.05.030 or 17.05.040, as appropriate, within 45 days of its submittal.

(2) Notice and review of the community development director’s decision shall be pursuant to CMC 18.15.010(B).

(C) Application Requirements. The community development director shall provide forms that specify the information required for review of a fee ownership subdivision. The applicant shall prepare a map together with other supplementary material as may be required and shall submit the necessary number of copies to the community development director.

(D) Approval Criteria. The community development director shall reduce the site development standards for lot area, lot dimension, building setbacks, building coverage, landscaping, parking and street frontage for the lot to allow fee ownership of the land on which the unit rests in the multi-family, commercial and industrial zones, provided the following criteria are met:

(1) As a whole, the development of which the unit is a part meets the criteria of this chapter for lot area, lot dimensions, setbacks, parking, lot coverage, landscaping, public facilities and street frontage.

(2) The development as a whole, the unit for which fee ownership is desired and any unit affected by the division shall meet all building, plumbing and fire code standards.

(3) Ingress and egress is provided to all lots.

(4) Parking is provided in accordance with the standard of this chapter for the individual unit either on the new lot or through easements as described in subsection (D)(6) of this section. If assigned parking is provided, it shall meet chapter standards.

(5) Adequate public facilities are provided to the new lot.

(6) The applicant provides deed covenants required that address: parking, maintenance of buildings and utilities, landscaping and common areas, ingress and egress. The deed covenants must be approved by the city attorney and community development director.

(E) Special Conditions. Applicant shall comply with application requirements for a subdivision request, CMC 17.05.040.

(F) Compliance with Approved Plans. A final plat shall be required for the division of land involving four or more lots and shall be in accordance with CMC 17.05.040(E)(5) and (6).

(G) Time Limit on Approvals.

(1) The developer shall submit a final plat, including a survey, within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plat. The community development director may grant time extensions allowing up to 12 additional months for final platting if justifiable cause is shown.

(2) If the community development director has authorized a time schedule for phasing the final platting, that schedule shall apply. The community development director may grant time extensions allowing up to 12 additional months for final platting of each phase if justifiable cause is shown; however, a time extension cannot be granted to allow final platting for any phase to be submitted more than five years from the date the preliminary plat was approved.

(3) If the developer wishes to proceed with the fee ownership land division and has not submitted the final plat within the required time or approved extensions of time, the developer shall resubmit the preliminary plat to the community development director with appropriate information for reprocessing the request according to the provisions for preliminary plat approval in effect at the time of resubmission.

(H) Appeal of a Decision. Appeal of a decision shall be filed in accordance with CMC 18.15.090, and the period for filing the appeal shall be 10 days. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.25; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


Title 18 ZONING

Chapters:

Division I. Introduction and General Provisions

18.05    Introduction and General Provisions

18.10    Application Procedure

18.15    Review Procedures

Division II. Land Use and Zoning Districts

18.20    Single-Family Residential Zone (R-7)

18.25    Single-Family Residential Zone (R-10)

18.30    Manufactured Home Park Zone (MHP)

18.35    Multi-Family Residential Zone (A-2)

18.40    General Commercial Zone (C-1)

18.45    Highway Commercial Zone (C-2)

18.50    Repealed

18.54    Light Industrial Zone (LI)

18.55    General Industrial Zone (M-1)

18.60    Central Mixed Use Zone (CMU)

18.65    Corridor Commercial (CC)

18.70    Core Residential Zone (CR)

18.75    Gateway Mixed Use (GMU)

18.80    Repealed

18.85    Repealed

18.90    Floodplain District (FP)

18.95    Natural Resources Overlay (NRO)

Division III. Types of Permits, Applications and Requests

18.100    Site Design Review

18.105    Conditional Use Permit

18.110    Planned Unit Development (PUD) Conditional Use

18.115    Variances

18.120    Temporary Use Permits

18.125    Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance

18.130    Comprehensive Plan

18.135    Nonconforming Uses

18.140    Community Development Director’s Interpretation

18.141    Administrative Relief

Division IV. Special Regulations

18.143    Transportation Facilities

18.145    Off-Street Parking and Loading

18.147    Street Vacations

18.150    Special Use Regulations

18.155    Solar Access for New Development

18.160    Solar Balance Point

18.165    Solar Access Permit

18.168    Low-Impact Development Practices

18.170    Cultural/Historic Resources

18.175    Signs

18.177    Marijuana Regulations

Division V. Reference Information

18.180    Public Improvement Plan Checking Fees

18.185    Park System Development Charge

18.190    General Reference Information

Division VI. Definitions

18.195    Definitions


Chapter 18.05 INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

18.05.010    Purpose.

18.05.020    Compliance.

18.05.030    Zoning map.

18.05.040    Authorization of similar uses.

18.05.050    Development permit required.

18.05.060    Exclusions from land use approval.

18.05.070    Use of a development.

18.05.080    Fees for land use applications.

18.05.090    Enforcement.

18.05.100    Misrepresentation and revocation of an approval.


18.05.010 Purpose.

This title has been designed in accordance with the goals, policies and statements of intent of the Cornelius comprehensive plan, the officially enacted comprehensive plan for the city of Cornelius and its environs. It is the general purpose of this title, therefore, to provide one of the principal means for the implementation of the Cornelius comprehensive plan.

(A) Consistency with Plans and Laws. Actions initiated under this code shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and with applicable state and federal laws and regulations as these plans, laws, and regulations may now or hereafter provide.

(B) This title is designed to regulate the division of land and to classify, designate and regulate the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses in appropriate places.

(C) Short Title. This title shall be known and may be called the development and zoning code. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.01.]


18.05.020 Compliance.

Except as otherwise specifically provided by this title, no building or other structure shall be constructed, improved, altered, enlarged or moved, nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the city be commenced or changed, nor shall any condition of or upon real property be caused or maintained after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, except in conformity with conditions prescribed for each of the several zones and general regulations established hereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, or use, or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this title contrary to the provisions of this title. Where this title imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control.

(A) No person shall divide land without first complying with the provision of this title and the laws of the state of Oregon.

(B) The terms or words used in this title shall be interpreted as follows where the context demands; words in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive; the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter; the term “this title” shall be deemed to include the text of this title, the accompanying zoning map and all amendments made hereafter to either. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.02.]


18.05.030 Zoning map.

The city is divided into the following zoning districts, each of which shall include a suffix letter designator with its map symbol to indicate its classification:

	ZONING DISTRICT	MAP SYMBOL	DENSITY

	Residential Districts

	Urban Low Density	R-10	Single-Family

	Urban Low Density	R-7	Single-Family

	Urban Medium Density	A-2	Multi-Family

	Core Residential	CR	Multi-Family

	Mobile Home Park	MHP 	 

	Mixed Use Districts

	Central Mixed Use	CMU	 

	Gateway Mixed Use	GMU	 

	Commercial Districts

	General Commercial	C-1	 

	Highway Commercial	C-2	 

	Corridor Commercial	CC	 

	Industrial Districts

	General Industrial	M-1 	 

	Light Industrial	LI	 

	Natural Resource

	Floodplain	FP	 

	Natural Resource Overlay	NRO	 

(A) The boundaries of the zoning districts established in this title are indicated on a map entitled the “Zoning Map of the City of Cornelius” which shall hereinafter be referred to as the “city zoning map.” The city zoning map and all amendments and changes thereto, and all legends, symbols, notations, references and other matters shown thereon, are hereby adopted by reference.

(B) Amendments to the city zoning map may be made in accordance with the provisions of this title. Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the document adopting the map amendment and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting document, on file in the office of the city recorder.

(C) The community development director shall maintain an up-to-date copy of the city zoning map to be revised from time to time so that it accurately portrays changes of zone boundaries. A separate map shall also be maintained and show the location of conditional use permits, planned unit developments, variances and the location of historical uses. The community development director shall maintain a log that identifies the following land use actions: zone change, conditional use, planned unit development, variance, or historical use and the number of the resolution, ordinance, order or other document authorizing the same.

(D) Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the city zoning map or due to any other reason there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundary, the exact location of a district boundary line shall be determined by the community development director in accordance with the following standards:

(1) Street Lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center line or right-of-way line of streets, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.

(2) Street Vacations. Whenever any street is lawfully vacated, and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of lands adjoining such street, such lands formerly within such vacated street shall automatically be subject to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to lands to which same shall attach.

(3) Lot Lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. If a district boundary divides a lot into two or more districts, the entire lot shall be placed in the district that accounts for the greater area of the lot by the adjustment of the district boundary; provided, that the boundary adjustment is for a distance of less than 20 feet. If an adjustment of more than 20 feet is required, the change in the district boundary shall be treated as a change of zone.

(4) Watercourses. District boundary lines are intended to follow the center lines of watercourses unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the city zoning map. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.03; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.05.040 Authorization of similar uses.

When any use is not specifically named in this title, the community development director shall determine whether the use is an outright use, conditional use or prohibited use. A request may be made for a community development director’s interpretation for determination of a use. The director may determine that a use, not specifically designated as an outright or conditional use, shall be one of the allowed uses if the use is of the same general type and is similar to the specified allowed uses. Nothing contained in this section is intended to authorize the inclusion of a use in a zone district where it is not specifically listed when such a use is specifically listed in another zoning district. [Ord. 596 § 1, 1982; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.04; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003.]


18.05.050 Development permit required.

(A) Except as excluded by CMC 18.05.060, no person shall engage in or cause to occur a development for which the appropriate permit has not been issued. The building official shall not issue a permit for the construction, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure or a part of a structure for which the appropriate permit has not been issued.

(B) The appropriate permit shall be issued by the community development director in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter

18.10 CMC. The community development director shall not issue a development permit for the improvement or use of land that has been previously divided or otherwise developed in violation of this code, regardless of whether the permit applicant or its predecessor created the violation, unless the violation can be rectified as part of the development.

(C) Unless appealed, a decision on a development permit shall be final upon expiration of the period provided for filing an appeal or, if appealed, upon rendering of the decision by the reviewing body. [Code 2000 § 11.10.05; amended during 2007 recodification.]


18.05.060 Exclusions from land use approval.

An activity or development listed below is excluded from the requirement for a development permit:

(A) Landscaping or other treatment or use of the land surface of a single-family residential lot not involving a structure, unless the activity involves moving more than 20 cubic yards of fill.

(B) A change internal to a building or other structure that does not substantially affect the use of the structure or an alteration that does not substantially affect the use or external appearance of land or a structure.

(C) Except as otherwise required by Chapters 17.05 and 18.20 CMC, the establishment, construction, or termination of an authorized public facility that directly serves development, including such facilities as a private or public street, sewer, water line, electrical power or gas distribution line, or telephone or television cable system, provided said construction complies with applicable public works standards.

(D) Installation or construction of a building that does not require a building permit.

(E) Minor clearing or grading for purposes of site surveying, or exploratory excavations under direction of a soil engineer or engineer geologists, provided said grading or excavation is consistent with building code requirements.

(F) Exclusion from a permit does not exempt the development or its use from applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan and this code. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.06.]


18.05.070 Use of a development.

A development may be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is not prohibited by law and for which the development is designed, arranged, and intended or which is nonconforming pursuant to Chapter 18.135 CMC.

(A) No structure (except single-family and duplex dwellings) hereinafter erected, moved, enlarged or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use until after a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official. Such certificate shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only after such structure, enlargement, or alteration has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title and with an approved site plan and required conditions, and when the proposed use conforms to this title and to any and all other required conditions. Any use legally occupying an existing building at the time this title became effective may be continued but shall not be changed unless a certificate of occupancy for the new use has been issued by the city after finding that such use conforms to this title and required conditions.

(B) Determination of Compliance with Performance Standards. If the building official is unable to determine from information submitted by the applicant that a proposed use in an industrial zone will comply with the performance standards for the zone in which it is to be located, he shall not issue a certificate of occupancy, but shall request the applicant to authorize the city to secure expert professional advice from firms or individuals acceptable to both the city and the applicant. Professional fees shall be paid by the applicant. The building official may require that the applicant agree to pay professional fees for necessary investigations to determine compliance with the required conditions prior to and after issuance of the certificate of occupancy.

(C) Record. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and copies shall be furnished on request at a reasonable charge to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the subject structure, use or land.

(D) Lawfully Existing Development. For the purposes of this code, lawfully existing uses shall include the following:

(1) All existing lots, properties, buildings, and developments developed in accordance with the comprehensive plan, and as approved by the design review board, planning commission, and/or city manager prior to May 1, 2000.

(2) All development plans, land partitions, and preliminary and final subdivision plats reviewed and approved in accordance with the applicable zoning and subdivision standards prior to May 1, 2000.

(3) All conditional use and temporary permits issued prior to May 1, 2000, shall remain valid consistent with the conditions and time periods in effect on the date of adoption. 

(4) Discontinuation of a lawfully established development/use for one year shall require that all future development/uses conform to current development code standards. [Code 2000 § 11.10.07; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.05.080 Fees for land use applications.

In order to defray expenses incurred in connection with the processing of applications, preparation of reports, publications of notices, issuance of permits and other matters, the city may charge and collect filing and other fees as established by resolution of the council. The required fees shall be paid to the city upon filing of an application or at such other time as may be specified in this title. The city may charge double the usual application fee to those who fail to apply for any permit or other approval required by the city. The failure to submit a required fee with an application or a notice of appeal, including return of checks unpaid or other failure of consideration, may preclude the processing of that application or appeal. [Code 2000 § 11.10.08.]


18.05.090 Enforcement.

The city manager, community development director and/or building official shall enforce the provisions of this title. An appeal from a ruling of the city manager, community development director and/or building official shall be made to the commission.

(A) Appeal to Council. An action or ruling of the commission authorized by this title may be appealed to the council within 10 days after the commission has rendered its decision by filing written notice with the city recorder. If no appeal is taken within the 10-day period, the decision of the commission shall be final. If an appeal is filed, the council shall receive a report and recommendation from the commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements of CMC 18.15.090.

(B) Form of Petitions, Applications, and Appeals. Petitions, applications, and appeals provided for in this title shall be made on forms provided for the purpose or as otherwise prescribed by the commission in order to assure the fullest practical presentation of pertinent facts and to maintain a permanent record. Applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and locations on the lot of the buildings and other structures, existing and proposed; the existing and intended use of each building, structure or part thereof; the number of families to be accommodated, if any; and such other information as is needed to determine their conformance with the provisions of this title and of the building code.

(C) Interpretation. The provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements fulfilling its objectives. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this title or of any other code provisions, ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.

(D) Violations of this title shall be addressed with the following process:

(1) Education. An explanatory letter and visit (within a week of receiving a written complaint), giving two weeks to demonstrate compliance.

(2) Warning. A reminder letter (sent two weeks after the first letter/visit) giving the consequences for not complying or instituting a city-approved compliance plan within a second two weeks.

(3) Citation. Notice to appear in municipal court. 

(4) Initiate revocation under CMC 18.05.100. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.09; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.05.100 Misrepresentation and revocation of an approval.

The community development director may upon a reasonable notice to the applicant revoke and/or recommend denial of an active land use application or land use approval previously authorized. The applicant shall have the opportunity to appeal such an action. 

(A) The community development director may revoke or recommend denial of an active land use application or previously authorized action for any of the following reasons:

(1) Material misrepresentation of fact in the application or in testimony or evidence submitted, whether the misrepresentation is intentional or unintentional.

(2) Failure to comply with the approval and/or conditions of approval within the time and in the manner that was approved without obtaining an extension of time or modification of plans.

(3) Failure to maintain and use the property in accordance with the approved plans and conditions.

(B) Enforcement of Misrepresentation and/or Noncompliance. The community development director’s decision to deny a land use application shall follow procedures in CMC 18.15.010. 

(C) Revocation of a Land Use. The community development director prior to revoking an approved land use application shall follow the steps identified in CMC 18.05.090(D) for code enforcement.

(1) In lieu of a citation, the director shall prepare a report with a notice of decision.

(2) An appeal of the director’s decision shall follow the procedures identified in CMC 18.15.090. [Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


Chapter 18.10 APPLICATION PROCEDURE

Sections:

18.10.010    Plan/zone conformance.

18.10.020    Procedures for processing development permit.

18.10.030    Neighborhood review meeting.

18.10.040    Application documents.

18.10.050    Complete submittal required.

18.10.060    Filing fee.

18.10.070    Jurisdiction and powers.


18.10.010 Plan/zone conformance.

Properties proposed for development or use permits must be appropriately designated for the proposed use on the comprehensive plan and zoned in accordance with said plan, or the application must include a request for the appropriate plan amendment and zone change. [Code 2000 § 11.10.21.]


18.10.020 Procedures for processing development permit.

(A) An application for development permit shall be processed under one of the three procedures set forth in CMC 18.15.010.

(B) When an application and proposed development plan is submitted the community development director shall determine the appropriate procedure specified by the code, together with the determination of affected departments, public agencies, and property owners. Where there is a question as to the appropriate type of procedure, the application shall be processed in accordance with CMC 18.15.010(C).

(C) The community development director shall be responsible for the coordination of the development permit application and decision-making procedure and shall only issue a development permit to an applicant whose application and proposed development is found in compliance with all of the applicable provisions set forth in the comprehensive plan and this title. Before issuing the development permit, the community development director shall be provided with the detail required to establish full compliance with the requirements of this code. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.22; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.10.030 Neighborhood review meeting.

(A) Prior to submittal of a Type III request which requires review by the planning commission, and for the application to be complete, the applicant shall provide an opportunity to meet with neighboring property owners, residents and businesses by conducting a neighborhood meeting.

(B) The purpose of the neighborhood review meeting is to allow the neighbors and residents to become familiar with the proposal and to identify any issues, which may be associated with an application. The intention of the meeting is for submittal of an application that is more responsive to neighborhood concerns, reducing the likelihood for delays and appeals of the application.

(C) The applicant shall send by regular mail a written notice announcing the neighborhood review meeting to the community development director and property owners within 250 feet of the subject property. The notice shall include the date, time and location of the meeting and a brief description of the nature and location of the proposal. The neighborhood review meeting must be held at an accessible location within the Cornelius city limits. The notice shall be deposited in the mail in the city, not less than 20 days prior to the required neighborhood review meeting.

(D) At the neighborhood review meeting, the applicant shall present the proposed application to the neighbors in attendance.

(E) The applicant shall not be required to hold more than one neighborhood review meeting provided such meeting is held within 180 days prior to submitting a land use or design review application for one specific site. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.23; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.10.040 Application documents.

An application for a building or development permit, which is subject to site design review as set forth in Chapter 18.100 CMC shall consist of the materials and information specified in this section, plus any other materials or information required by this code. Required documents shall be submitted to the community development director as follows:

(A) A completed permit application form including identification of the project coordinator, or professional design team if application is in a commercial zone or for a planned unit development.

(B) A narrative addressing the approval criteria, including an explanation of intent; stating the nature of the proposed development, reasons for the permit request, pertinent background information, information required by the development standards and as required by other sections of this code because of the type of development proposal or the area involved or that may have a bearing in determining the action to be taken.

(C) Proof that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership of the applicant or that the applicant has the consent of all individuals or partners in ownership of the affected property. Legal description of the property affected by the applicant.

(D) The application shall include conceptual and quantitatively accurate representations of the entire development sufficient to judge the scope, size, and impact of the development on the community, public facilities, and adjacent properties; and except as otherwise specified in this code.

(E) The number of required documents for completeness review, facilities and design review and planning commission review shall be identified on the application checklist.

(F) Site plans and architectural renderings drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of all structures and other improvements per the approved city application checklist, including an erosion control plan for any building or land development permit. Such a plan shall conform to the standards established by Clean Water Services (CWS) and shall conform to CMC 13.30.020, Clean Water Services of Washington County rules adopted.

(G) The total land area, in square feet devoted to various uses such as total site area, building area (gross and net rentable), parking and paved coverage, landscaped area coverage, and average residential density per net acre. The percentage of site coverage for each use shall also be calculated.

(H) Documentation of Neighborhood Review Meeting, if Required.

(1) A copy of the notice sent to surrounding property owners within 250 feet of the subject parcel.

(2) A copy of the mailing list used to send out meeting notices.

(3) Repealed by Ord. 2017-01.

(4) An affidavit of mailing notices.

(5) Representative copies of written materials and plans presented at the neighborhood review meeting.

(6) Notes of the meeting, including the meeting date, time, and location, the names and addresses of those attending, and oral and written comments received.

(I) An application fee as set by the city council. [Ord. 696 § 1, 1989; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.24; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2017-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.10.050 Complete submittal required.

Application materials shall be submitted to the community development director who shall have the date of submission indicated on each copy submitted. Within 30 calendar days from the date of submission, the community development director shall determine whether an application is complete.

(A) If the community development director determines that the application is incomplete or otherwise does not conform to the provisions of the code, the applicant shall immediately be notified of the negative determination in writing by mail conveying an explanation and a submittal deadline for completion or correction of the application. However, if the application remains incomplete for more than 30 days from the date of notice of negative determination, the materials submitted shall be returned to the applicant and the file shall be closed. If an application is returned and the file closed, resubmittal shall require a new application.

(B) If an application is determined to be complete and in conformance with the provisions of the code, the community development director shall accept it and note the date of acceptance on the application form. The community development director shall then schedule the appropriate review and notify the applicant in writing of the date of the final decision or hearing as set forth in Chapter 18.15 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.25; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.10.060 Filing fee.

The council shall by resolution establish fees and deposits to be paid for all development permits. [Ord. 810, 2000. Code 2000 § 11.10.26.]


18.10.070 Jurisdiction and powers.

(A) Authority of Community Development Director. The community development director shall have authority over the daily administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and shall have specific authority as follows:

(1) Pursuant to Type I procedures set forth in CMC 18.15.010(A), the community development director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny:

(a) Design review Type I requests.

(b) Signs authorized for administrative review.

(c) Lot line adjustments in approved subdivisions and for other legally created lots.

(d) Fence construction permits, consistent with CMC 18.150.020.

(e) A temporary permit consistent with Chapter 18.120 CMC.

(f) Administrative Relief. The community development director may grant or deny a variation from quantifiable provisions of yard, lot coverage, lot area, lot dimension, or parking, to relieve a hardship created by unusual lot conditions or circumstances, provided the request involves only the expansion or reduction of not more than 10 percent of the requirement.

(g) Request for the Community Development Director’s Interpretation. The community development director shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this title.

(2) Pursuant to Type II procedures set forth in CMC 18.15.010(B), the community development director shall approve, approve with conditions, deny, or refer the following applications to the planning commission for a hearing, pursuant to CMC 18.15.010(C):

(a) Design review Type II requests.

(b) Architectural, site development, and landscape plans in compliance with applicable standards.

(c) Land partitions and subdivisions in full compliance with Chapter 17.05 CMC.

(d) A temporary permit consistent with Chapter 18.120 CMC.

(e) Other specific actions or duties delegated by the planning commission, or by order of the city council, setting forth the review procedures guided by clear and objective standards for administration.

(B) Authority of Planning Commission.

(1) As specified in Chapter 2.65 CMC, the commission shall have authority to administer and enforce all the provisions of Chapter 18.15 CMC.

(2) At their earliest regularly scheduled meeting following the date of complete submission, the commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed development. However, if the commission finds that additional information or time is necessary to render a reasonable decision, the matter may be continued to a date certain. The applicant shall be immediately notified in writing of any such continuation or delay together with the scheduled date of review.

(C) Authority of City Council. Upon appeal or upon referral for legislative action, the council shall have final authority to interpret and enforce the procedures and standards set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.27; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.15 REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:

18.15.010    Application review.

18.15.020    Legislative enactments not restricted.

18.15.030    Notice.

18.15.040    Hearing procedures.

18.15.050    Interested officers or employees.

18.15.060    Hearing body – Conflicts of interest.

18.15.070    Ex parte contacts.

18.15.080    Record of proceedings.

18.15.090    Appeal procedures.


18.15.010 Application review.

Applications for site development permits and land divisions shall be reviewed as follows. A zone change shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in CMC 18.125.010.

(A) Type I – Administrative Review. A Type I application shall be processed without need for a public hearing or notification of other property owners.

(B) Type II – Administrative Review. A Type II application shall be processed without need for a public hearing, except as determined appropriate by the community development director.

(1) Upon receipt of an application for a Type II action, public notice of the impending application shall be given pursuant to the provisions of CMC 18.15.030. In addition, notice shall be sent to each member of the planning commission. Notice shall be given for general information purposes to provide affected parties the opportunity to review submitted plans and make their comments to the community development director orally or in writing. The community development director shall not hold a public hearing but may allow affected parties to attend meetings of the city for informational purposes.

(2) If the community development director contemplates that persons other than the applicant can be expected to question the application compliance with the comprehensive plan and development standards, the community development director may initiate a public hearing before the planning commission pursuant to subsection (C) of this section, or the applicant may request that the application for a Type II decision go directly to the planning commission, in which case the notice provision shall follow that for a Type III action as discussed in CMC 18.15.030.

(3) Within 10 working days of the final response date, set forth in the notice, the community development director shall review comments received and make a finding for each of any points in dispute and make a final decision. The final decision and supporting findings shall be forwarded to the applicant and affected parties who submitted comments. The notice of decision shall indicate the date of final action, conditions attached, if any, and the right of appeal pursuant to CMC 18.15.090.

(4) A Type II decision of the community development director may be appealed by the applicant, any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved or anyone who is entitled to notice under CMC 18.15.030(A).

(C) Type III – Commission Review. A Type III request, as set forth in CMC 18.10.070(B), shall be processed with notice and a public hearing pursuant to CMC 18.15.040, as follows:

(1) All Type III requests shall require a preapplication meeting between the applicant and the design review team. The purpose of a preapplication meeting is to obtain a preliminary understanding of the proposed project and to collectively discuss considerations related to planning and land use; building; fire, life, and safety; and public works standards. The community development director shall make available a preapplication meeting request form to be completed and submitted by the applicant to the community development department. Following receipt of the preapplication meeting request form, CDD staff shall schedule a preapplication meeting with the applicant at the earliest available regularly scheduled pre-application meeting date.

(2) Prior to submittal of a Type III request which requires review by the planning commission, and for the application to be complete, the applicant shall provide an opportunity to meet with neighboring property owners, residents and businesses by conducting a neighborhood review meeting.

(3) Once a complete application is accepted the community development director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission at their next regularly scheduled meeting but not more than 45 days from date of complete application submission. Notice shall be provided pursuant to CMC 18.15.030.

(4) The community development director shall prepare a staff report, including conclusionary findings. Said report shall be forwarded to the commission and made available to interested parties at least seven days prior to the date of public hearing. At the public hearing, the staff, any applicant, and interested persons may present information relevant to the policies, criteria, and standards pertinent to the proposal, giving reasons why the application should or should not be approved or proposing modifications or conditions and the reasons the person believes they are necessary for approval. The hearing body shall make a finding for each of the applicable policies, criteria and standards. The decision, including findings, of the hearing body shall be written and adopted, setting forth all conditions of approval or basis for denial and relevant time periods for compliance with said conditions.

(5) The community development director shall provide notice of final decision to the applicant and interested parties. The notice shall indicate the date the action is to become effective, conditions attached, if any, and the right of appeal pursuant to CMC 18.15.090. The notice shall invite persons to submit information within 10 days relevant to the standards pertinent to the proposal and giving reasons why the application should or should not be approved or proposing conditions the person believes are necessary for approval according to the standards. The notice shall also advise the person of the right to appeal the decision on the proposed development if the person’s concerns are not resolved. If the application is approved and no appeal filed within the time period allowed, the community development director shall issue a development permit consistent with the standards and conditions of approval.

(6) A decision of the commission may be appealed by the applicant or affected party pursuant to CMC 18.15.090.

(D) Council Review.

(1) When a decision or approval of the council is required, the community development director shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to CMC 18.15.040. Said hearing shall be scheduled within 60 days of the date of appeal. At the public hearing the staff shall review the report of the planning commission and provide other pertinent information, and interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present testimony and information relevant to the proposal and make final arguments why the matter shall not be approved and, if approved, the nature of the provisions to be contained in approving action.

(2) To the extent that a finding of fact is required, the council shall make a finding for each of the criteria applicable and in doing so may sustain or reverse a finding of the planning commission. The council may delete, add, or modify any of the provisions pertaining to the proposal or attach certain development or use conditions beyond those warranted for compliance with standards in granting an approval if the council determines the conditions are appropriate to fulfill the criteria for approval.

(3) To the extent that a policy is to be established or revised, the council shall make its decision after information from the hearing has been received. The decision shall become effective by passage of an ordinance, resolution, or order. [Code 2000 § 11.10.31; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.15.020 Legislative enactments not restricted.

Nothing in CMC 18.15.010(A) through (D) shall limit the authority of the council to make changes in district designations or requirements as part of some more extensive revision of the comprehensive plan, the implementing ordinance or development standards, or relieve a use or development from compliance with other applicable laws. [Code 2000 § 11.10.32.]


18.15.030 Notice.

(A) Administrative Review. Notice of a Type II administrative review without a hearing shall:

(1) Provide a 20-day period for submitting written comments prior to a final decision;

(2) Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be authorized;

(3) Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

(4) State the date, time and location of the hearing;

(5) Include the name of a local government representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

(6) State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost;

(7) State that any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved or who is entitled to written notice under this section may appeal the decision by filing a written appeal in the manner as provided in CMC 18.15.090;

(8) State that the decision will not become final until the period for filing an appeal has expired;

(9) State that a person who is mailed written notice of the decision cannot appeal the decision directly to the land use board of appeals under ORS 197.830.

Notice under this section shall be provided to the applicant and to the owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located within 250 feet of the property that is the subject of the notice.

(B) Quasi-Judicial Evidentiary Hearing. Notice of a Type III decision before the planning commission or an appeal to the planning commission from a Type I or II decision shall:

(1) Comply with subsections (A)(2) through (6) of this section;

(2) Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 20 days prior to the initial hearing before the planning commission and city council;

(3) List the applicable criteria from this title and the plan that apply to the application at issue;

(4) State that failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the board based on that issue;

(5) State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost; and

(6) Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings.

Notice under this section shall be provided to the applicant and the owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located within 250 feet of the property that is the subject of the notice at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing.

(C) Appeal to City Council. Notice of a hearing on appeal to the city council pursuant to CMC 18.15.090(D) and (E) shall be provided in the following manner:

(1) For an on the record appeal, notice shall state the issues raised in the appeal and comply with subsections (A)(2) through (5) of this section.

(2) For a de novo hearing, state the issues raised in the appeal and comply with the applicable provisions required for a Type III decision under subsection (A)(2) of this section.

(D) Legislative Hearings. A legislative hearing before the planning commission or city council shall be provided in the following manner:

(1) Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 20 days prior to the initial hearing before the planning commission and city council.

(2) Notice shall be provided to all affected agencies and organizations recognized in the comprehensive plan and any person or entity requesting notice.

(3) Notice shall include:

(a) The time, date and location of the hearing.

(b) A summary of the proposed amendments.

(c) A statement that a copy of the proposed amendments are available for review or to purchase a copy. [Code 2000 § 11.10.33; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003.]


18.15.040 Hearing procedures.

(A) Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures for evidentiary hearings set forth in CMC 2.40.020, Government and Administration, or as otherwise amended by city council action.

(B) Decision. Following the hearing procedure, the hearing body shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application, or if the hearing is in the nature of an appeal, affirm, reverse, or remand the decision that is on appeal. A decision on a hearing or an application for a development permit shall be made within 60 days of the application except that with agreement of the hearing body and the applicant or appellant, the processing of a matter under consideration may be extended for a reasonable period of time as determined by the hearing body, but not to exceed six months from the date of the first hearing on the matter.

(C) Findings and Order. The hearing body shall prepare findings of fact and a final order which shall include:

(1) A statement of the applicable criteria against which the proposal was tested, and of the hearing body’s interpretation of what would be required to achieve compliance with the criteria and standards.

(2) A statement of the facts which the hearing body found establishing compliance or noncompliance with each applicable criteria and assurance of compliance with applicable standards.

(3) The reasons for a conclusion to approve or deny.

(4) The decision to deny or approve the proposed change with or without conditions. [Code 2000 § 11.10.34.]


18.15.050 Interested officers or employees.

No officer or employee of the city who has a financial or other private interest in a proposal shall participate in discussion with or give an official opinion to the hearing body on the proposal without first declaring for the record the nature and extent of such interest. [Code 2000 § 11.10.35.]


18.15.060 Hearing body – Conflicts of interest.

(A) A member of the hearing body shall disclose any actual or potential conflict of interest before participating in any hearing body proceeding or action on a planning matter involving action on any particular parcel of real estate. No member shall participate as a member of the hearing body if he has an actual conflict of interest. A member of the hearing body may participate as a member of the public at large in cases where he has an actual conflict of interest.

(B) An actual conflict of interest arises when any of the following persons have direct or substantial financial interest in the particular parcel of real estate or in property immediately adjacent to that real estate:

(1) The member or his spouse;

(2) A brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, or mother-in-law of the member;

(3) Any business associate of the member within the previous two years, a prospective partner, an employer or prospective employer.

(C) If a member of the hearing body shows evidence of or declares a potential conflict of interest, members of the public or other members of the hearing body may challenge his participation in hearing body proceedings on the particular issue involved. Following such a challenge, the member of the hearing body may either withdraw from participation or explain the invalidity of the challenge. In cases of potential conflict, the hearing body member himself will decide on his final participation.

(D) A potential conflict of interest arises when the member has an indirect financial interest in the particular parcel of real estate or in property immediately adjacent to that real estate or exhibits bias toward the real estate, its owners, or its tenants.

(E) Disqualification for reasons other than the member’s own judgment may be ordered by a majority of the members of a hearing body present and voting. The member who is the subject of the motion for disqualification may not vote on the motion.

(F) Rights of Disqualified Member of the Hearing Body.

(1) An abstaining or disqualified member of the hearing body shall be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. A member who represents personal interest at a hearing may do so only by abstaining from voting on the proposal, physically joining the audience and vacating the seat on the hearing body, and making full disclosure of his or her status and position at the time of addressing the hearing body.

(2) If a majority of the hearing body abstains or is disqualified, all members present, after stating their reasons for abstention or disqualification, shall by so doing be requalified and proceed to resolve the issues.

(3) Except for appeal hearings conducted by the council, a member present during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or final decision regarding the matter of the hearing unless the member has reviewed the evidence received. [Code 2000 § 11.10.36; Ord. 2019-03 § 1.]


18.15.070 Ex parte contacts.

The general public has a right to have hearing body members free from prehearing or ex parte contacts on matters heard by them. It is recognized that a countervailing public right is free access to public officials on any matter. Therefore, hearing body members shall reveal any significant prehearing or ex parte contacts with regard to any matter; the member shall so state and shall participate or abstain in accordance with CMC 18.15.060. [Code 2000 § 11.10.37.]


18.15.080 Record of proceedings.

City staff shall be present at each hearing and shall cause the proceedings to be recorded electronically, by computer or in writing:

(A) Testimony shall be transcribed if required for judicial review or if ordered by the hearing body.

(B) The hearing body shall, where practicable, retain as part of the hearing record each item of physical or documentary evidence presented and shall have the items marked to show the identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on behalf of a proponent or opponent. Exhibits received into evidence shall be retained in the hearing file until after the applicable appeal period has expired, at which time the exhibits may be released to the person identified thereon, or otherwise disposed of.

(C) Included in the record shall be a brief statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and explains the justification for the decision based on the criteria, standards, and facts set forth.

(D) A person shall have access to the record of the proceedings at reasonable times, places, and circumstances. A person shall be entitled to make copies of the record at the person’s own expense. [Code 2000 § 11.10.38.]


18.15.090 Appeal procedures.

(A) Reviewing Body.

(1) Type I and II Decisions. An appeal of a decision by the community development director on issuance of a development permit may be appealed to the planning commission.

(2) Type III Decision. A decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the council.

(B) Timeliness of Appeal.

(1) An appeal must be received by the city within 10 working days of the date the notice of the decision was mailed.

(2) Failure to receive the appeal within 10 working days is jurisdictional.

(3) The day the notice of the decision was mailed shall not be included for purposes of determining the expiration of the appeal period.

(C) Contents of an Appeal. The appeal shall set forth:

(1) The name of the person or entity appealing the decision.

(2) The decision being appealed.

(3) A statement of the issue(s) being appealed with sufficient specificity to allow the city and any person an opportunity to respond.

(D) Hearing on Appeal.

(1) Planning Commission. An appeal to the planning commission shall be de novo.

(2) City Council. An appeal to the council shall be on the record unless otherwise approved by the city council under subsection (E) of this section. The record shall include:

(a) A staff report.

(b) All written documents or other evidence submitted to the city in the proceeding before the planning commission and, if applicable, the proceeding before the community development director.

(c) The transcript of the hearing before the planning commission.

(d) Any notices provided by the city.

(E) Petition for a De Novo Hearing before City Council. The applicant may petition the city council for a de novo hearing. The city will not accept a petition unless the applicant provides a written extension of the 120-day period under state law for a period of 30 days. The city council shall take final action on the request within 30 days. The decision to approve or deny this request shall be based on the following factors:

(1) Prejudice to the parties.

(2) Convenience or availability of evidence at the time of the initial hearing.

(3) Surprise to opposing parties.

(4) The competency, relevancy, and materiality of the proposed testimony or other evidence.

The council may allow a new evidentiary hearing or limit new evidence to the issues raised in the appeal. The request shall be decided at a public meeting without hearing or comment. Any comments on the city council’s decision on whether to accept additional evidence may be presented at the time of the appeal hearing.

(F) Effective Date of Decisions. A decision of the community development director or planning commission shall become effective 11 working days after the date of the decision unless an appeal is received by the city in accordance with subsection (A) of this section. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.10.39; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.20 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-7)

Sections:

18.20.010    Purpose.

18.20.020    Permitted uses.

18.20.030    Conditional uses.

18.20.040    Prohibited uses.

18.20.050    Area, density and lot requirements.

18.20.060    Site development standards.

18.20.070    Manufactured housing on individual lots.

18.20.080    Home occupation.

18.20.090    Accessory dwellings.


18.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the single-family residential (R-7) zone is to implement the low density residential land use designation and policies of the comprehensive plan. The R-7 is intended to establish low density residential home sites where a minimum gross acreage of 7,000 square feet is available for each dwelling unit. To do this, the R-7 single-family residential zone regulates the construction of single-family homes on existing lots, and provides design guidance for single-family residential subdivisions. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.01.]


18.20.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in an R-7 zone:

(A) Site-built detached single-family dwelling; and detached single-family manufactured housing, subject to CMC 18.20.070.

(B) Underground public utilities.

(C) Accessory uses and/or accessory structures or both which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the above uses, including approved carports, garages, or storage facilities. See CMC 18.150.010.

(D) Accessory dwelling unit subject to CMC 18.20.090.

(E) Home occupation consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(F) Residential home consistent with state law.

(G) Type “A” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.02; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.20.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Governmental structure or use including public and private park, playground, community center and noncommercial recreational facilities, golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, fire station, library or museum.

(B) School – Nursery, primary, elementary, junior or senior high, college or university.

(C) Utility substation or above ground pumping station with no equipment storage.

(D) Duplex, subject to lot area standards and design review.

(E) Common wall single-family dwellings as defined in CMC 18.195.040.

(F) Home occupation consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(G) A planned unit development, including mixed uses approved by the planning commission and as provided for under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(H) Church, and associated church activities, except commercial day care.

(I) A manufactured structure for temporary educational purposes subject to the following required conditions in addition to other conditions which may be imposed under Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(1) Placed upon a permanent concrete or concrete block foundation and supplied with a continuous perimeter skirting that extends at least six inches below the surface of the ground or to an impervious surface. The skirting shall be composed of the same material and finish as the exterior of the unit or of brick or concrete block, or as may be approved by the planning commission.

(2) Placed a maximum of 18 inches above ground level at any point, unless the unit is placed upon a basement foundation, or unless approved by the planning commission.

(3) Manufactured after June 15, 1976, and bear the Oregon Department of Commerce “Insignia of Compliance” indicating conformance with HUD standards. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.03; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.20.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses shall be prohibited within the R-7 zone:

(A) Recreational vehicles or other movable temporary dwellings used as a residence or accessory sleeping units, except as lodging for guests not to exceed two weeks.

(B) More than one dwelling unit on a single lot, except for an accessory dwelling unit or a duplex as approved through CMC 18.20.030.

(C) Retail sales, except for when over the Internet and where applicable in compliance with the home occupation permit requirements.

(D) Heavy manufacturing and processing.

(E) Parking and storage of construction equipment, semi-tractors and trailers.

(F) The raising of animals other than normal household pets.

(G) Freestanding wind turbines. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.04; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.20.050 Area, density and lot requirements.

(A) Maximum Density. The average density over the entire development shall not exceed five dwellings per net acre. A net acre is equal to 32,670 square feet, and excludes roads, common open space, floodplains, riparian setbacks, and slopes over 25 percent.

(1) No lot shall be less than 6,000 square feet for single-family detached units. Duplexes or common wall single-family dwellings shall have at least 4,500 square feet of lot area per unit, except as may be approved as part of a planned unit development.

(2) In the case of flag lots, the pole portion of the lot shall not count towards the required lot area.

(B) Minimum Density. The minimum density allowed is four dwellings per net acre. Any land partition or subdivision shall make provisions to ensure that the minimum density is protected when further partitioning is possible.

(C) Maximum Height. Building height, as defined in CMC 18.195.080, shall not exceed 35 feet, except for a chimney, radio, television antenna, or solar feature (see CMC 18.195.190, S definitions).

(D) Minimum Yard Area Setbacks.

(1) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the furthest extension of the home, including porch or decks, shall not be less than 10 feet. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 20 feet.

(2) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth.

(3) Side Yard. The minimum width of side yards shall be not less than five feet, as measured from the foundation of the home. On corner lots the side yard facing the street shall not be less than 10 feet. Common wall single-family dwellings shall have a zero-foot side yard setback on the side where the common wall is located.

(4) No accessory building or other structure or building shall be closer than three feet from a side or rear property line; see CMC 18.150.010.

(5) Lot Coverage. The area occupied by the home, and all accessory buildings and structures on the lot shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area.

(6) All setbacks shall be measured from Clean Water Services (CWS) required buffer areas, where applicable.

(E) Minimum Lot Shape.

(1) No single-family lot shall be less than 60 feet in width or less than 60 feet in depth, except as may be approved as part of a planned unit development.

(2) In the case of in-fill development on parcels, as defined by the city’s current vacant land inventory, the commission may allow the lot width to be reduced to 50 feet.

(3) In the case of in-fill development on parcels, as defined by the current city vacant land inventory, the lot width at the street may be reduced to not less than 20 feet for a single lot and not less than 30 feet for two dwelling units. A flag design shall serve no more than two lots. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.05; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.20.060 Site development standards.

(A) Perimeter Requirements. If topographical or other barriers within the development do not provide adequate buffering between a subdivision and adjacent nonresidential development, the reviewing body may impose one or more of the following requirements.

(1) Where the subdivision abuts an arterial or collector street or an existing planned unit development, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 25 feet wide, and/or sound mitigation structures be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip, which shall be set aside as a separate tract, and provisions for pedestrian connections through the landscape strip may also be required.

(2) Where the subdivision abuts an existing or planned nonresidential area, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 50 feet wide, be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip, which shall be set aside as a separate tract, and provisions for pedestrian connections through the landscape strip may also be required.

(3) All driveways and landscaped areas shall comply with vision clearance standards set forth in subsection (B) of this section.

(B) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to residential subdivisions shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets. Access to individual lots shall be primarily from local streets or alleyways when the alleyway is developed to current public works standards. Direct lot access to arterials or collector streets shall not be permitted, unless there is no alternative as determined by the city engineer.

(2) The minimum street width shall comply with the adopted public works standards.

Public and/or private alleys or both shall be constructed to city standards as approved by the city engineer.

(3) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(C) Access Streets – Sidewalks – Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, and the subdivision code.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 12 feet and shall not be more than 25 feet in width at the curb. Each driveway shall have a concrete curb apron designed to comply with public works standards, and not more than two lots may be served by one shared driveway,

(3) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than 12 residential units and meet current public works design standards.

(4) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street trees shall be provided along the entire lot frontage, per the public works public utilities design standards, and shall meet ADA accessibility standards. In the case of remodels or garage additions to an existing house no sidewalk shall be required if one does not exist, but the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be required.

(5) Storm drainage shall meet current public works design standards and shall comply with Clean Water Service (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(D) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(E) Mailboxes. Except for in-fill partitioning, clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the post master. They shall be of uniform style.

(F) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Resident. One covered parking space shall be provided for each home either on an individual lot or in an off-street parking bay within 100 feet from the dwelling being served. For an accessory dwelling, one additional off-street parking space is required. However, the commission may waive this additional parking space, if appropriate on-street parking is available within 100 feet of the lot.

(b) Guest. Where on-street parking is prohibited on both sides of a street, guest parking shall be provided in off-street parking bays at the rate of one parking space for every three home sites along the street section. Guest parking should be in close proximity to the homes being served.

(c) Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Vehicles of Similar Size. Recreational vehicles such as camping trailers, boats, campers, motor homes, and other such vehicles and vehicles of similar size shall only be parked or stored within an area specifically designated and designed for such use, and shall not be located in the public right-of-way.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking areas shall be paved and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of the zoning ordinance.

(G) Open Space. Within residential developments containing 20 or more lots or units there shall be, at least, 300 square feet of recreational space per unit provided in public open space for single-family development. Such space may be considered as part of any required landscaping, but must be designed in a manner that affords residents usable open area, such as lawns, patios, etc. Delineated wetlands recognized by the Division of State Lands may apply 20 percent of their area located on the subject parcel(s) to the open space requirement. Calculate the total square footage of delineated wetland area on the subject parcel(s) and multiply it by 20 percent. Streets, access drives and parking lots shall not be considered open space. Open space must be a usable open recreational area, and may include a club house or indoor recreation facility. All outdoor area shall be landscaped and maintained by the owner, or a homeowners’ association, according to the approved development plans, unless the open space is dedicated to and accepted by the city as a public park. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.06; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.20.070 Manufactured housing on individual lots.

All manufactured homes on individual lots within the R-7 zone shall:

(A) Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet.

(B) All manufactured homes shall be skirted with a minimum of smooth face or split face concrete blocking or similar material.

(C) Have a pitched roof with at least a nominal slope of one foot in height for each three feet in width.

(D) Have exterior siding and roofing material which in color, material grade, and appearance is comparable to the exterior siding and roofing material predominantly used on surrounding residential dwellings.

(E) Be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards required of site-built single-family construction under the State Building Code (1981) as defined by ORS 455.010.

(F) Have at least one covered off-street parking space constructed of like materials as the home.

(G) Comply with all federal, state and local building codes for placement, occupation and storage. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.07; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.20.080 Home occupation.

Home occupations may be allowed as follows:

(A) Type A. Allowed through a Type I administrative review consistent with the following:

(1) There are no structural alterations or changes necessary to the dwelling or accessory building, or to the premises in order to conduct the business operations; and

(2) There is no outdoor display or storage, nor indoor display or storage, of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the dwelling; and

(3) The business is conducted by members of the immediate family, all of whom reside in the residence and there are no additional employees; and

(4) Personal appearances by customers on the property are limited to one at a time, and not more than eight customers per day; and

(5) There is no external signage which informs potential customers of the location of the residential dwelling for the purpose of attracting customers to the dwelling; and

(6) The business activity does not create noise levels audible above normal ambient residential levels beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; and

(7) The activities do not attract more than three commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; and

(8) The home occupation may not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; and

(9) In the case of home child care, there are not more than 16 children total and the operator is appropriately registered and/or certified by the state; and

(10) The owner has and maintains a valid city business license.

(B) Type B. Allowed by approval of the planning commission through a Type III application, and subject to the following:

(1) There are structural alterations or changes necessary to the dwelling, accessory building, or to the premises in order to conduct the business operations, and/or a new accessory building is needed to conduct the normal operations of the business; and

(2) There is no outdoor display or storage, nor indoor display or storage, of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the dwelling; and

(3) The business is conducted by members of the immediate family living on the premises and/or not more than one employee who does not reside in the residence; and

(4) Personal appearances by customers on the property are limited to three at a time, and not more than 10 customers per day; and

(5) The business activity does not create noise levels audible above normal ambient residential levels beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; and

(6) The activities do not attract more than five commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; and

(7) The home occupation may not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; and

(8) The owner has and maintains a valid city business license; and

(9) There is no accessory dwelling associated with the primary residence. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.08; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.20.090 Accessory dwellings.

(A) A second or secondary, self-contained, one-bedroom living unit with separate entrance and kitchen, developed in conjunction with an existing single-family home and usually created in one of the following ways:

(1) From existing space in the primary dwelling;

(2) From a combination of existing and newly created space associated with the primary dwelling;

(3) From space within an existing accessory building, such as a detached garage; or

(4) From the addition of a new accessory building associated with an existing single-family home.

(B) Accessory dwellings shall comply with the following:

(1) The owner(s) of the primary dwelling shall occupy at least one of the units.

(2) There shall be a minimum of 250 square feet of floor area for each occupant, and there shall be no more than two occupants, and the unit shall not exceed 800 square feet, or 30 percent of the total floor area of the primary dwelling.

(3) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided, unless waived by the planning commission.

(4) The exterior architectural design and building materials are consistent with those of the primary dwelling, and there shall be only one front door facing the street.

(5) All yard area requirements of the base zone shall be met, and the unit shall comply with the fire and life safety codes. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.09.]


Chapter 18.25 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-10)

Sections:

18.25.010    Purpose.

18.25.020    Permitted uses.

18.25.030    Conditional uses.

18.25.040    Prohibited uses.

18.25.050    Area, density and lot requirements.

18.25.060    Site development standards.

18.25.070    Manufactured housing on individual lots.

18.25.080    Home occupation.

18.25.090    Accessory dwellings.


18.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the single-family residential (R-10) zone is to implement the low density residential land use designation and policies of the comprehensive plan. To do this, the R-10 single-family residential zone regulates the construction of single-family homes on existing lots, and provides design guidance for single-family residential subdivisions. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.11.]


18.25.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in an R-10 zone:

(A) Site-built detached single-family dwelling and detached single-family manufactured housing, subject to CMC 18.20.070.

(B) Underground public utilities.

(C) Accessory uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the above uses, including approved carports, garages, or storage facilities. See CMC 18.150.010.

(D) Accessory dwelling unit, subject to CMC 18.20.090.

(E) Home occupation consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(F) Residential home consistent with state law.

(G) Type “A” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.12; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.25.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Governmental structure or use including public and private park, playground, community center and noncommercial recreational facilities, golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, fire station, library or museum.

(B) School – Nursery, primary, elementary, junior or senior high, college or university.

(C) Utility substation or above ground pumping station with no equipment storage.

(D) Duplex, subject to lot area standards and design review.

(E) Home occupation consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(F) A planned unit development, including mixed uses approved by the planning commission and as provided for under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(G) Church, and associated church activities, except commercial day care.

(H) A manufactured structure for temporary educational purposes subject to the following required conditions in addition to other conditions which may be imposed under Chapter 18.105 CMC, Conditional Uses. Placed upon a permanent concrete or concrete block foundation and supplied with a continuous perimeter skirting that extends at least six inches below the surface of the ground or to an impervious surface. The skirting shall be composed of the same material and finish as the exterior of the unit or of brick or concrete block, or as may be approved by the planning commission.

(1) Placed a maximum of 18 inches above ground level at any point, unless the unit is placed upon a basement foundation, or unless approved by the planning commission.

(2) Manufactured after June 15, 1976, and bear the Oregon Department of Commerce “Insignia of Compliance” indicating conformance with HUD standards. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.13; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.25.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses shall be prohibited within the R-10 zone:

(A) Recreational vehicles or other movable temporary dwellings used as a residence or accessory sleeping units, except as lodging for guests not to exceed two weeks.

(B) More than one dwelling unit on a single lot, except for an accessory dwelling unit or a duplex as approved through CMC 18.20.030.

(C) Retail sales, except for when over the Internet.

(D) Heavy manufacturing and processing.

(E) Parking and storage of construction equipment, semi-tractors and trailers.

(F) The raising of animals other than normal household pets. 

(G) Freestanding wind turbines. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.14; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.25.050 Area, density and lot requirements.

(A) Minimum Density. The minimum density allowed is three dwellings per net acre. Any land partition or subdivision shall make provisions to ensure that the minimum density is protected when further partitioning is possible.

(1) No lot shall be less than 10,000 square feet for single-family detached units. Duplexes shall have at least 6,000 square feet of lot area per unit, except as may be approved as part of a planned unit development.

(2) In the case of flag lots, the pole portion of the lot shall not count towards the required lot area.

(B) Maximum Height. Building height, as defined in CMC 18.195.080, shall not exceed 35 feet, except for a chimney, radio, television antenna, or solar feature (see CMC 18.195.190, S definitions).

(C) Minimum Yard Area Setbacks.

(1) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the furthest extension of the home including porch or deck, shall not be less than 25 feet. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 25 feet.

(2) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 25 feet in depth.

(3) Side Yard. The minimum width of side yards shall be not less than 10 feet, as measured from the foundation of the home. On corner lots the side yard facing the street shall not be less than 20 feet.

(4) No accessory building or other structure or building shall be closer than three feet from a side or rear property line.

(5) Lot Coverage. The area occupied by the home and all accessory buildings and structures on the lot shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area.

(D) Minimum Lot Shape. No single-family lot shall be less than 80 feet in width or less than 80 feet in depth, except as may be approved as part of a planned unit development. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.15; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.25.060 Site development standards.

(A) Perimeter Requirements. If topographical or other barriers within the development do not provide adequate buffering between a subdivision and adjacent nonresidential development, the reviewing body may impose one or more of the following requirements.

(1) Where the subdivision abuts an arterial or collector street or an existing planned unit development, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 25 feet wide, and/or sound mitigation structures be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip, which shall be set aside as a separate tract, and provisions for pedestrian connections through the landscape strip may also be required.

(2) Where the subdivision abuts an existing or planned nonresidential area, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 50 feet wide, be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip, which shall be set aside as a separate tract, and provisions for pedestrian connections through the landscape strip may also be required.

(3) All driveways and landscaped areas shall comply with vision clearance standards set forth in subsection (B) of this section. All landscaping shall comply with the general landscaping standards set forth in subsection (C) of this section.

(B) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to residential subdivisions shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets. Access to individual lots shall be primarily from local streets or alleyways when the alleyway is developed to current public works standards. Direct lot access to arterials or collector streets shall not be permitted, unless there is no alternative as determined by the city engineer.

(2) The minimum street width shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(C) Access Streets – Sidewalks – Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, and the subdivision code.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 12 feet and shall not be more than 25 feet in width at the curb. Each driveway shall have a concrete curb apron designed to comply with public works standards, and not more than two lots may be served by one shared driveway.

(3) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than 12 residential units and meet current public works design standards.

(4) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, and a minimum five-foot-wide sidewalk shall be provided along the entire lot frontage and shall meet ADA accessibility standards. In the case of remodels or garage additions to an existing house, no sidewalk shall be required if one does not exist, but the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be required.

(5) Storm drainage shall meet current public works design standards and shall comply with Clean Water Service (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity. 

(D) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(E) Mailboxes. Except for in-fill partitioning, clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the post master. They shall be of uniform style.

(F) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Resident. One covered parking space shall be provided for each home either on an individual lot or in an off-street parking bay within 100 feet from the dwelling being served. For an accessory dwelling, one additional off-street parking space is required. However, the commission may waive this additional parking space, if appropriate on-street parking is available within 100 feet of the lot.

(b) Guest. Where on-street parking is prohibited on both sides of a street, guest parking shall be provided in off-street parking bays at the rate of one parking space for every three home sites along the street section. Guest parking should be in close proximity to the homes being served.

(c) Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Vehicles of Similar Size. Recreational vehicles such as camping trailers, boats, campers, motor homes, and other such vehicles and vehicles of similar size shall only be parked or stored within an area specifically designated and designed for such use, and shall not be located in the public right-of-way.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking areas shall be paved and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of the zoning ordinance. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.16; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.25.070 Manufactured housing on individual lots.

All manufactured homes on individual lots within the R-10 zone shall:

(A) Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet.

(B) Have a pitched roof with at least a nominal slope of one foot in height for each three feet in width.

(C) Have exterior siding and roofing material which in color, material grade, and appearance is comparable to the exterior siding and roofing material predominantly used on surrounding residential dwellings in the zoning district.

(D) Be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards required of site-built single-family construction under the State Building Code (1981) as defined by ORS 455.010.

(E) Have at least one covered off-street parking space constructed of like materials as the home.

(F) Have skirting that consists of smooth or split face concrete blocks.

(G) Comply with all federal, state, and local building codes for placement, occupation and storage. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.17; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.25.080 Home occupation.

Home occupations may be allowed as follows:

(A) Type A. Allowed through a Type I administrative review consistent with the following:

(1) There are no structural alterations or changes necessary to the dwelling or accessory building, or to the premises in order to conduct the business operations; and

(2) There is no outdoor display or storage, nor indoor display or storage, of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the dwelling; and

(3) The business is conducted by members of the immediate family, all of whom reside in the residence and there are no additional employees; and

(4) Personal appearances by customers on the property are limited to one at a time, and not more than eight customers per day; and

(5) There is no external signage which informs potential customers of the location of the residential dwelling for the purpose of attracting customers to the dwelling; and

(6) The business activity does not create noise levels audible above normal ambient residential levels beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; and

(7) The activities do not attract more than three commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; and

(8) The home occupation may not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; and

(9) The owner has and maintains a valid city business license; and

(10) In the case of home child care, there are not more than 16 children total and the operator is appropriately registered and/or certified by the state.

(B) Type B. Allowed by approval of the planning commission through a Type III application, and subject to the following:

(1) There are structural alterations or changes necessary to the dwelling, accessory building, or to the premises in order to conduct the business operations, and/or a new accessory building is needed to conduct the normal operations of the business; and

(2) There is no outdoor display or storage, nor indoor display or storage, of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the dwelling; and

(3) The business is conducted by members of the immediate family living on the premises and/or not more than one employee who does not reside in the residence; and

(4) Personal appearances by customers on the property are limited to three at a time, and not more than 10 customers per day; and

(5) The business activity does not create noise levels audible above normal ambient residential levels beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; and

(6) The activities do not attract more than five commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; and

(7) The home occupation may not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; and

(8) The owner has and maintains a valid city business license; and

(9) There is no accessory dwelling associated with the primary residence. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.18; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.25.090 Accessory dwellings.

(A) A second or secondary, self-contained, one-bedroom living unit with separate entrance and kitchen, developed in conjunction with an existing single-family home and usually created in one of the following ways:

(1) From existing space in the primary dwelling;

(2) From a combination of existing and newly created space associated with the primary dwelling;

(3) From space within an existing accessory building, such as a detached garage; or

(4) From the addition of a new accessory building associated with an existing single-family home.

(B) Accessory dwellings shall comply with the following:

(1) The owner(s) of the primary dwelling shall occupy at least one of the units.

(2) There shall be a minimum of 250 square feet of floor area for each occupant, and there shall be no more than two occupants, and the unit shall not exceed 800 square feet, or 30 percent of the total floor area of the primary dwelling.

(3) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided, unless waived by the planning commission.

(4) The exterior architectural design and building materials are consistent with those of the primary dwelling, and there shall be only one front door facing the street.

(5) All yard area requirements of the base zone shall be met, and the unit shall comply with the fire and life safety codes. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.19.]


Chapter 18.30 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK ZONE (MHP)

Sections:

18.30.010    Purpose.

18.30.020    Permitted uses.

18.30.030    Prohibited uses.

18.30.040    Approval process.

18.30.050    Modifications – Existing parks.

18.30.060    Area, density and height requirements.

18.30.070    Site development standards.

18.30.080    Manufactured home installation.

18.30.090    Prior approvals.


18.30.010 Purpose.

These provisions are intended to regulate the establishment of manufactured home parks and shall also apply to modifications, enlargements, or amendments to existing manufactured home parks, including removal and replacement of homes. The purpose of these regulations is:

(A) To provide for mobile home parks as a use permitted outright in the manufactured home park zone.

(B) To assist in providing opportunities for low and moderately priced single-family housing.

(C) To provide opportunities for upgrading and updating of dwelling units within existing mobile home parks, thereby improving living conditions for mobile home owners.

(D) To provide standards to ensure a high-quality living environment within mobile home parks.

(E) To recognize and support the basic design concept that manufactured home parks tend to be closed, safe environments isolated from major traffic flows, while at the same time providing for appropriate collector street connectivity.

(F) To provide standards to ensure compatibility with residential, commercial, and/or industrial development adjacent to mobile home parks.

(G) These provisions are intended to conform to state definitions as set forth in ORS 446.003 established by the Department of Commerce, Building Codes Agency, OAR Chapter 918, Division 600, General Rules. However, the standards set forth herein supersede those set in the state code, and any discrepancy with the state code shall be governed by the city standard. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.21.]


18.30.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses may be permitted within manufactured home parks, provided they are designated on the approved development plan:

(A) Manufactured home dwellings with a minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum floor area of 672 square feet.

(B) Parks, playgrounds, community centers and noncommercial recreational facilities such as golf courses, shuffleboard courts, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms, libraries and similar uses.

(C) Public utilities.

(D) Accessory uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the above uses, including approved carports, garages, or storage facilities.

(E) Use of a manufactured home as a park manager’s office, or as a temporary sales office for the park during and immediately following construction.

(F) Other conditional uses, including neighborhood commercial, considered compatible and complementary to the park and neighborhood, as may be approved by the planning commission in a public hearing.

(G) Type “A” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC, subject to approval by the community development director. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.22; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.30.030 Prohibited uses.

The following uses shall be prohibited within mobile home parks:

(A) Sales lot for manufactured homes or other movable dwellings, including recreational vehicles. This provision shall not prohibit the sale of a manufactured home on the space it is intended to occupy.

(B) Conventional single-family and multi-family units.

(C) The raising of animals other than normal household pets. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.23.]


18.30.040 Approval process.

(A) These provisions address three types of actions:

(1) The replacement of a manufactured home in an existing manufactured home park, as a Type I process.

(2) A modification, enlargement or change to an existing manufactured home park, as a Type II process.

(3) The establishment of a manufactured home park, as a Type III process.

(B) Replacement of a Manufactured Home. Consistent with Type I procedures, a manufactured home in an existing manufactured home park may be removed and replaced by another manufactured home upon issuance of a manufactured home placement permit, issued by the community development director, subject to the following standards:

(1) The front and rear setbacks shall be as set forth in CMC 18.30.060(D)(1) or equal to the setback of the replaced unit, whichever is less.

(2) The side yard setback shall be as set forth in CMC 18.30.060(D)(3) or equal to the setback of the replaced unit, whichever is less.

(3) Within existing parks, where specific lot lines were not previously shown on a master plan, yards and lot lines shall be defined by an assumed line half the distance of the established building separation, or the actual distance from the foundation line of a manufactured home to the perimeter lot line of the park or to the edge of the street or interior roadway.

(4) An existing manufactured home that does not meet the minimum safety standards established by HUD may be replaced by a manufactured dwelling unit that meets HUD safety standards as long as the replacement unit maintains the minimum separation requirements as defined by the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

(C) Establishment of a Manufactured Home Park.

(1) The establishment of a manufactured home park is a two-part process. It involves:

(a) General design approval of a master site plan by the city’s planning commission. The approval standards shall be the site development standards set forth in CMC 18.30.060 and 18.30.070, and other applicable provisions of the city code; and

(b) Design review approval of a master site plan by the city’s facilities and design review committee.

(2) No construction approval permit shall be given by the city until the applicant has received approval from the planning commission and facilities and design review committee.

(D) A Modification, Enlargement or Change to an Existing Manufactured Home Park. The approval of a modification, enlargement or change to an existing manufactured home park is a Type II process. It involves:

(1) Satisfaction of the standards set forth in CMC 18.30.050; and

(2) No construction approval or permit shall be given by the city until the applicant has received approval from the facilities and design review committee. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.24; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.30.050 Modifications – Existing parks.

(A) Prior to consideration, under subsection (B) of this section, of any modification, enlargement or change to an existing manufactured home park, a master site plan shall be submitted and approved by the design and facilities review committee which shall conform to the provisions of CMC 18.30.060 and 18.30.070. Any changes which conform to the approved plan shall not require any additional approvals.

(B) Prior to implementing any modification, enlargement or change consistent with the approved master site plan, an application shall be submitted which satisfies the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, Partial Site Plan, to the community development director for approval for each modification. The community development director shall determine if the proposed modification, enlargement or change is consistent with the approved overall site plan. The community development director shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions consistent with the provisions of this code, or deny any application. Notice of an approval or approval with conditions shall be given to all property owners and manufactured home owners within 250 feet of the area being modified. The decision of the community development director shall be appealable to the planning commission by any person who is aggrieved or has interests adversely affected by the decision. A notice of appeal shall be filed in the office of the community development director not later than 10 working days after the date of the notice of the decision.

(C) Partial Site Plan.

(1) An application for any modification to an existing manufactured home park shall place on record a partial site plan with approximate dimensions showing that the provisions of this zone are satisfied and which includes:

(a) A narrative statement which states the number of units allowed on the site by the approved master site plan, the number of existing units, and the number of units being added or deleted. If there is not an approved master site plan, then the applicant shall provide a scaled aerial photo, no more than two years old, of the entire park, and including at least 100 feet around the perimeter of the park. The average setbacks shall be documented as a basis for determining yard requirements for replacement units.

(b) Drawings to scale which show the dimensions and height of any buildings on the site.

(c) A drawing to scale which shows the size of a manufactured home being added, deleted or moved, and the relationship of the manufactured home to the setback requirements set forth in CMC 18.30.060.

(d) A list of names of all persons owning property or manufactured homes within 250 feet of the manufactured home park area being modified.

(e) A fee in an amount determined by the city council.

(2) Each portion of the park being modified shall satisfy the applicable requirements outlined in CMC 18.30.060 through 18.30.090. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.25; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.30.060 Area, density and height requirements.

(A) Minimum Area Dimensions. The minimum area for a manufactured home park shall be four acres. The minimum width of the tract for portions used only for vehicular access shall be 60 feet. For portions containing manufactured home spaces and buildings open generally to occupants of the park, the minimum dimension shall be 200 feet.

(B) Maximum Density. The average density over the entire development shall not exceed 10 dwellings per gross acre. Portions of the manufactured home park where grades exceed 15 percent shall not be included in the gross area computation.

(C) Maximum Height. No building in a manufactured home park shall exceed two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less, except for a chimney, radio or television antenna.

(D) Minimum Yard Area, Setbacks, Lot Size and Shape.

(1) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the furthest extension of the manufactured home including porch or deck, shall not be less than 10 feet from the back of the sidewalk. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk.

(2) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth. However, where a rear yard abuts a perimeter landscape strip, the rear yard may be reduced to five feet.

(3) Side Yard. The minimum width of side yards shall be not less than seven and one-half feet, as measured from the edge of the eave or the furthest extension of the manufactured home or accessory structure to the edge of the manufactured home space.

(4) Distance between Manufactured Homes. Neighboring manufactured homes shall be separated by an average distance of at least 15 feet, but in no case shall manufactured dwelling units be closer than 10 feet. No accessory building or other structure or building on a manufactured home space shall be closer than 10 feet from other buildings or structures on the same space, or another manufactured home.

(5) Distance between Manufactured Homes and Other Nonresidential Buildings. Manufactured homes shall be no closer than 20 feet to any permitted building other than another manufactured home or an accessory structure on a manufactured home space.

(6) Lot Lines. Manufactured home lot lines need not be perpendicular to streets or radial to curves, but shall be clearly identified on the master site plan, and identifiable on-site.

(7) Lot Coverage. The area occupied by the manufactured home, accessory buildings and structures on the lot shall not exceed 75 percent of the lot area.

(E) No manufactured home space shall be less than 30 feet in width or less than 85 feet in length, unless legally created prior to May 1, 2000. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.26.]


18.30.070 Site development standards.

(A) Open Space. There shall be at least 200 square feet of open space for each unit in the park provided in common open space. However, the minimum required area shall be 5,000 square feet. Streets, access drives and parking lots shall not be considered open space. Open space must be a usable open recreational area, and shall be landscaped and maintained by the park owner according to the approved master site plan.

(B) Perimeter Requirements. If topographical or other barriers within the development do not provide adequate buffering between the manufactured home park and adjacent development, the reviewing body may impose one or more of the following requirements:

(1) Where the manufactured home park abuts an arterial or collector street or an existing or planned residential area, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 25 feet wide, be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip.

(2) Where the manufactured home park abuts an existing or planned nonresidential area, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 50 feet wide, be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip.

(3) Where required above, the reviewing body may require that perimeter strips be landscaped in a manner to buffer and screen from view adjoining commercial and industrial uses from the manufactured home park. Such buffering or screening shall be in place prior to issuance of home siting permits. Either of the following techniques may be used:

(a) A six-foot-high earthen berm, with 75 percent of the area planted with evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover arranged so as to create an effective buffer and visual screen; or

(b) A six-foot-high decorative masonry wall, or combination masonry wall and wooden fence, and a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover arranged so as to create an effective buffer and visual screen.

(4) All required landscaped areas shall comply with the general landscaping standards and vision clearance standards set forth below.

(C) Landscape Plan. In addition to the open space requirements, at least 20 percent of the gross site area shall be in landscaping. The perimeter buffer area required under subsection (B) of this section, shall be considered landscaped area. All front yards of manufactured home lots shall be landscaped prior to occupancy, in accordance with the approved master site plan.

(D) Patio. A patio of wood, concrete, flagstone or equivalent material having a minimum area of 160 square feet shall be installed on each manufactured home space prior to occupancy of the manufactured home.

(E) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures such as carports, garages, storage lockers, recreation and management buildings, cabanas and ramadas shall be allowed and shall satisfy the setback and lot coverage requirements.

(F) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to a manufactured home park shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets. When bounded by more than one arterial or collector street, only one access point from each street shall be permitted. If the park is situated so that it would block through-connection of a public collector street, then the reviewing body may require that a public street connection shall be made through the park. The access and street design shall comply with the standards identified in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, inclusive.

(2) No manufactured home park entrance or exit shall be closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street.

(3) No manufactured home space shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the development, unless it is a public street that extends through the park, required by subsection (F)(1) of this section.

(4) Each manufactured home space shall have direct access to an internal access street. Internal streets shall be designed to discourage outside traffic from traversing the development, except as required by subsection (F)(1) of this section.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards of this title.

(G) Internal Access Streets – Drainage.

(1) All interior roadways and drives, except in the case of a through public street, shall be paved and maintained by the owner of the manufactured home park in accordance with city standards.

(2) All interior roadways shall have minimum pavement width from curb face to curb face, as follows:

(a) Two-way streets:

(i) No on-street parking: 24 feet;

(ii) Parking on one side: 28 feet;

(iii) Parking on both sides: 36 feet.

(3) All corners shall have a minimum curb radius of 20 feet.

(4) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than 12 manufactured home sites and have a minimum turning radius of 40 feet measured to the front of the curb.

(5) All streets shall have curbs, gutters, and a minimum five-foot-wide sidewalk on each side, and shall meet ADA accessibility standards.

(6) Storm drainage shall be managed through a system of underground drainage lines and catch basins, which convey storm water off the site to a public storm system, and shall comply with Clean Water Service (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(H) Lighting Streets and Sidewalks. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness. Such lighting shall be automatically controlled and not be under control of the individual manufactured home occupants. Lighting shall be designed to an average of 0.025 horizontal candle power of light the full length of all roadways and walks within the park boundaries.

(I) Mailboxes. Clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the post master. They shall be of uniform style.

(J) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Resident. One covered parking space shall be provided for each manufactured home either on the manufactured home space or in an off-street parking bay within 100 feet of the dwelling being served. The covered parking space requirement may be waived in the replacement of a manufactured dwelling when the applicant can show that the minimum setbacks for the carport cannot be met, and fewer than 50 percent of the manufactured dwellings within 100 feet of the lot in question have a carport.

(b) Guest. Where on-street parking is prohibited on both sides of an interior roadway, guest parking shall be provided in off-street parking bays at the rate of one parking space for every three manufactured home sites along the roadway section. Guest parking should be in close proximity to the manufactured home units being served.

(c) Storage of Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles, such as camping trailers, boats, campers, motor homes, and other such vehicles shall only be parked or stored within an area specifically designated and designed for such use, and shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high sight-obscuring wooden fence or decorative masonry wall with a gate.

(2) Loading Space. Off-street loading bays and maneuvering areas shall be provided for all uses receiving delivery vehicles on a regular basis in conformance with the off-street loading requirements of this title, except for home occupational uses.

(3) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be paved and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking and loading regulations of this title, and all streets which are to be used for emergency vehicle access shall be designed to load carrying capacities required by the fire chief. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.27; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006.]


18.30.080 Manufactured home installation.

(A) Compliance with HUD Standards. Any manufactured home placed within any manufactured home park established under this title shall have been manufactured after June 15, 1976, and bear the insignia of compliance issued by the Oregon Department of Commerce to show conformance with construction standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) construction standards.

(B) Removal of Wheels. Wheels shall be removed from the manufactured home upon placement within a manufactured home park. Hubs and axles may remain.

(C) Site Preparation, Skirting, and Tie-Downs. The site shall be properly prepared, compacted and graded for drainage as required by the building official, based on soil conditions and the weight of the unit being installed. All manufactured homes shall be skirted with a minimum concrete blocking or similar material as prescribed by the building official. Manufactured homes shall be tied down in accordance with state standards. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.28.]


18.30.090 Prior approvals.

Any and all conditions attached to the approval of any manufactured home park prior to September 2, 1986, shall continue to apply and shall not be repealed, modified or in any manner affected by the provisions of the city building code, CMC 15.05.020 through 15.10.010, inclusive, so long as modifications are not made. However, the standards set forth herein supersede those established by the Department of Commerce, Building Codes Agency, OAR Chapter 918, Division 600, General Rules, and any discrepancy with the state code shall be governed by the city standards for any modifications or replacements made on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.29.]


Chapter 18.35 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (A-2)

Sections:

18.35.010    Purpose.

18.35.020    Permitted uses.

18.35.030    Conditional uses.

18.35.040    Prohibited uses.

18.35.050    Area, density and lot requirements.

18.35.060    Site development standards.

18.35.070    Manufactured housing on individual lots.

18.35.080    Home occupation.

18.35.090    Accessory dwellings.


18.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the multi-family residential or A-2 zone is to implement the city’s land use designation and policies for medium-density residential housing as set forth in the comprehensive plan. The A-2 zone regulates development of single-family homes on existing lots and provides design guidance for small lot single-family residential subdivisions and multi-family developments. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.31; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005.]


18.35.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in an A-2 zone:

(A) Duplexes.

(B) Common wall single-family dwellings as defined in CMC 18.195.040.

(C) Single-family attached units (i.e., townhomes).

(D) Multiple-family dwellings of three or more units.

(E) Boarding house, lodging or rooming house.

(F) Underground public utilities.

(G) Accessory uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the above uses, including approved carports, garages, or storage facilities.

(H) Private parks and recreational facilities designed within a multi-family development.

(I) Accessory dwelling unit, associated with single-family detached or common wall single-family dwellings, and subject to CMC 18.20.090.

(J) Home occupation, including Internet sales, consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(K) Residential facility consistent with state law.

(L) Type “A” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.32; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.35.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Governmental structure or use including public and private park, playground, community center and noncommercial recreational facilities, golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, fire station, library or museum.

(B) School – Public or Private. Nursery, primary, middle, junior or senior high, but not college or university.

(C) Utility substation or aboveground pumping station with no equipment storage.

(D) Home occupation consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(E) A planned unit development, including office and retail sales and other mixed uses approved by the planning commission and conditional uses as provided for under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(F) A manufactured/modular structure for temporary educational purposes subject to the following required conditions in addition to other conditions which may be imposed under Chapter 18.105 CMC.

(G) Church, and associated church activities, except commercial day care.

(H) Site-built detached single-family dwelling, including a residential home consistent with state law; and detached single-family manufactured housing, subject to CMC 18.20.070.

(1) On a single, undividable infill lot, approval of a single-family detached dwelling or manufactured housing shall be processed as a Type II procedure. Approval of more than one single-family detached unit within the A-2 zone shall require a Type III procedure. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.33; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.35.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses shall be prohibited within the A-2 zone:

(A) Recreational vehicles or other movable temporary dwellings used as a residence, or accessory sleeping units, except as lodging for guests not to exceed two weeks.

(B) Manufacturing, processing, and bulk storage, except as permitted as a home occupation.

(C) Parking and storage of construction equipment, semi-tractors and trailers.

(D) The raising of animals other than normal household pets.

(E) Retail sales, except for when over the Internet and where applicable in compliance with the home occupation requirements.

(F) Heavy manufacturing and processing.

(G) Freestanding wind turbines. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.34; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.35.050 Area, density and lot requirements.

Lot area and density requirements shall be calculated based on net acreage. A net acre is equal to 32,670 square feet, and excludes roads, common open space, floodplains, riparian setbacks, and slopes over 25 percent.

(A) Maximum Density. The average density over the entire development shall not exceed 14 dwellings per net acre.

(1) Lot Size.

(a) Single-family detached residences, duplexes, or common wall single-family dwellings shall have at least 3,100 square feet of lot area per unit.

(b) Single-family attached residences (e.g., townhomes) shall have at least 3,000 square feet of lot area per unit.

(c)  Multi-family development shall have at least 2,330 square feet per unit, except as may otherwise be approved as part of a planned unit development. 

(2) In the case of flag lots, the pole portion of the lot shall not count towards the required lot area.

(B) Minimum Density. The minimum density allowed is eight dwellings per net acre for single-family, and 11 for multi-family development. Any land partition or subdivision shall make provisions to ensure that the minimum density is protected when further partitioning is possible and initial development is less than the minimum density.

(C) Maximum Height. Building height, as defined in CMC 18.195.080, shall not exceed 35 feet, except for a chimney, radio, television antenna, or solar feature (see CMC 18.195.190, S definitions), or as may be approved by the planning commission as part of a planned unit development.

(D) Setback Requirements. Except as provided in CMC 18.150.010, in an A-2 zone the minimum yard area setback requirements shall be as follows: 

(1) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the foundation of the structure, including porch or deck, shall not be less than 10 feet. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 20 feet.

(2) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth for a single-story structure, plus five feet per additional story as measured from the foundation of the structure.

(3) Side Yard. For single-family residences, the minimum width of side yards shall be not less than five feet, as measured from the foundation of the home. On corner lots the side yard facing the street shall not be less than 10 feet. For multi-family residences, no side yard shall be less than five feet in depth for a single story structure, plus five feet per additional story as measured from the foundation of the structure. On corner lots the side yard facing the street shall not be less than 10 feet.

(4) Building Separation. Buildings within a complex shall be separated by at least 10 feet, plus five feet per additional story.

(5) No accessory building or other structure or building shall be closer than three feet from a side or rear property line.

(E) Lot Coverage. The area occupied by the home and all accessory buildings and structures on the lot shall not exceed 55 percent of the lot area.

(F) Repealed by Ord. 916.

(G) Minimum Lot Dimensions.

(1) No single-family lot shall be less than 30 feet in width abutting a public street, nor less than 60 feet in depth, except as may be approved as part of a planned unit development.

(2) For multi-family, the minimum average lot width shall be 75 feet abutting a public street, except on a cul-de-sac where the width may be reduced to 50 feet.

(3) In the case of infill development on parcels, as defined by the city’s current vacant land inventory, the director may allow the lot width at the street to be reduced to not less than 20 feet for a single lot with no more than two dwelling units and not less than 30 feet for more than two dwelling units. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.35; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.35.060 Site development standards.

All multi-family developments are subject to design review requirements as set forth in Chapter 18.100 CMC; and all prior conditions of approval attached to any use in a multi-family zone shall continue to apply.

(A) Open Space. Within residential developments containing 20 or more lots or units there shall be, at least, 300 square feet of open recreational space per unit provided in common open space for multi-family development and/or 300 square feet of recreational space per unit provided in public open space for single-family development. Such space will be considered part of the required landscaping, but must be designed in a manner that affords residents usable open area, such as lawn, patios, etc. Delineated wetlands recognized by the Division of State Lands may apply 20 percent of their area located on the subject parcel(s) to the open space requirement. Calculate the total square footage of delineated wetland area on the subject parcel(s) and multiply it by 20 percent. Streets, access drives and parking lots shall not be considered open space. Open space must be a usable open recreational area, and may include a club house or indoor recreation facility. All outdoor area shall be landscaped and maintained by the owner, or a homeowners’ association, according to the approved development plans, unless the open space is dedicated to and accepted by the city as a public park.

(B) Perimeter Requirements. If topographical or other barriers within the development do not provide adequate buffering between the development and adjacent nonresidential development, the reviewing body may impose one or more of the following requirements:

(1) Where the development abuts an arterial or collector street or an existing planned unit development, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 25 feet wide, and/or sound mitigation structures be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip, which shall be set aside as a separate tract. And provisions for pedestrian connections through the landscape strip may also be required.

(2) Where the development abuts an existing or planned nonresidential area, the reviewing body may require that a perimeter landscaped strip, no more than 50 feet wide, be established along the abutting property line. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the inner edge of the perimeter strip, which shall be set aside as a separate tract. And provisions for pedestrian connections through the landscape strip may also be required.

(3) All driveways and landscaped areas shall comply with vision clearance standards set forth below. All landscaping shall comply with the general landscaping standards set forth below.

(C) Landscape Plan.

(1) For multi-family residence, in addition to the open space requirements, the entire net area of the site that is not covered by building or parking and circulation improvements shall be landscaped prior to occupancy, in accordance with the approved site plan and the standards set forth herein.

(2) At maturity at least 80 percent of the landscape area shall be covered by plant material, lawn, and trees when the plantings reach maturity. The remaining area may be covered in nonvegetative ground cover.

(3) Frontage Trees. Frontage trees shall be required and must comply with current public works standards.

(4) Installation of required landscaping may be deferred for up to six months with written approval by the community development director; provided, that the owner posts with the city a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit assigned to the city for an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the landscaping materials and installation by a qualified contractor.

(D) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to residential subdivisions shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets. Access to individual lots shall be primarily from local streets or alleyways when the alleyway is developed to current public works standards. Direct lot access to arterials or collector streets shall not be permitted, unless there is no alternative as determined by the city engineer.

(2) The minimum public street width shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Internal Access. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and maintained by the owner in accordance with city standards. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street, unless there is no reasonable alternative. They shall have the following minimum unobstructed pavement width:

(a) Two-way traffic: 24 feet;

(b) One-way traffic: 15 feet.

(4) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(E) Access Streets – Sidewalks – Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, and the subdivision code.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 12 feet and shall not be more than 25 feet in width at the curb. Each driveway shall have a concrete curb apron designed to comply with public works standards, and not more than two lots may be served by one shared driveway.

(3) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than 12 residential units and meet current public works design standards.

(4) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, and a minimum five-foot-wide sidewalk, offset from the curb, shall be provided along the entire lot frontage and shall meet ADA accessibility standards. In the case of remodels or garage additions to an existing house, no sidewalk shall be required if one does not exist, but the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be required. However, a curb tight sidewalk may be approved by the city engineer when it is impractical to provide the offset.

(5) Storm drainage shall meet current public works design standards and shall comply with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(F) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(G) Mailboxes. Except for in-fill partitioning, clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the Post Master. They shall be of uniform style.

(H) Insects and Rodents. Materials, including wastes, shall be stored and managed, and grounds shall be maintained in a manner that will not attract or aid in the propagation of insects or rodents or cause a health hazard.

(I) Screening.

(1) Sight-obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, approved outdoor storage, and parking lots abutting a low density residential development. Such screening shall be six feet in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material, or a densely planted evergreen hedge and chain link fence.

(2) The review body may require nonsight-obscuring screening and/or fencing of parking lots abutting property lines, front yards abutting a public street, or other yards abutting a low density residential development.

(J) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Resident. One covered parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit either on the individual lot or in an off-street parking bay within 100 feet from the dwelling being served. For an accessory dwelling, one additional off-street parking space is required. However, the commission may waive this additional parking space, if appropriate on-street parking is available within 100 feet of the lot.

(b) Guest. Where on-street parking is prohibited on both sides of a street, guest parking shall be provided in off-street parking bays at the rate of one parking space for every three home sites along the street section. Guest parking should be in close proximity to the homes being served.

(c) Storage of Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles, such as camping trailers, boats, campers, motor homes, and other such vehicles shall only be parked or stored within an area specifically designated and designed for such use, and shall not be located in the public right-of-way.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of this title.

(3) Parking Lot Landscaping. There shall be a five-foot landscaped buffer at the perimeter of all parking lot areas. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped so as to break up large paved areas with landscaped islands, such as every 10 spaces. See CMC 18.145.050.

(4) On each home site, or on each individual dwelling within a complex, an address number of the home shall be provided in a manner that is clearly visible from the street, as approved by the fire department.

(5) Each resident may display on their home one sign identifying the person residing therein; provided, that the sign is not larger than one square foot.

(6) Traffic control and directional signs shall be installed as required by the current public works standards. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.36; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.35.070 Manufactured housing on individual lots.

All manufactured homes on individual lots within the A-2 zone shall:

(A) Comply with all federal, state and local building codes for placement, occupation and storage.

(B) Have a pitched roof with at least a nominal slope of one foot in height for each three feet in width.

(C) Have exterior siding and roofing material which in color, material grade, and appearance is comparable to the exterior siding and roofing material predominantly used on surrounding residential dwellings.

(D) Be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards required of site-built single-family construction under the State Building Code (1981) as defined by ORS 455.010.

(E) Have at least one covered off-street parking space constructed of like materials as the home.

(F) Have skirting that consists of smooth or split face concrete blocks.

(G) Be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.37; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.35.080 Home occupation.

Home occupations may be allowed as follows:

(A) Type A. Allowed through a Type I administrative review consistent with the following:

(1) There are no structural alterations or changes necessary to the dwelling or accessory building or to the premises in order to conduct the business operations; and

(2) There is no outdoor display or storage, nor indoor display or storage, of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the dwelling; and

(3) The business is conducted by members of the immediate family, all of whom reside in the residence and there are no additional employees; and

(4) Personal appearances by customers on the property are limited to one at a time, and not more than eight customers per day; and

(5) There is no external signage which informs potential customers of the location of the residential dwelling for the purpose of attracting customers to the dwelling; and

(6) The business activity does not create noise levels audible above normal ambient residential levels beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; and

(7) The activities do not attract more than three commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; and

(8) The home occupation may not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; and

(9) The owner has and maintains a valid city business license; and

(10) In the case of home child care, there are not more than 16 children total and the operator is appropriately registered and/or certified by the state.

(B) Type B. Allowed by approval of the planning commission through a Type III application, and subject to the following:

(1) There are structural alterations or changes necessary to the dwelling, accessory building, or to the premises in order to conduct the business operations and/or a new accessory building is needed to conduct the normal operations of the business; and

(2) There is no outdoor display or storage, nor indoor display or storage, of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the dwelling; and

(3) The business is conducted by members of the immediate family living on the premises and/or not more than one employee who does not reside in the residence; and

(4) Personal appearances by customers on the property are limited to three at a time, and not more than 10 customers per day; and

(5) The business activity does not create noise levels audible above normal ambient residential levels beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; and

(6) The activities do not attract more than five commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; and

(7) The home occupation may not serve as a headquarters or dispatch center where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; and

(8) The owner has and maintains a valid city business license; and

(9) There is no accessory dwelling associated with the primary residence. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.38; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.35.090 Accessory dwellings.

This section applies only to single-family detached or attached dwelling units.

(A) A second or secondary, self-contained, one-bedroom living unit with separate entrance and kitchen, developed in conjunction with an existing single-family home and usually created in one of the following ways:

(1) From existing space in the primary dwelling;

(2) From a combination of existing and newly created space associated with the primary dwelling;

(3) From space within an existing accessory building, such as a detached garage; or

(4) From the addition of a new accessory building associated with an existing single-family home.

(B) Accessory dwellings shall comply with the following:

(1) The owner(s) of the primary dwelling shall occupy at least one of the units.

(2) There shall be a minimum of 250 square feet of floor area for each occupant, and there shall be no more than two occupants, and the unit shall not exceed 800 square feet, or 30 percent of the total floor area of the primary dwelling.

(3) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided, unless waived by the planning commission.

(4) The exterior architectural design and building materials are consistent with those of the primary dwelling, and there shall be only one front door facing the street.

(5) All yard area requirements of the base zone shall be met, and the unit shall comply with the fire and life safety codes. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.39.]


Chapter 18.40 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-1)

(Repealed by Ord. 841)


Chapter 18.45 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-2)

Sections:

18.45.010    Purpose.

18.45.020    Uses permitted outright.

18.45.030    Conditional uses permitted.

18.45.040    Development requirements.

18.45.050    Performance standards.

18.45.060    Development standards.

18.45.070    Signs.


18.45.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the highway commercial or C-2 zone is to provide for retail businesses, services, and offices located along the Tualatin Valley Highway corridor, where the principal users are auto oriented. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.51.]


18.45.020 Uses permitted outright.

In a C-2 zone the following uses shall be permitted outright; provided, that all operations are conducted within an enclosed structure:

(A) General retail.

(B) Service commercial, including barber, banks.

(C) Automobile, truck, marine, motorcycle, appliance and/or parts sales, service, repair, rental, and including custom vehicle assembly; provided, that all operations are conducted within an enclosed structure.

(D) Office, including professional, medical/dental.

(E) Indoor amusement or entertainment and restaurants, including fast food with drive-up window.

(F) Motel, motor courts, hotel, inns or bed and breakfasts.

(G) Small engine or equipment repair shop.

(H) Single-family dwelling units as a secondary or accessory use to commercial.

(I) Other similar uses as may be approved by the planning commission.

(J) Type “A” or Type “B” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC; this use is not subject to the enclosed structure requirement. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.52; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.45.030 Conditional uses permitted.

In a C-2 zone the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Outdoor storage and/or display of merchandise, materials, goods, and equipment, or any other outdoor activity, subject to a Type II review if the outdoor activity complies with principally permitted uses within the zone, otherwise a Type III review is required.

(B) Government or other similar institutional uses.

(C) Warehouse or wholesale operation.

(D) Above ground utility yard and above ground storage tanks.

(E) Large machinery or farm equipment sales, service or rental.

(F) A planned unit development, as provided under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(G) Requests to exceed the permitted building height.

(H) Church and associated church activities.

(I) Service stations and fuel distribution, provided storage tanks are underground.

(J) Multi-family dwelling units, including a residential facility consistent with state law, and all shall be consistent with A-2 standards.

(K) Indoor mini-storage facility.

(L) Certified child care center.

(M) Marijuana retail sales facilities, wholesale sales facilities, and medical marijuana dispensaries as defined in CMC 18.177.025 and subject to the provisions of Chapters 18.105 and 18.177 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.53; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2015-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.45.040 Development requirements.

(A) Lot Size. In a C-2 zone there is no minimum lot size, save and except that the lot must be large enough to accommodate the proposed use, including all design standards and functional requirements related to the use.

(B) Setback Requirements. In a C-2 zone the following setbacks shall meet the base standard; however, the review body may require a greater or lesser setback based on the design review criteria set forth in this chapter:

(1) The front yard shall be 20 feet, except that:

(a) Parking shall be allowed within five feet of the front property line.

(b) For all properties abutting the south side of Baseline Road, there shall be a front yard setback equal to five percent of the average lot depth, but not less than four feet.

(2) No side yard shall be required, except five feet when abutting a residential use or zone, and when a side yard abuts a public street the setback shall be the same as the front yard.

(3) No rear yard is required, except five feet when abutting a residential use or zone, and when a side yard abuts a public street the setback shall be the same as the front yard.

(C) Height of Building. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet, unless approved by the planning commission. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.54.]


18.45.050 Performance standards.

In a C-2 zone no land or structure shall be used or occupied unless there is continuing compliance with the following standards:

(A) Design Review Approval. All design review requirements and conditions of approval, including all prior attached conditions shall be satisfied.

(B) Environmental Standards. All uses shall comply with required air, land, and water quality standards set forth by all state, federal and local jurisdictions (i.e., Department of Environmental Quality, Clean Water Services, and Metro).

(C) Heat and Glare.

(1) Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat or glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, such that glare is not visible from a public street or adjacent property.

(2) Exterior lighting shall be designed such that glare is directed away from public streets or adjacent properties.

(D) Insects and Rodents. Materials including wastes shall be managed and stored, and grounds shall be maintained in a manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard.

(E) Outside Storage. Outside storage shall be appropriately screened consistent with CMC 18.55.070(F)(1). [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.55; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.45.060 Development standards.

In a C-2 zone no new use or occupation of land or a structure or a new structure and no change of use of land or a structure shall be permitted unless there is continuing compliance with the following standards:

(A) Landscape Plan.

(1) For all uses in a C-2 zone, the first five feet of lineal street frontage on the subject site shall be landscaped (exclusive of frontage trees) prior to occupancy, in accordance with the approved site plan and the standards set forth herein.

(2) When at maturity, at least 80 percent of the proposed landscape area shall be covered by plant material, lawn, and trees. The remaining area may be covered in nonvegetative ground cover.

(3) Frontage Trees. Frontage trees shall be required and shall be selected from the approved public works street tree list. The total number of trees shall be determined by dividing the total linear footage of the site, which abuts a public street, by 30 feet. The location of the trees shall be determined through design review, and the following standards shall apply:

(a) Trees shall be located at least five feet from a utility pole, fire hydrant, driveway, crosswalk, or utility easement, except as may be approved by the public works director, and at least 20 feet from an overhead street light.

(b) There shall be no impervious material within a one-and-one-half-foot radius around the tree trunk.

(c) Trees at the time of planting shall have a minimum height of six feet from ground level, and shall be at least two inches in caliper (d.b.h.).

(d) Trees shall not cause any vision impairment to vehicular traffic.

(e) Installation of required landscaping may be deferred for up to six months; provided, that the owner posts with the city a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit assigned to the city for an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the landscaping materials and installation by a qualified contractor.

(B) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to commercial developments shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets, and shall be shared with adjacent properties to minimize multiple curb cuts. Access to individual lots from T.V. Highway shall be approved by ODOT with secondary access from adjacent collectors or minor local streets where possible. Except in the case of a multi-building complex, direct lot access to an arterial shall not be permitted, unless there is no viable alternative, and direct access to collector and local streets shall only be allowed as permitted by the review body.

(2) The minimum public street width for commercial development shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Internal Access. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and maintained by the owner in accordance with city standards. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street, unless there is no reasonable alternative. They shall have the following minimum unobstructed pavement width:

(a) Two-way traffic: 24 feet;

(b) One-way traffic: 15 feet.

(4) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(C) Access Streets – Sidewalks – Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, the subdivision code and public works standards.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 12 feet and shall not be more than 35 feet in width at the curb, unless specifically approved by the review body to meet unusual requirements of a particular use. Each driveway shall have a concrete curb apron designed to comply with public works standards.

(3) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than four separate uses and shall have a minimum turning radius of 50 feet measured to the front edge of the curb.

(4) Sidewalks and Improvements.

(a) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, and a minimum six-foot-wide sidewalk, with eight feet at a bus stop, shall be provided along the entire lot frontage, and shall meet ADA accessibility standards.

(b) Site design review Type II requests for remodels, alterations and/or additions to an existing building shall require a sidewalk if one does not exist, the driveway apron and paved driveway to be constructed to city standards. Commercial sidewalks shall be curb tight, unless otherwise approved by the review body.

(5) Storm drainage shall be managed through a system of underground drainage lines and catch basins, which convey storm water off the site to a public storm system, and shall comply with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(D) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(E) Mailboxes. Except for in-fill partitioning, clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the Post Master. They shall be of uniform style.

(F) Screening.

(1) Sight-obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, and for any approved outdoor storage, or parking lots abutting a residential development. Such screening shall be six feet in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material, or a densely planted evergreen hedge and a decorative fence, such as wrought-iron. Chain link fencing may not be used in the front yard area.

(2) The reviewing body may require nonsight-obscuring screening and/or fencing of parking lots abutting property lines, front yards abutting a public street, or other yards abutting a residential development.

(G) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.145 CMC.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of this title.

(3) Parking Lot Landscaping. There shall be a five-foot landscaped buffer at the perimeter of all parking lot areas. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped so as to break up large paved areas with landscaped islands, such as every 10 spaces. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.56; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006.]


18.45.070 Signs.

Signs within the C-2 zone may be allowed consistent with Chapter 18.175 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.57.]


Chapter 18.50 CORE COMMERCIAL-EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT (CE)

(Repealed by Ord. 2019-10)


Chapter 18.54 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (LI)

Sections:

18.54.010    Purpose.

18.54.020    Permitted uses.

18.54.030    Conditional uses.

18.54.040    Prohibited uses.

18.54.050    Development requirements.

18.54.060    Performance standards.

18.54.070    Development standards.

18.54.080    Signs.


18.54.010 Purpose.

The LI zoning district provides for light, clean industries for a variety of manufacturing and other uses with controlled external impacts. The district provides for secondary processing industries, involving manufacturing, warehousing, assembling, packaging and treatment of products with components that have been previously prepared from raw materials. Industrial establishments shall not have objectionable external features, shall feature well-landscaped sites and their activities shall occur within enclosed buildings. 

Limited supporting commercial uses that are accessory to the primary use of the site may be conditionally permitted and shall comply with Title 4 of the metro urban growth functional management plan. LI uses may be located adjacent to residential and commercial uses with adequate buffering. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010.]


18.54.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted outright with the appropriate site design review:

(A) Secondary manufacturing and processing of products made from components previously prepared from raw materials.

(B) Public and private utilities, including but not limited to telephone exchanges, electric substations, data centers, gas regulator stations, water wells and public work yards.

(C) Industrial hand tool and supply sales primarily wholesaled to other industrial firms or industrial workers.

(D) Research and development companies, experimental and/or testing laboratories. 

(E) Internet and telephone system retail sales without counter sales, which are shipped out or shipped directly to customers of products prepared on site. The total retail sales area shall be less than 25 percent of the total building area in which the use is located.

(F) Wholesale and/or card-lock fuel stations with approved loading and queuing space.

(G) Electronics, building materials and home appliance recycling in an enclosed structure.

(H) Blueprinting, printing, publishing, or other reproduction services. 

(I) Self-service storage facilities.

(J) Medical, dental and similar laboratories.

(K) Type “A” or Type “B” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.54.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses are permitted as conditional uses, provided such uses are subject to the standards contained in CMC 18.54.060 and approved in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Commercial laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing or rug cleaning plants.

(B) Brewery or winery where all activity, including storage, occurs inside an enclosed structure.

(C) Radio, television and similar communication stations, including transmitters and wireless communication towers.

(D) Restaurants without drive-through.

(E) Hospitals and emergency care facilities.

(F) Automotive, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, truck, manufactured home, boat, farm and other equipment repair or service within an enclosed structure.

(G) Trade, industrial or commercial schools whose primary purpose is to provide training for an industrial need or occupation.

(H) Wholesale building material sales, lumberyards, contractors’ storage and equipment yards, building maintenance services, and similar uses.

(I) Cellular transmission towers.

(J) Power generation plants and associated facilities, including wind turbines.

(K) Automobile, boat, trailer and recreational vehicle storage.

(L) Child care facilities and preschools, if fully integrated with and secondary to the primary use of a site.

(M) Public recreational facilities including parks, playfields and sports and racquet courts on publicly owned property.

(N) Private indoor recreational facilities.

(O) Sewage treatment plants. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010.]


18.54.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses are expressly prohibited:

(A) Outdoor storage and/or display of raw materials.

(B) Auto wrecking and junk or salvage yards.

(C) Distillation of oil, coal, wood or tar compounds and the creosote treatment of any products.

(D) General purpose solid waste landfills, incinerators, and other solid waste facilities.

(E) Pulp mills and paper mills.

(F) Slaughter of livestock or poultry, the manufacture of animal by-products or fat rendering.

(G) Leather tanneries.

(H) Indoor motor vehicle sports.

(I) Horse stables, riding arenas and other livestock event facilities.

(J) Marijuana facilities. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 2015-03 § 3 (Exh. A), 2015.]


18.54.050 Development requirements.

(A) Lot Size. In an LI zone there is no minimum lot size, save and except that the lot must be large enough to accommodate the proposed use, including all design standards and functional requirements related to the use.

(B) Setback Requirements. In an LI zone the following setbacks shall be the minimum required. The approval authority may require greater setbacks for uses allowed under CMC 18.54.030, based on the approval criteria in Chapter 18.105 CMC, the base standard; however, the review body may require a greater or lesser setback based on the design review criteria set forth in this chapter:

(1) The front yard shall be 20 feet, except that:

(a) Parking shall not be allowed within five feet of the front property line.

(b) Where an industrial use abuts a residential zone there shall be a front yard setback of 25 feet.

(2) No side or rear yard shall be required, except:

(a) Fifteen feet when the side yard abuts a public street.

(b) Twenty-five feet when abutting any residential zone, except that parking shall not be allowed within 10 feet of the side or rear property line.

(C) Height of Building. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet, unless approved by the Planning Commission. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010.]


18.54.060 Performance standards.

In an LI zone no land or structure shall be used or occupied unless there is continuing compliance with the following standards:

(A) Design Review Approval. All design review requirements and conditions of approval, including all prior attached conditions, shall be satisfied.

(B) Environmental Standards. All uses shall comply with the required air, land, and water quality standards set forth by all state, federal and local jurisdictions (i.e., Department of Environmental Quality, Clean Water Services, and Metro).

(1) Vibration. No vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles or trains shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the property line of the use concerned.

(2) Odors. The emission of odorous gases or matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property line of the use creating the odors is prohibited.

(C) Heat and Glare.

(1) Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat or glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, such that glare is not visible from a public street or adjacent property.

(2) Exterior lighting shall be designed such that glare is directed away from public streets or adjacent properties.

(D) Insects and Rodents. Materials, including wastes, shall be managed and stored, and grounds shall be maintained, in a manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard.

(E) Outside Storage. Permitted outside storage shall be appropriately screened consistent with CMC 18.54.070, Development Standards. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010.]


18.54.070 Development standards.

In an LI zone no new use or occupation of land or a structure or a new structure and no change of use of land or a structure shall be permitted unless there is continuing compliance with the following standards:

(A) Landscape Plan.

(1) For all uses in an LI zone, the first five feet of lineal street frontage on the subject site shall be landscaped (exclusive of frontage trees) prior to occupancy, in accordance with the approved site plan and the standards set forth herein.

(2) At least 80 percent of the landscape area shall be covered by plant material, lawn, and trees when the plantings are at maturity. The remaining area may be covered in nonvegetative ground cover.

(3) Frontage Trees. Frontage trees shall be required and shall be selected from the approved public works street tree list. The total number of trees shall be determined by dividing the total lineal footage of the site which abuts a public street by 30. The location of the trees shall be determined through design review, and the following standards shall apply:

(a) Trees shall be located at least five feet from a utility pole, fire hydrant, driveway, crosswalk, or utility easement, except as may be approved by the public works director, and at least 20 feet from an overhead street light.

(b) There shall be no impervious material within a one-and-one-half-foot radius around the tree trunk.

(c) Trees at the time of planting shall have a minimum height of six feet from ground level, and shall be at least two inches in caliper (d.b.h.).

(d) Trees shall not cause any vision impairment to vehicular traffic.

(e) Installation of required landscaping may be deferred for up to six months; provided, that the owner posts with the city a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit assigned to the city for an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the landscaping materials and installation by a qualified contractor.

(B) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to industrial developments shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets, and shall be shared with adjacent properties to minimize multiple curb cuts. Access to individual lots from T.V. Highway shall be approved by ODOT with secondary access from adjacent collectors or if necessary from minor local streets where possible. Except in the case of a multi-building complex, direct lot access to an arterial shall not be permitted, unless there is no viable alternative, and direct access to a local street shall only be allowed as permitted by the review body.

(2) The minimum public street width for industrial development shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Internal Access. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and maintained by the owner in accordance with city standards. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street, unless there is no reasonable alternative. They shall have the following minimum pavement widths:

(a) Two-way traffic: 24 feet;

(b) One-way traffic: 20 feet.

(4) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(C) Access Streets – Sidewalks – Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, the subdivision code and public works standards.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 24 feet and shall not be more than 45 feet in width at the curb, unless specifically approved by the review body to meet unusual requirements of a particular use.

(3) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than four separate uses and shall have a minimum turning radius of 50 feet measured to the front edge of the curb.

(4) Sidewalks and Improvements.

(a) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, and a minimum six-foot-wide sidewalk, with eight feet at a bus stop, shall be provided along the entire lot frontage, and shall meet ADA accessibility standards.

(b) Site design review Type II requests for remodels, alterations and/or additions to an existing building shall require a sidewalk, if one does not exist; the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be constructed to city standards. 

(5) Storm drainage shall be managed through a system of underground drainage lines and catch basins, which convey storm water off the site to a public storm system, and shall comply with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(D) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(E) Mailboxes. Except for in-fill partitioning, clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the postmaster. They shall be of uniform style.

(F) Screening.

(1) Sight-obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, and for any approved outdoor storage, or parking lots abutting a residential development. Such screening shall be a minimum six feet in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material; or a densely planted evergreen hedge and chain link fencing. Such screening shall be provided to a height sufficient to block the view of materials stored as viewed from the sidewalk on the opposite side of the street from the screen wall.

(2) The reviewing body may require sight-obscuring screening and/or fencing of parking lots abutting property lines, front yards abutting a public street, or other yards abutting a residential development.

(G) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.145 CMC.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of this title.

(3) Parking Lot Landscaping. There shall be a five-foot landscaped buffer at the perimeter of all parking lot areas. The parking area shall be screened with evergreen plant material maintained at a minimum of 36 inches in height. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped so as to break up large paved areas with landscaped islands every 10 parking spaces. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010.]


18.54.080 Signs.

Signs within the LI zone may be allowed consistent with the provisions identified for the light industrial LI zone and Chapter 18.175 CMC. [Ord. 916 § 2 (Exh. B), 2010.]


Chapter 18.55 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE (M-1)

Sections:

18.55.010    Purpose.

18.55.020    Permitted uses.

18.55.030    Conditional uses permitted.

18.55.040    Prohibited uses.

18.55.050    Development requirements.

18.55.060    Performance standards.

18.55.070    Development standards.

18.55.080    Signs.


18.55.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the general industrial or M-1 zone is to provide for various industrial activities which require processing, fabrication and storage of raw, primary materials, including outdoor storage areas, heavy equipment storage and other uses not compatible with the commercial or residential zones. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.71; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.55.020 Permitted uses.

In an M-1 zone the following uses shall be permitted outright; provided, that all operations are conducted within an enclosed structure:

(A) General uses involving manufacturing, processing, or storage.

(B) Automobile, truck, marine, motorcycle, motors, machine or appliance service and repair; provided, that all operations, other than storage, are conducted within an enclosed structure, and there shall be no retail sales, except as may be allowed under CMC 18.55.030(I).

(C) Cabinet shop, light metal fabrication shop, machine shop, but not including retail sales of finished products except if located on an arterial street as designated in the comprehensive plan.

(D) Research and development facilities.

(E) Other similar uses as may be approved by the planning commission.

(F) New general commercial office improvements shall be permitted without the need for direct arterial access; provided, that such use, including required parking, does not exceed 25 percent of the total site area, and providing that all other code requirements are met. Total site area shall be defined by existing tax lots and/or lots under contiguous ownership.

(G) Existing nonconforming residential structures may be converted to general commercial office use without the need for direct arterial access, provided all other code requirements are met, and provided the conversion complies with all applicable building code requirements.

(H) Internet and telephone system retail sales without counter sales, which are shipped out or shipped directly to customers of products prepared on site. The total retail sales area shall be less than 25 percent of the total building area in which the use is located.

(I) Type “A” or Type “B” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC; this use is not subject to the enclosed structure requirement. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.72; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-015 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.55.030 Conditional uses permitted.

The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use subject to the standards contained in CMC 18.55.060 and Chapter 18.105 CMC, Conditional Use Permit. In an M-1 zone the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) A planned commercial and industrial park, as provided under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(B) Any conditional use allowed in a commercial zone, except residential.

(C) A mobile structure used as a construction and/or security office during site development.

(D) Parks, open space, recreation areas.

(E) Cellular transmission towers.

(F) Administrative, educational or other activities subordinate to a permitted use on the same premises as the principal use.

(G) Request to exceed the maximum building height.

(H) Above ground utility yard and above ground storage tanks.

(I) General retail shall only be permitted as approved by the planning commission where retail sales are in conjunction with and/or directly associated with products manufactured on site. The retail sales shall be subordinate to the primary industrial use approved for the site. 

(J) Outdoor storage and display subject to a Type III review, except when the property abuts and/or is adjacent to M-1 zoned property on all sides in the city then a Type II review is required.

(K) Wind generation and turbines, subject to setback from all property lines equal to or greater than the height of the wind generation structure.

(L) Caretaker’s residence solely intended to provide security for the established principal permitted use of the property.

(M) Indoor mini-storage facility.

(N) Marijuana production facilities and processing facilities as defined in CMC 18.177.025 and subject to the provisions of Chapters 18.105 and 18.177 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.73; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.55.040 Prohibited uses.

(A) General retail, except as identified as a conditional use in CMC 18.55.030.

(B) No residential use shall be permitted, except:

(1) Existing nonconforming structure and/or use.

(2) Caretaker’s residence, conditionally permitted in conformance with CMC 18.55.030.

(C) Marijuana retail sales facilities or medical marijuana dispensaries. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.74, Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003; Ord. 2015-03 § 4 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.55.050 Development requirements.

(A) Lot Size. In an M-1 zone there is no minimum lot size, save and except that the lot must be large enough to accommodate the proposed use, including all design standards and functional requirements related to the use.

(B) Setback Requirements. In an M-1 zone the following setbacks shall be the minimum required. The approval authority may require greater setbacks for uses allowed under CMC 18.55.030, based on the approval criteria in Chapter 18.105 

CMC, the base standard; however, the review body may require a greater or lesser setback based on the design review criteria set forth in this chapter:

(1) The front yard shall be 20 feet, except that:

(a) Parking shall not be allowed within five feet of the front property line.

(b) Where an industrial use abuts a residential zone there shall be a front yard setback of 25 feet.

(2) No side or rear yard shall be required, except:

(a) Fifteen feet when the side yard abuts public street.

(b) Twenty-five feet when abutting any residential zone, except that parking shall not be allowed within 10 feet of the side or rear property line.

(C) Height of Building. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet, unless approved by the planning commission. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.75; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003.]


18.55.060 Performance standards.

In an M-1 zone no land or structure shall be used or occupied unless there is continuing compliance with the following standards:

(A) Design Review Approval. All design review requirements and conditions of approval, including all prior attached conditions, shall be satisfied.

(B) Environmental Standards. All uses shall comply with the required air, land, and water quality standards set forth by all state, federal and local jurisdictions (i.e., Department of Environmental Quality, Clean Water Services, and Metro).

(1) Vibration. No vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles or trains shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the property line of the use concerned.

(2) Odors. The emission of odorous gases or matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property line of the use creating the odors is prohibited.

(C) Heat and Glare.

(1) Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat or glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, such that glare is not visible from a public street or adjacent property.

(2) Exterior lighting shall be designed such that glare is directed away from public streets or adjacent properties.

(D) Insects and Rodents. Materials including wastes shall be managed and stored, and grounds shall be maintained in a manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard.

(E) Outside Storage. Outside storage shall be appropriately screened consistent with CMC 18.55.070(F)(1). [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.76; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.55.070 Development standards.

In an M-1 zone no new use or occupation of land or a structure or a new structure and no change of use of land or a structure shall be permitted unless there is continuing compliance with the following standards:

(A) Landscape Plan.

(1) For all uses in an M-1 zone, the first five feet of lineal street frontage on the subject site shall be landscaped (exclusive of frontage trees) prior to occupancy, in accordance with the approved site plan and the standards set forth herein.

(2) At least 80 percent of the landscape area shall be covered by plant material, lawn, and trees when the plantings are at maturity. The remaining area may be covered in nonvegetative ground cover.

(3) Frontage Trees. Frontage trees shall be required and shall be selected from the approved public works street tree list. The total number of trees shall be determined by dividing the total lineal footage of the site, which abuts a public street, by 50. The location of the trees shall be determined through design review, and the following standards shall apply:

(a) Trees shall be located at least five feet from a utility pole, fire hydrant, driveway, crosswalk, or utility easement, except as may be approved by the public works director, and at least 20 feet from an overhead street light.

(b) There shall be no impervious material within a one-and-one-half-foot radius around the tree trunk.

(c) Trees at the time of planting shall have a minimum height of six feet from ground level, and shall be at least two inches in caliper (d.b.h.).

(d) Trees shall not cause any vision impairment to vehicular traffic.

(e) Installation of required landscaping may be deferred for up to six months; provided, that the owner posts with the city a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit assigned to the city for an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the landscaping materials and installation by a qualified contractor.

(B) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to industrial developments shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets, and shall be shared with adjacent properties to minimize multiple curb cuts. Access to individual lots from T.V. Highway shall be approved by ODOT with secondary access from adjacent collectors or minor local streets where possible. Except in the case of a multi-building complex, direct lot access to an arterial shall not be permitted, unless there is no viable alternative, and direct access to a local street shall only be allowed as permitted by the review body.

(2) The minimum public street width for industrial development shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Internal Access. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and maintained by the owner in accordance with city standards. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street, unless there is no reasonable alternative. They shall have the following minimum pavement width:

(a) Two-way traffic: 24 feet;

(b) One-way traffic: 20 feet.

(4) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(C) Access Streets – Sidewalks – Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, the subdivision code and public works standards.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 24 feet and shall not be more than 45 feet in width at the curb, unless specifically approved by the review body to meet unusual requirements of a particular use.

(3) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than four separate uses and shall have a minimum turning radius of 50 feet measured to the front edge of the curb.

(4) Sidewalks and Improvements.

(a) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, and a minimum six-foot-wide sidewalk, with eight feet at a bus stop, shall be provided along the entire lot frontage, and shall meet ADA accessibility standards.

(b) Site design review Type II requests for remodels, alterations and/or additions to an existing building shall require a sidewalk, if one does not exist; the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be constructed to city standards. Commercial sidewalks shall be curb tight, unless otherwise approved by the review body.

(5) Storm drainage shall be managed through a system of underground drainage lines and catch basins, which convey storm water off the site to a public storm system, and shall comply with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(D) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(E) Mailboxes. Except for in-fill partitioning, clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the locational criteria set by the Post Master. They shall be of uniform style.

(F) Screening.

(1) Sight-obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, and for any approved outdoor storage, or parking lots abutting a residential development. Such screening shall be a minimum six feet in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material; or a densely planted evergreen hedge and chain link fencing. Such screening shall be provided to a height sufficient to block the view of materials stored as viewed from the sidewalk on the opposite side of the street from the screen wall.

(2) The reviewing body may require nonsight-obscuring screening and/or fencing of parking lots abutting property lines, front yards abutting a public street, or other yards abutting a residential development.

(G) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 18.145 CMC.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of this title.

(3) Parking Lot Landscaping. There shall be a five-foot landscaped buffer at the perimeter of all parking lot areas. The parking area shall be screened with evergreen plant material maintained at a minimum of 36 inches in height. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped so as to break up large paved areas with landscaped islands, every 10 parking spaces. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.77; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006.]


18.55.080 Signs.

Signs within the M-1 zone may be allowed consistent with Chapter 18.175 CMC. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.20.78.]


Chapter 18.60 CENTRAL MIXED USE ZONE (CMU)

Sections:

18.60.010    Purpose.

18.60.020    Permitted uses.

18.60.030    Conditional uses permitted.

18.60.040    Prohibited uses.

18.60.045    Applicability of development and design requirements.

18.60.050    Development requirements.

18.60.060    Design requirements.

18.60.070    Parking.

18.60.080    Signs.


18.60.010 Purpose.

The central mixed use (CMU) zone supports active uses in the heart of the town center and historic city center, decreasing dependency on automobiles and creating a self-sustaining and interconnected geography with myriad services and attractions. Complementary commercial, civic, office and residential uses create a dynamic, mixed use environment. Preferred development incorporates active first-floor commercial uses with upper-story residential or office uses that increase the level of activity in the town center core, with multistory design that engages ground-floor users and passers-by while creating a sense of enclosure along the street. Building and site design function together to create a unified, inviting streetscape with attractive facades and functional design of entrances, lighting, and vehicle and bike parking areas. The CMU zone standards guide new development and redevelopment that create a walkable center focused on health and wellness, community and culture, and shopping and dining that serves the entire Cornelius community and attracts visitors from beyond the city. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(A) General retail.

(B) Commercial amusements, including, but not limited to, pool hall, internet and video game center, dance hall or theater, when enclosed in a building.

(C) Artisan manufacturing where a minimum of 25 percent of the floor area is devoted to retail sales or display, including, but not limited to, bakery, brewpub, specialty foods production, artisan studio such as pottery, metalwork, or jewelers.

(D) Service commercial, including but not limited to barber, banks, laundry or dry cleaning, repair shops.

(E) Sales, service or repair of nonmotorized sporting equipment, such as bicycles, skis, snowboards, skates, and general sporting goods, inclusive of electric bicycles and stationary exercise machines that incorporate motors such as treadmills.

(F) Office, business, professional, medical/dental, veterinarian including indoor animal boarding.

(G) Restaurant, eating and drinking establishments without drive-in service. May include outdoor seating areas, subject to CMC 18.60.060(H).

(H) Commercial lodging, including hotel, motel and bed and breakfast.

(I) Residential dwelling units located above ground floor, with the exception that regulated affordable housing units may be located on the ground floor.

(J) Single-family residences existing at the time of adoption. Residences may be subject to CMC 18.135.020, Nonconforming structures.

(K) Cultural and educational resource facilities.

(L) Health care and social service offices.

(M) Government structure or use including but not limited to public and private park, playground, library, museum, fire station, community center, noncommercial recreational facilities.

(N) Type “A” or Type “B” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC.

(O) Outdoor display and storage, subject to CMC 18.60.060(I). [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.030 Conditional uses permitted.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) A planned unit development conditional use as provided under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(B) Ground-floor residential dwelling units.

(C) Church, and associated church activities.

(D) Certified child care center.

(E) Commercial parking lot or garage.

(F) Building height in excess of 40 feet.

(G) Outdoor display or storage in excess of the allowances in CMC 18.60.060(I). [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.040 Prohibited uses.

Only uses specifically listed in CMC 18.60.020 and 18.60.030, and uses similar to these, are permitted in this district. The following uses are expressly prohibited:

(A) Heavy industrial uses.

(B) Self-service storage.

(C) Automobile drive-up, drive-in and drive-through uses.

(D) Automobile, truck, recreational vehicle storage, repair, fuel and/or sales.

(E) Marijuana facilities. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.045 Applicability of development and design requirements.

(A) New buildings must meet all standards of this chapter.

(B) Redevelopment valued at 50 percent of the building’s assessed value or more or expansions of more than 50 percent of the building’s gross floor area shall meet all standards for any expanded portions of the building and shall meet CMC 18.60.060(B), (C), and (F) for the entire building.

(C) Redevelopment valued at less than 50 percent of the building’s assessed value that does not expand the gross floor area of the building by more than 10 percent shall be exempt from compliance with CMC 18.60.060 and the expanded portion shall use materials that substantially match the originals. CMC 18.135.020, Nonconforming structures, shall apply.

(D) Redevelopment valued at less than 50 percent of the building’s assessed value that includes expansions of existing gross floor area by 10 to 50 percent shall either:

(1) Meet CMC 18.60.060(B), (C), and (F) for any expanded portions of the building; or

(2) Use materials that substantially match the originals for any expanded portions of the building. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.050 Development requirements.

(A) Lot Size. No minimum lot size is required. All lots must be functional and meet the minimum setback and parking requirements.

(B) Setback Requirements. For purposes of this section, the Adair or Baseline Street frontage shall be deemed the front lot line for any lots with multiple frontages that include frontage on Adair or Baseline Street.

(1) Front Setbacks. The front building setback shall be a minimum of zero and a maximum of 10 feet, unless the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with CMC 18.60.060(E). No vehicular parking, storage, access or other vehicular use is permitted within the front yard setback, except for a single driveway to access an off-street parking area.

(2) Side Setbacks. The minimum building setback at a side lot line shall be zero. The maximum street side yard setback shall be 10 feet, unless the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with CMC 18.60.060(E). No vehicular parking, storage, access or other vehicular use is permitted within the street side yard setback, except for a single driveway to access an off-street parking area.

(3) Rear Setbacks. The minimum building setback at a rear lot line shall be zero.

(C) Height of Buildings.

(1) Buildings may be a maximum of three stories or 40 feet in height, whichever is less.

(2) Buildings shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height. The minimum height is intended to maintain a sense of enclosure of the street. Single-story buildings shall incorporate false fronts, parapets, or other design elements that reach the minimum height along the entire length of the building. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.060 Design requirements.

(A) Building Frontage on Adair and Baseline. For lots with frontage on Adair or Baseline Street, buildings shall occupy the full width of the parcel’s frontage on Adair or Baseline Street with a maximum front setback of zero feet, with the following exceptions:

(1) One driveway to access an off-street parking area; and/or

(2) A pedestrian accessway perpendicular to Adair or Baseline Street with a maximum width of 12 feet connecting Adair or Baseline Street to a rear parking area or midblock alley; and/or

(3) Up to 40 percent of the building frontage may be set back up to 20 feet if the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with subsection (E) of this section or outdoor seating area consistent with subsection (H) of this section; and/or

(4) A chamfered corner for a building at the intersection of two streets may be set back from the lot frontage for a maximum width of 20 feet along the lot frontage.

Figure 18.60.060-1: Minimum Building Frontage Requirements
[IMAGE]


(B) Entrances and Orientation. Building entrances shall define the building’s orientation toward the street. Buildings shall be oriented directly onto the Adair and Baseline Street frontages or at the corner to create a cohesive, pedestrian-oriented character along those streets.

(1) Main Entrances. Buildings shall provide at least one main entrance facing the street; for lots with a frontage along Adair or Baseline Street, at least one main entrance shall face Adair or Baseline Street or be oriented to the corner of two streets. Main entrances shall be clearly defined and distinguished from other parts of the building by at least one of the following design elements:

(a) Recessed entry.

(b) Entry surrounds such as arches, columns, insets and design elements above and/or flanking the entrance.

(c) Transom windows above the entrance door.

(2) Secondary Entrances. A secondary entrance must be provided along all facades facing a mid-block alley, and may be provided on any other facade.

(3) All entrances shall be served by a direct and convenient pedestrian connection from the nearest street frontage, either by being located along the frontage or connected by a pedestrian path.

(4) All entrances must have a light source to illuminate the entrance.

(C) Weather Protection. Weather protection shall consist of permanent canopies, awnings or arcades; canvas or fabric awnings are not considered permanent for the purposes of this standard because of their short life span. Weather protection elements shall extend at least five feet beyond the building facade with a minimum vertical clearance of at least eight feet.

(1) Weather protection shall be provided over at least the full width of all main building entrances on all street frontages.

(2) Weather protection shall be provided along at least 50 percent of the building frontage for Adair and Baseline Street frontages, including weather protection provided over the main entrance.

(3) Weather protection features may extend over the right-of-way, provided they are approved by the city engineer.

(D) Corner Enhancements. Buildings on corners where one leg of the corner is Adair or Baseline Street shall have an entry located at the corner and include one of the following features:

(1) Tower element, defined as an architectural feature that projects above the surrounding building, which has a separate roof structure and is uniquely identifiable from the rest of the building.

(2) Chamfered corner with an entry on the chamfer.

(3) Corner offset projecting from the main facade and/or incorporating distinctive materials compared to the main facade, and extending to a minimum height of one story.

(4) Corner inset from the building face and developed as enhanced setback area consistent with subsection (E) of this section.

(5) Accommodations or adjustment to these corner enhancement standards may be considered by the community development director in cases where public infrastructure or equipment (e.g., street light poles or utility boxes) create an impediment to accessing these corner features or entrances.

(E) Enhanced Setback Area. All setback areas between buildings and the street allowed under subsection (A)(3) of this section shall be enhanced with the following improvements:

(1) A paved area for use by pedestrians incorporating permanent amenities such as textured paving, planters connected to the earth and planting areas, seat walls and fences a maximum of 42 inches in height, outdoor lighting, short-term bicycle parking, kiosks, colonnades, drinking fountains, public art, etc.; or

(2) A landscaped area incorporating ground cover and shrubs with a mature height of less than five feet to maintain visibility between buildings and the street, achieving 80 percent plant cover at maturity; or

(3) A combination of the above and/or outdoor seating areas per subsection (H) of this section.

(F) Window Coverage.

(1) Ground-floor facades facing Adair and Baseline Street shall incorporate a minimum 25 percent of the ground-floor wall area in transparent windows, display areas, or doorways.

(2) Ground-floor facades facing all other public streets, excluding mid-block alleys, shall incorporate a minimum of 20 percent of the ground-floor wall area in transparent windows, display areas, or doorways.

(3) Ground-floor windows shall include sills at the bottom; bulkheads and piers; and a storefront cornice to separate the ground floor from the second story. Window sills shall be no more than two feet above grade along facades facing Adair and Baseline Streets, except for ground-floor residential uses.

(4) Windows, doorways and other openings along the ground-floor facade shall be arranged to prevent a blank length of wall more than 20 linear feet along any street-facing facade, excluding facades facing the mid-block alleys. A blank wall is a wall that contains no openings such as windows or doorways within the ground-floor wall area.

(5) Upper-story windows shall be vertically proportioned and repeated at regular intervals, with window trim at least two inches wide framing the windows.

(6) Glass curtain walls, reflective glass, and painted or darkly tinted glass shall not be used for ground-floor windows.

(G) Facade Design.

(1) Building Top. The building top must be distinguished from the building facade by a cornice, wall cap, or eaves provided with a pitched or overhung roof.

(2) Building Base. Buildings of three stories or more shall incorporate features to distinguish the base of the building from the upper stories, including:

(a) A horizontal architectural element such as a masonry string course, ledge, or band that projects or recesses from the building face and extends across the facade.

(b) Use of distinct materials on the ground floor compared to upper stories to create a solid foundation. Ground-floor materials shall be finished concrete, stone, brick, masonry or similar as determined by the community development director as the predominant facade material.

(H) Outdoor Seating Areas. Outdoor seating areas are encouraged to increase pedestrian activity and interest along the street.

(1) Outdoor seating areas shall be permitted on up to 25 percent of the gross site area.

(2) Outdoor seating areas are permitted anywhere on site, including within the enhanced setback area and the sidewalk fronting the site, as approved by the city engineer. A minimum width of six feet shall be maintained for pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.

(3) Outdoor seating areas shall be approved through site design review.

(I) Outdoor Display and Storage. Outdoor display of merchandise and vendors shall be permitted within the enhanced setback area and the sidewalk, as approved by the city engineer. Such outdoor display shall be limited to plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, clothing, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile-oriented), and shall only be displayed during business hours. A minimum width of six feet shall be maintained for pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.

(1) Outdoor storage outside of business hours may only be approved through a site design review, which may include conditions limiting the size and requiring screening of such storage.

(2) Outdoor storage or display shall not exceed 10 percent of the gross site area unless approved as a conditional use. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.070 Parking.

(A) Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Chapter 18.145 CMC, as adjusted by the following provisions:

(1) On-street parking spaces adjacent to the street frontage of a building or tenant lease space shall be counted toward meeting the minimum off-street parking requirement. Twenty-two feet of uninterrupted street frontage shall count as a single parking space, rounded down to the nearest whole number.

(2) The minimum required off-street vehicle parking requirements in CMC 18.145.030 shall be reduced by 25 percent for all sites.

(3) Developments with a mix of uses are encouraged to make use of shared parking, and may utilize additional parking reductions in CMC 18.145.020(D) in addition to the reductions in this section.

(B) Off-street parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the lot. No parking areas shall be located between the front of the building and the street.

(C) Change of use of an existing commercial structure will not require additional parking to be constructed. However, construction of a new building or addition to an existing building will require the provision of off-street parking as required in CMC 18.145.030. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.60.080 Signs.

(A) Signs within the CMU district shall conform to Chapter 18.175 CMC, and are subject to the following considerations:

(1) All signs should be architecturally integrated with their surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting so that they are complementary to the overall design of the buildings.

(2) Signs should respect the immediate context of the building’s location and the overall character of the CMU district.

(3) Signs should enhance the primary design elements or unique architectural features of buildings.

(4) Modification to logos and corporate identifiers may be required to fit attractively in the space provided.

(5) Signs should be designed with the purpose of promoting commercial and street activity while enhancing the pedestrian experience.

(B) Sign Design and Materials.

(1) Exterior materials, finishes, and colors should be the same or similar to those of the building or structures on site.

(2) Signs should be professionally constructed using high quality materials such as metal, stone, wood, brass plated, and exposed neon.

(3) Wall-mounted and freestanding LED signs are prohibited.

(4) Excessively bright colors or over-scaled letters shall not be used as a means to attract attention. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


Chapter 18.65 CORRIDOR COMMERCIAL (CC)

Sections:

18.65.010    Purpose.

18.65.020    Permitted uses.

18.65.030    Conditional uses permitted.

18.65.040    Prohibited uses.

18.65.045    Applicability of development and design requirements.

18.65.050    Development requirements.

18.65.060    Design requirements.

18.65.070    Parking.

18.65.080    Signs.


18.65.010 Purpose.

The corridor commercial (CC) zone serves as the gateway to the town center core, transitioning from a highway-oriented environment towards a main street character with smaller-scale businesses and attractions. Uses include commercial retail and services, along with opportunities for multi-family residential uses in a mixed use environment, civic uses including schools and parks as district anchors, and limited light industrial uses. The area is primarily defined by small, individual sites, with several large sites that connect and relate to the scale of surrounding uses. Pedestrian-scale development and streetscape standards inclusive of pedestrian and bicyclist amenities encourage users to experience the district on foot, while standards discourage automobile presence and auto-oriented uses. Development and redevelopment in this district creates a street presence along the N Adair and Baseline couplet, defined by primary entrances, building presence and landscaping. The CC zone standards guide new development and redevelopment that support active commercial and civic opportunities and an engaging street presence to welcome residents and visitors to the town center. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(A) General retail.

(B) Indoor recreation and entertainment, including but not limited to pool hall, internet and video game center, dance hall or theater, fitness or sports facility, when enclosed in a building.

(C) Artisan manufacturing where a minimum of 25 percent of the floor area is devoted to retail sales or display, including but not limited to bakery, brewpub, specialty foods production, or artisan studio such as pottery, metalwork, or jewelers.

(D) Service commercial, including but not limited to barbers, banks, laundry or dry cleaning, and repair shops. Drive-up window, drive-in, or drive-through facilities in conjunction with these uses existing at the time of adoption.

(E) Sales, service or repair of nonmotorized sporting equipment, such as bicycles, skis, snowboards, skates, and general sporting goods, inclusive of electric bicycles and stationary exercise machines that incorporate motors such as treadmills.

(F) Automobile, truck, marine and/or motorcycle service, fueling, repair, parts sales, and including custom vehicle assembly existing at the time of adoption; provided, that all operations other than storage are conducted within an enclosed structure and storage tanks are underground.

(G) Office, business, professional, medical/dental, veterinarian including indoor animal boarding.

(H) Restaurant, eating and drinking establishments without drive-in service. May include outdoor seating areas, subject to CMC 18.65.060(F).

(I) Fast food restaurant with drive-up window, drive-in, or drive-through facilities existing at the time of adoption.

(J) Commercial lodging, including hotel, motel and bed and breakfast.

(K) Residential dwelling units located above ground floor or behind nonresidential uses in the interior of the site such that they are set back a minimum of 50 feet from Adair or Baseline Street, with the exception that regulated affordable housing units may be located anywhere on the site.

(L) Single-family residences existing at the time of adoption. Residences may be subject to CMC 18.135.020, Nonconforming structures.

(M) Cultural and educational resource facilities.

(N) Health care and social service offices.

(O) Government structure or use including but not limited to public and private park, playground, library, museum, fire station, post office, community center, noncommercial recreational facilities.

(P) Certified child care center.

(Q) Type “A” or Type “B” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC.

(R) Outdoor display and storage, subject to CMC 18.65.060(G). [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.030 Conditional uses permitted.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Research and development.

(B) Light industrial uses, except those specifically listed in CMC 18.65.040.

(C) A planned unit development conditional use as provided under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(D) Ground-floor residential units set back less than 50 feet from Adair or Baseline Street.

(E) School, public or private. Nursery, primary, middle, junior or senior high, college or university.

(F) Commercial parking lot or garage.

(G) Building height in excess of 40 feet.

(H) Outdoor display or storage in excess of the allowances in CMC 18.65.060(G). [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.040 Prohibited uses.

Only uses specifically listed in CMC 18.65.020 and 18.65.030, and uses similar to these, are permitted in this district. The following uses are expressly prohibited:

(A) Heavy industrial uses.

(B) Distribution.

(C) Warehousing.

(D) Self-service storage.

(E) Automobile, truck, recreational vehicle storage and/or sales.

(F) Automobile, truck, marine and/or motorcycle service, fueling, repair, parts sales, rental, and including custom vehicle assembly.

(G) Automobile drive-through, drive-in, or drive-up service facilities.

(H) Marijuana facilities. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.045 Applicability of development and design requirements.

(A) New buildings must meet all standards of this chapter.

(B) Redevelopment valued at 50 percent of the building’s assessed value or more or expansions of more than 50 percent of the building’s gross floor area shall meet all standards for any expanded portions of the building and shall meet CMC 18.65.060(B) and (E) for the entire building.

(C) Redevelopment valued at less than 50 percent of the building’s assessed value that does not expand the gross floor area of the building by more than 10 percent shall be exempt from compliance with CMC 18.65.060 and the expanded portion shall use materials that substantially match the originals. CMC 18.135.020, Nonconforming structures, shall apply.

(D) Redevelopment valued at less than 50 percent of the building’s assessed value that includes expansions of existing gross floor area by 10 to 50 percent shall either:

(1) Meet CMC 18.65.060(B) and (E) for any expanded portions of the building; or

(2) Use materials that substantially match the originals for any expanded portions of the building. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.050 Development requirements.

(A) Lot Size. No minimum lot size is required. All lots must be functional and meet the minimum setback and parking requirements.

(B) Setback Requirements. For purposes of this section, the Adair or Baseline Street frontage shall be deemed the front lot line for any lots with multiple frontages including frontage on Adair or Baseline Street. Through lots with frontage on both Adair and Baseline Street with a lot depth greater than 225 feet at any point shall meet the front setbacks for both the Adair and Baseline Street frontages.

(1) Front Setbacks. The front building setback shall be a minimum of zero and a maximum of 10 feet, unless the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with CMC 18.65.060(D). No vehicular parking, storage, access or other use is permitted within the front yard setback, except for a single driveway to access an off-street parking area.

(2) Side Setbacks. The minimum building setback at a side lot line shall be zero. No vehicular parking, storage, access or other use is permitted within the street side yard setback, except for a single driveway to access an off-street parking area.

(3) Rear Setbacks. The minimum building setback at a rear lot line shall be zero.

(C) Height of Buildings.

(1) Buildings may be a maximum of three stories or 40 feet in height, whichever is less.

(D) Lot Coverage. A minimum of 10 percent of each lot, or multiple lots if developed concurrently, shall be landscaped and maintained free of buildings, pavement, or any other form of impermeable cover. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.060 Design requirements.

(A) Building Frontage on Adair and Baseline. For lots with frontage on Adair or Baseline Street, buildings shall occupy 50 percent of the width of the parcel’s frontage on Adair or Baseline Street with a maximum front setback of zero feet. For through lots with frontage on Adair and Baseline Streets with a lot depth greater than 225 feet at any point, both frontages shall comply with this section. The following exceptions shall apply:

(1) Up to 40 percent of the building frontage may be set back up to 20 feet if the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with subsection (D) of this section or outdoor seating area consistent with subsection (F) of this section; and/or

(2) A chamfered corner for a building at the intersection of two streets may be set back from the lot frontage for a maximum width of 20 feet along the lot frontage.

Figure 18.65.060-1: Minimum Building Frontage Requirements
[IMAGE]


(B) Entrances and Orientation. Building entrances shall define the building’s orientation toward the street.

(1) Main Entrances. Buildings shall provide at least one main entrance facing the street. For lots with a frontage along Adair or Baseline Street, at least one main entrance shall face Adair or Baseline Street or be oriented to the corner of two streets. Main entrances shall be clearly defined and distinguished from other parts of the building by at least one of the following design elements:

(a) Recessed entry.

(b) Entry surrounds such as arches, columns, insets and design elements above and/or flanking the entrance.

(c) Transom windows above the entrance door.

(d) Weather protection consisting of permanent canopies, awnings or arcades; canvas or fabric awnings are not considered permanent for the purposes of this standard because of their short life span.

(2) Secondary Entrances. Through lots with frontage along both Adair and Baseline Streets shall provide a secondary entrance on the frontage opposite the main entrance developed consistent with subsection (B)(1) of this section. Secondary entrances may be provided on any other frontage.

(3) All entrances shall be served by a direct and convenient pedestrian connection from the street frontage, either by being located along the frontage or connected by a pedestrian path.

(4) All entrances must have a light source to illuminate the entrance.

(C) Pedestrian Connectivity. All sites shall provide internal pedestrian connections between individual buildings, through parking areas, and between parking areas and buildings, linking to the street frontage. Pedestrian connections shall be direct, safe, and separated from vehicular traffic.

(D) Enhanced Setback Area. All setback areas between buildings and the street allowed under subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be enhanced with the following improvements:

(1) A paved area for use by pedestrians incorporating permanent amenities such as textured paving, planters connected to the earth and planting areas, seat walls and fences a maximum of 42 inches in height, outdoor lighting, short-term bicycle parking, kiosks, colonnades, drinking fountains, public art, etc.; or

(2) A landscaped area incorporating ground cover and shrubs with a mature height of less than five feet to maintain visibility between buildings and the street, achieving 80 percent plant cover at maturity; or

(3) A combination of the above and/or outdoor seating areas per subsection (F) of this section.

(E) Windows.

(1) Windows, doorways and other openings along the ground-floor facade shall be arranged to prevent a blank length of wall more than 20 linear feet along any street-facing facade within 20 feet of the lot line. A blank wall is a wall that contains no openings such as windows or doorways within the ground-floor wall area.

(2) Glass curtain walls, reflective glass, and painted or darkly tinted glass shall not be used for ground-floor windows.

(F) Outdoor Seating Areas. Outdoor seating areas are encouraged to increase pedestrian activity and interest along the street.

(1) Outdoor seating areas, excluding any portion located within the sidewalk, shall be permitted on up to 25 percent of the gross site area.

(2) Outdoor seating areas are permitted anywhere on site, including within the enhanced setback area and the sidewalk fronting the site, as approved by the city engineer. A minimum width of six feet shall be maintained for pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.

(3) Outdoor seating areas shall be approved through a site design review.

(G) Outdoor Display and Storage.

(1) Outdoor display of merchandise and vendors shall be permitted within the enhanced setback area and the sidewalk, as approved by the city engineer. Such outdoor display shall be limited to plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, clothing, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile-oriented), and shall only be displayed during business hours. A minimum width of six feet shall be maintained for pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.

(2) Outdoor storage outside of business hours shall only be located to the side or rear of the lot and shall not be located on the sidewalk or the enhanced setback area. Such storage may only be approved through a site design review, which may include conditions limiting the size and requiring screening of such storage.

(3) Outdoor storage and display, excluding any portion within the sidewalk, shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross site area unless approved as a conditional use. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.070 Parking.

(A) Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Chapter 18.145 CMC, as adjusted by the following provisions:

(1) On-street parking spaces adjacent to the street frontage of a building or tenant lease space shall be counted toward meeting the minimum off-street parking requirement. Twenty-two feet of uninterrupted street frontage shall count as a single parking space, rounded down to the nearest whole number.

(2) The minimum required off-street vehicle parking requirements in CMC 18.145.030 shall be reduced by 15 percent for all sites.

(3) Developments with a mix of uses are encouraged to make use of shared parking, and may utilize additional parking reductions in CMC 18.145.020(D) in addition to the reductions in this section.

(B) Off-street parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the lot. No parking areas shall be located between the front of the building and the street. For through lots with frontage along both Adair and Baseline Streets, the Adair Street frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot, except that such lots with a lot depth greater than 225 feet at any point shall treat both the Adair and Baseline Street frontages as the front of the lot. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.65.080 Signs.

Signs within the CC district shall conform with Chapter 18.175 CMC. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


Chapter 18.70 CORE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (CR)

Sections:

18.70.010    Purpose.

18.70.020    Permitted uses.

18.70.030    Conditional uses.

18.70.040    Prohibited uses.

18.70.050    Area, density and lot requirements.

18.70.060    Site development standards.

18.70.070    Manufactured housing on individual lots.

18.70.080    Commercial use standards.

18.70.090    Accessory dwellings.


18.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the core residential (CR) zone is to encourage a diversity of housing types in close proximity to the city’s town center, creating a vibrant and walkable neighborhood through gradual infill, redevelopment, and preservation of existing homes. A mix of housing types, sizes, and prices are encouraged to reflect the existing mix of housing options and expand housing opportunities for households of all sizes, stages of life, and income levels. The neighborhood is also intended to support interspersed, small-scale commercial businesses compatible with residential use – primarily professional services with limited customer traffic. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in the CR zone:

(A) Single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes consistent with CMC 18.70.070.

(B) Common wall single-family dwellings.

(C) Single-family attached dwellings (i.e., townhomes).

(D) Duplex dwellings.

(E) Multi-family dwellings.

(F) Boarding, lodging or rooming house.

(G) Residential home and residential facility, consistent with state law.

(H) Professional services, including office, medical, and legal, subject to CMC 18.70.080.

(I) Creative spaces with secondary retail, such as art studios and galleries, subject to CMC 18.70.080.

(J) Accessory dwelling unit, associated with single-family detached or common wall single-family dwellings, and subject to CMC 18.70.090.

(K) Accessory uses and structures which are customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the above uses, including approved carports, garages, or storage facilities, subject to CMC 18.150.010.

(L) Home occupation, consistent with CMC 18.20.080.

(M) Type “A” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC.

(N) Underground public utilities. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Governmental structure or use including public and private park, playground, community center and noncommercial recreational facilities, golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, fire station, library or museum.

(B) School – Public or Private. Nursery, primary, middle, junior or senior high, college or university, including manufactured/modular structure for temporary educational purposes.

(C) Utility substation or aboveground pumping station with no equipment storage.

(D) A planned unit development, including office and retail sales and other mixed uses approved by the planning commission and conditional uses as provided for under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(E) Church, and associated church activities.

(F) Certified child care center. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.040 Prohibited uses.

The following uses shall be prohibited within the CR zone:

(A) Recreational vehicles or other movable temporary dwellings used as a residence, or accessory sleeping units, except as lodging for guests not to exceed two weeks.

(B) Manufacturing, processing, and bulk storage, except as permitted as a home occupation.

(C) Parking and storage of construction equipment, semi-tractors and trailers.

(D) The raising of animals other than normal household pets.

(E) Retail sales, except where in compliance with the home occupation requirements or as an accessory use to an approved use under CMC 18.70.020 or 18.70.030.

(F) Restaurant, eating and drinking establishments, or commercial amusements, including but not limited to pool hall, internet and video game center, dance hall or theater, when enclosed in a building.

(G) Heavy manufacturing and processing.

(H) Freestanding wind turbines.

(I) Marijuana facilities. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.050 Area, density and lot requirements.

Lot area and density requirements shall be calculated based on net acreage, as defined in Chapter 18.195 CMC.

(A) Minimum Lot Size.

(1) Single-family detached dwellings and duplex dwellings shall have a minimum lot size of 3,100 square feet.

(2) Common wall single-family dwellings, single-family attached dwellings (i.e., townhomes), and multi-family dwellings shall have a minimum lot size of 2,000 square feet per unit.

(3) For approved nonresidential uses there shall be no minimum lot size, but buildings shall meet all required setbacks as listed in subsection (D) of this section.

(4) In the case of flag lots, the pole portion of the lot shall not count towards the required lot area.

(B) Density.

(1) The minimum density allowed is eight dwellings per net acre for single-family detached dwellings, and 11 dwellings per net acre for all other dwelling types. Any land partition or subdivision shall make provisions to ensure that the minimum density is protected when further partitioning is possible and initial development is less than the minimum density.

(2) There is no maximum density standard for this zoning district.

(C) Maximum Height. Building height, as defined in CMC 18.195.080, shall not exceed 35 feet, except for a chimney, radio, television antenna, or solar feature (see CMC 18.195.190, S definitions), or as may be approved by the planning commission as part of a planned unit development.

(D) Setback Requirements. Except as provided in CMC 18.150.010 for accessory structures, the minimum yard area setback requirements shall be as follows:

(1) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the foundation of the structure, including porch or deck, shall not be less than 10 feet. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 20 feet.

(2) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth as measured from the foundation of the structure.

(3) Side Yard.

(a) The minimum width of side yards shall be not less than five feet in width as measured from the foundation of the structure, except that common wall detached single-family dwellings and single-family attached dwellings shall not be required to have a side yard on side(s) where structures are attached.

(b) On corner lots, the side yard facing the street shall not be less than 10 feet.

(4) Building Separation. Buildings on the same lot shall be separated by at least six feet, subject to Oregon Residential Specialty Code and/or Oregon Structural Specialty Code requirements.

(5) No accessory building or other structure or building shall be closer than three feet from a side or rear property line.

(E) Lot Coverage. The area occupied by the home and all accessory buildings and structures on the lot shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area.

(F) Minimum Lot Dimensions.

(1) For single-family detached dwelling and duplex dwelling lots, the minimum lot width shall be 30 feet.

(2) For single-family common wall dwelling and single-family attached dwelling lots, the minimum lot width shall be 20 feet.

(3) For lots developed with multi-family dwellings, the minimum lot width shall be 30 feet. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.060 Site development standards.

All multi-family developments are subject to design review requirements as set forth in Chapter 18.100 CMC. Developments with three or four units are subject to a Type II site design review process as set forth in CMC 18.100.030(B), and developments with five or more units are subject to a Type III site design review process as set forth in CMC 18.100.030(C).

(A) Landscape Plan.

(1) For multi-family residences, the entire net area of the site that is not covered by building or parking and circulation improvements shall be landscaped prior to occupancy, in accordance with the approved site plan and the standards set forth herein.

(2) At maturity at least 80 percent of the landscape area shall be covered by plant material, lawn, and trees when the plantings reach maturity. The remaining area may be covered in nonvegetative ground cover.

(3) Street Trees. Street trees shall be required and must comply with current public works standards.

(4) Installation of required landscaping may be deferred for up to six months with written approval by the community development director; provided, that the owner posts with the city a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit assigned to the city for an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the landscaping materials and installation by a qualified contractor.

(5) All landscaped areas shall comply with vision clearance standards set forth below.

(B) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to residential subdivisions shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets. Access to individual lots shall be primarily from local streets or alleyways when the alleyway is developed to current public works standards. Direct lot access to arterials or collector streets shall not be permitted, unless there is no alternative as determined by the city engineer.

(2) The minimum public street width shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Internal Access. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and maintained by the owner in accordance with city standards. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street, unless there is no reasonable alternative, as determined by the city engineer. They shall have the following minimum unobstructed pavement width:

(a) Two-way traffic: 24 feet;

(b) One-way traffic: 15 feet.

(4) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(C) Access Streets, Sidewalks, and Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, and the subdivision code.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 12 feet and shall not be more than 25 feet in width at the curb. Each driveway shall have a concrete curb apron designed to comply with public works standards, and not more than two lots may be served by one shared driveway.

(3) For all new construction except accessory dwelling units, curbs, gutters, landscape strip, and a sidewalk subject to public works standards shall be provided along the entire lot frontage and shall meet ADA accessibility standards. In the case of remodels or garage additions to an existing house, no sidewalk shall be required if one does not exist, but the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be required. However, a curb tight sidewalk may be approved by the city engineer when it is impractical to provide the offset.

(4) Storm drainage shall meet current public works design standards and shall comply with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(D) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(E) Mailboxes. Multi-family developments with five or more units shall provide clustered mailboxes, consistent with the locational criteria set by the postmaster. They shall be of uniform style.

(F) Screening. Multi-family developments with five or more units shall provide the following types of screening:

(1) Sight-obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, approved outdoor storage, and parking lots abutting a low density residential development. Such screening shall be six feet in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material, or a densely planted evergreen hedge and chain link fence.

(2) The review body may require non-sight-obscuring screening and/or fencing of parking lots abutting property lines, front yards abutting a public street, or other yards abutting a low density residential development.

(G) Parking and Loading Space.

(1) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Resident. One covered parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit either on the individual lot or in an off-street parking bay within 100 feet from the dwelling being served.

(b) Storage of Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles, such as camping trailers, boats, campers, motor homes, and other such vehicles shall only be parked or stored within an area fully on private property, and shall not be located in the public right-of-way.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of Chapter 18.145 CMC.

(3) Parking Lot Landscaping. For multi-family developments with five or more units, and all commercial development, there shall be a five-foot landscaped buffer at the perimeter of all parking lot areas. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped so as to break up large paved areas with landscaped islands, such as every 10 spaces. See CMC 18.145.050.

(H) On each home site, or on each individual dwelling within a complex, an address number of the home shall be provided in a manner that is clearly visible from the street, as approved by the fire department. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.070 Manufactured housing on individual lots.

All manufactured homes on individual lots within the CR zone shall:

(A) Comply with all federal, state and local building codes for placement, occupation and storage.

(B) Have a pitched roof with at least a nominal slope of one foot in height for each three feet in width.

(C) Have exterior siding and roofing material which in color, material grade, and appearance is comparable to the exterior siding and roofing material predominantly used on surrounding residential dwellings.

(D) Be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards required of site-built single-family construction under the State Building Code (1981) as defined by ORS 455.010.

(E) Have at least one covered off-street parking space constructed of like materials as the home.

(F) Have skirting that consists of smooth or split face concrete blocks.

(G) Be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.080 Commercial use standards.

(A) Commercial uses permitted in CMC 18.70.020(H) and (I) shall comply with the following:

(1) In order to maintain the existing form and character of the district, such uses must be located within a structure existing as of December 4, 2019.

(2) No outdoor storage or display of merchandise is permitted that can be seen from the street or sidewalk adjacent to the property.

(3) No off-street parking is required.

(4) One sign is permitted limited to 10 square feet of sign area and meeting all other standards of Chapter 18.175 CMC. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.70.090 Accessory dwellings.

(A) An accessory dwelling is an accessory, self-contained dwelling unit with separate entrance and kitchen, developed in conjunction with an existing single-family dwelling and usually created in one of the following ways:

(1) From existing space in the primary dwelling;

(2) From a combination of existing and newly created space associated with the primary dwelling;

(3) From space within an existing accessory building, such as a detached garage; or

(4) From the addition of a new accessory building associated with an existing single-family home.

(B) Accessory dwellings shall comply with the following:

(1) Up to two accessory dwellings may be created per single-family dwelling, including single-family detached dwellings, single-family common wall dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, or single manufactured homes.

(2) Each accessory dwelling shall not exceed 800 square feet, or 60 percent of the total floor area of the primary dwelling, whichever is less.

(3) All height, setback, and coverage requirements of the base zone shall be met, and the unit shall comply with the fire and life safety codes. Additionally, conversion of an existing legal, nonconforming structure to an accessory dwelling is allowed; provided, that the conversion does not increase the nonconformity.

(4) No off-street parking is required for an accessory dwelling. If off-street parking is provided, no new curb cuts shall be permitted for an accessory dwelling, except on corner lots where a new curb cut will be allowed on the street frontage having no existing curb cut. New curb cuts shall be allowed only on local streets.

(5) Each accessory dwelling shall have a separate entrance from the primary dwelling; however, the entrance shall not be located on the front of the existing dwelling.

(6) All ADUs shall have a separate street address, visible from the abutting street frontage and clearly identifying the site location of the ADU. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


Chapter 18.75 GATEWAY MIXED USE (GMU)

Sections:

18.75.010    Purpose.

18.75.020    Permitted uses.

18.75.030    Conditional uses permitted.

18.75.040    Prohibited uses.

18.75.045    Applicability of development and design requirements.

18.75.050    Development requirements.

18.75.060    Design requirements.

18.75.065    Residential requirements.

18.75.070    Parking and access.

18.75.080    Signs.


18.75.010 Purpose.

The gateway mixed use (GMU) zone serves as the eastern anchor for the city’s commercial core, with larger-format commercial, office, and residential opportunities in a mixed use environment. Uses include commercial retail and services, offices and employment opportunities, and multi-family residential uses, connected by open spaces, landscaping, and parks. The district welcomes users arriving by vehicle, bicycle, transit, and on foot by accommodating multiple modes of access and providing cross-circulation within the district through a mix of public and private streets, sidewalks, pathways, and connections. Development and redevelopment of the large lots that comprise this district is coordinated to create a cohesive, integrated form of development. Building presence, facade design, and building entrances are emphasized along the Baseline Street, N 19th/20th Avenue, N 26th Avenue, and future N Davis Street frontages to create a welcoming face for the district, with building height limited around the perimeter and concentrated in the interior of the district to increase compatibility with neighboring development. Landscaping, open space, and graduated height transition along the northern perimeter of the district create a low-impact, welcoming interface with the future Council Creek Regional Trail. The GMU zone standards support development of a mixed use district that meets city and regional needs for commercial, employment, and residential opportunities. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(A) General retail.

(B) Indoor recreation and entertainment, including but not limited to pool hall, internet and video game center, dance hall or theater, fitness or sports facility, when enclosed in a building.

(C) Service commercial, including but not limited to barbers, banks, laundry, or dry cleaning. Drive-up window, drive-in, or drive-through facilities in conjunction with these uses.

(D) Sales, service or repair of nonmotorized sporting equipment, such as bicycles, skis, snowboards, skates, and general sporting goods, inclusive of electric bicycles and stationary exercise machines that incorporate motors such as treadmills.

(E) Office, business, professional, medical/dental, or veterinarian.

(F) Restaurant, eating and drinking establishments. May include drive-up window, drive-in, or drive-through facilities. May include outdoor seating areas, subject to CMC 18.75.060(G).

(G) Commercial lodging, including hotel or motel.

(H) Multi-family dwelling units, subject to CMC 18.75.065.

(I) Single-family attached dwelling units, subject to CMC 18.75.065.

(J) Theatrical arts or cultural performance center.

(K) Health care and social service offices.

(L) Certified child care center.

(M) Type “A” or Type “B” mobile vendor, as described in Chapter 5.35 CMC.

(N) Outdoor display and storage, subject to CMC 18.75.060(H). [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.030 Conditional uses permitted.

The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when in accordance with Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Research and development.

(B) Light industrial uses principally permitted under CMC 18.54.020, except those specifically listed in CMC 18.75.040.

(C) Government structure or use including but not limited to public and private park, playground, library, museum, fire station, post office, community center, noncommercial recreational facilities.

(D) A planned unit development conditional use as provided under Chapter 18.110 CMC.

(E) Service stations and fuel distribution, provided storage tanks are underground.

(F) Aboveground utility yard.

(G) Commercial parking lot or garage.

(H) Building height in excess of 45 feet, subject to CMC 18.75.050(C)(2).

(I) Outdoor display or storage in excess of the allowances in CMC 18.75.060(H). [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.040 Prohibited uses.

Only uses specifically listed in CMC 18.75.020 and 18.75.030, and uses similar to these, are permitted in this district. The following uses are expressly prohibited:

(A) Heavy industrial uses.

(B) Distribution.

(C) Warehousing.

(D) Self-service storage.

(E) Large machinery or farm equipment sales, service or rental.

(F) Marijuana facility.

(G) Single-family detached residential. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.045 Applicability of development and design requirements.

(A) New buildings must meet all standards of this chapter.

(B) Redevelopment valued at 50 percent of the building’s assessed value or more or expansions of more than 50 percent of the building’s gross floor area shall meet all standards for any expanded portions of the building and shall meet CMC 18.75.060(B) and (E) for the entire building.

(C) Redevelopment valued at less than 50 percent of the building’s assessed value that does not expand the gross floor area of the building by more than 10 percent shall be exempt from compliance with CMC 18.75.060 and the expanded portion shall use materials that substantially match the originals. CMC 18.135.020, Nonconforming structures, shall apply.

(D) Redevelopment valued at less than 50 percent of the building’s assessed value that includes expansions of existing gross floor area by 10 to 50 percent shall either:

(1) Meet CMC 18.75.060(B) and (E) for any expanded portions of the building; or

(2) Use materials that substantially match the originals for any expanded portions of the building. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.050 Development requirements.

(A) Lot Size. No minimum lot size is required. All lots must be functional and meet the minimum setback and parking requirements.

(B) Setback Requirements. For purposes of this section, the frontage with the higher street classification shall be deemed the front lot line for any lots with multiple frontages.

(1) Front Setbacks. The front building setback shall be a minimum of zero and a maximum of 10 feet, unless the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with CMC 18.75.060(D). No vehicular parking, storage, access or other use is permitted within the front yard setback, except for a single driveway to access an off-street parking area.

(2) Side Setbacks. The minimum building setback at a side lot line shall be zero. No vehicular parking, storage, access or other use is permitted within the street side yard setback, except for a single driveway to access an off-street parking area.

(3) Rear Setbacks. The minimum building setback at a rear lot line shall be zero.

(4) Clear vision areas shall be maintained at all intersections.

(C) Height of Buildings.

(1) Buildings shall be a maximum of three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is less.

(2) Building height may be increased to a maximum of four stories or 60 feet in height, whichever is less, for buildings or portions of buildings set back at least 30 feet from the eastern, western, and southern perimeters of the district, and set back at least 120 feet from the northern perimeter of the district, if approved as a conditional use consistent with Chapter 18.105 CMC.

(D) Lot Coverage. A minimum of 10 percent of each lot, or multiple lots if developed concurrently, shall be landscaped and maintained free of buildings, pavement, or any other form of impermeable cover. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.060 Design requirements.

(A) Building Frontage on Major Streets. For lots with frontage on Baseline Street, Davis Street, N 19th/20th Avenue or N 26th Avenue, buildings shall occupy 50 percent of the width of the parcel’s frontage on these major streets with a maximum front setback of zero feet. The following exceptions shall apply:

(1) Up to 40 percent of the building frontage may be set back up to 20 feet if the setback area is developed as an enhanced setback area consistent with subsection (D) of this section or outdoor seating area consistent with subsection (G) of this section; and/or

(2) A chamfered corner for a building at the intersection of two streets may be set back from the lot frontage for a maximum width of 20 feet along the lot frontage; and/or

(3) Lots or portions of lots developed as a public park or open space shall be exempt from this standard.

(B) Entrances and Orientation. Building entrances shall define the building’s orientation toward the street. Buildings shall be oriented with regard to creating visual exposure from both the highway and from within the district and other uses, through consideration of location, design and relationship of entry doors, pedestrian access and vehicular circulation that does not create significant conflicts with pedestrian circulation, and loading docks, etc. Buildings may need to be designed with multiple fronts, much like occurs on corner lots where exposure to the building is from more than one street.

(1) Main Entrances. Buildings shall provide at least one main entrance facing the street. For lots with a frontage along Baseline Street, Davis Street, N 19th/20th Avenue or N 26th Avenue, at least one main entrance shall face these major streets or be oriented to the corner of two streets. Main entrances shall be clearly defined and distinguished from other parts of the building by at least one of the following design elements:

(a) Recessed entry.

(b) Entry surrounds such as arches, columns, insets and design elements above and/or flanking the entrance.

(c) Transom windows above the entrance door.

(d) Weather protection consisting of permanent canopies, awnings, or arcades; canvas or fabric awnings are not considered permanent for the purposes of this standard because of their short life span.

(2) Secondary Entrances. Secondary entrances shall be provided for buildings with multiple fronts, to provide direct and convenient entrances for users arriving via all modes of transportation.

(3) All entrances shall be served by a direct and convenient pedestrian connection to the street sidewalk and/or internal pathway system.

(4) All entrances must have a light source to illuminate the entrance.

(C) Pedestrian Connectivity. All sites shall provide internal pedestrian connections between individual buildings, through parking areas, and between parking areas and buildings, linking to the nearest street and/or transit stop. Pedestrian connections shall be direct, safe, and separated from vehicular traffic. Pedestrian pathways shall also be coordinated within the district to connect uses and buildings.

(D) Enhanced Setback Area. All setback areas between buildings and the street allowed under subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be enhanced with the following improvements:

(1) A paved area for use by pedestrians incorporating permanent amenities such as textured paving, planters connected to the earth and planting areas, seat walls and fences a maximum of 42 inches in height, outdoor lighting, short-term bicycle parking, kiosks, colonnades, drinking fountains, public art, etc.; or

(2) A landscaped area incorporating ground cover and shrubs with a mature height of less than five feet to maintain visibility between buildings and the street, achieving 80 percent plant cover at maturity; or

(3) A combination of the above and/or outdoor seating areas per subsection (G) of this section.

(E) Windows.

(1) Windows, doorways and other openings along the ground-floor facade shall be arranged to prevent a blank length of wall more than 20 linear feet along any facade facing a public street, off-street parking area, open space or public park, or internal pathway system. A blank wall is a wall that contains no openings such as windows or doorways within the ground-floor wall area.

(2) Glass curtain walls, reflective glass, and painted or darkly tinted glass shall not be used for ground-floor windows.

(F) Facade Design.

(1) Building Top. The building top must be distinguished from the building facade by a cornice, wall cap, or eaves provided with a pitched or overhung roof.

(2) Building Base. Buildings of three stories or more shall incorporate features to distinguish the base of the building from the upper stories, including:

(a) A horizontal architectural element such as a masonry string course, ledge, or band that projects or recesses from the building face and extends across the facade.

(b) Use of distinct materials on the ground floor compared to upper stories to create a solid foundation. Ground-floor materials shall be finished concrete, stone, brick, masonry or similar as determined by the community development director as the predominant facade material.

(G) Outdoor Seating Areas. Outdoor seating areas are encouraged to increase pedestrian activity and interest along the street.

(1) Outdoor seating areas, excluding any portion located within the sidewalk, shall be permitted on up to 25 percent of the gross site area.

(2) Outdoor seating areas are permitted anywhere on site, including within the enhanced setback area and the sidewalk fronting the site, as approved by the city engineer, and the Oregon Department of Transportation in cases where the Baseline Street right-of-way is affected. A minimum width of six feet shall be maintained for pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.

(3) Outdoor seating areas shall be approved through a site design review.

(H) Outdoor Display and Storage.

(1) Outdoor display of merchandise and vendors shall be permitted within the enhanced setback area and the sidewalk, as approved by the city engineer, and the Oregon Department of Transportation in cases where the Baseline Street right-of-way is affected. Such outdoor display shall be limited to plants, gardening/floral products, food, books, newspapers, clothing, bicycles, and similar small items for sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile-oriented), and shall only be displayed during business hours. A minimum width of six feet shall be maintained for pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.

(2) Outdoor storage outside of business hours shall only be located to the side or rear of the lot and shall not be located on the sidewalk or the enhanced setback area. Such storage may only be approved through a site design review, which may include conditions limiting the size and requiring screening of such storage.

(3) Outdoor storage and display, excluding any portion within the sidewalk, shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross site area unless approved as a conditional use.

(I) Screening. Screening shall be required to buffer commercial, employment and residential uses, including associated parking areas, from exposed outdoor storage areas, aboveground utility yards, and abutting properties zoned for industrial use. Screening shall consist of a 10-foot landscaped buffer at least six feet in height at the time of maturity, with one row of evergreen trees planted 25 feet on center and shrubs every five feet on center, or as otherwise determined appropriate by the design review committee, consistent with the intent of this screening.

(J) Landscaping. A minimum of 10 percent of each lot, or multiple lots if developed concurrently, shall be landscaped and maintained free of buildings, pavement, or any other form of impermeable cover.

(1) All landscaped areas shall be planted with at least an 80 percent plant cover at maturity. Large areas of bark dust or other nonliving vegetative ground covers shall be avoided.

(2) The elements of landscaping include all forms of planting and vegetation, all adjustments, refinements, or designed developments in ground forms, rock groupings, or water patterns or features, all construction other than completely enclosed buildings or primarily utilitarian engineering structures such as retaining walls. Particular attention shall be given to providing walkways, patios or plazas that create linkages between buildings, uses and activity areas. These are all elements used to develop and refine space between, around, or within buildings and pedestrian and vehicular circulation elements.

(3) Landscaping should be used to separate and buffer parking areas from pedestrian areas, and to accentuate building design and entrances. Landscaping is intended to provide visual relief, buffering from vehicles for pedestrian and bikeways, and accent or framing of buildings, plazas and other activity areas.

(4) Landscaping should be incorporated into plazas and courtyards to provide common spaces serving the development. Uses and buildings should be clustered around these common spaces whenever possible, with entries oriented to these spaces.

(5) All vegetative landscaping shall be maintained with a functioning irrigation system.

(K) Trail Corridor Landscaping. A 30-foot-wide landscaping buffer is required along the northern property line abutting the ODOT Rail/future Council Creek Regional Trail corridor to soften the transition between development and the trail.

(1) The landscaping buffer area shall meet the requirements of and count towards the minimum percentage required in subsection (J) of this section, except that paved pedestrian and bikeways may be integrated into the buffer area.

(2) Fences within the landscaping buffer area shall not exceed 42 inches in height unless approved as a conditional use consistent with Chapter 18.105 CMC and the applicant demonstrates that they are necessary for security purposes.

(3) A landscaping buffer is not required between the trail corridor and any public park or common open space; provided, that the park or open space is a minimum of 30 feet wide.

(L) Residential Open Space. Vertical mixed use developments containing 20 or more residential units shall provide at least 100 square feet of open recreational space per unit provided in common open space. Such space will be considered part of the landscaping required by subsection (J) of this section, but must be designed in a manner that affords residents usable open area. Streets, access drives and parking lots shall not be considered open space. Open space must be a usable open recreational area, and may include a club house or indoor recreation facility. All outdoor area shall be landscaped and maintained by the owner, or a homeowners’ association, according to the approved development plans, unless the open space is dedicated to and accepted by the city as a public park.

(M) Lighting. Adequate exterior lighting shall be provided to promote public safety, to illuminate pedestrian pathways and parking areas, and shall be designed to avoid unnecessary or undesirable glare into the street or upon other properties, particularly those outside of the district. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.065 Residential requirements.

In lieu of compliance with CMC 18.75.050, 18.75.060 and 18.75.070, ground-floor residential uses shall comply with the standards of this section. Upper-story residential uses in a vertical mixed use building shall not be subject to this section.

(A) Location of Residential Uses. Ground-floor residential uses are limited to a percentage of the total site area based on the three subdistricts shown in Figure 18.75.065-1.

(1) In subdistrict A, up to 100 percent of a lot or multiple lots if developed concurrently may be developed as ground-floor residential uses, including parking to serve residential uses.

(2) In subdistrict B, up to 50 percent of a lot or multiple lots if developed concurrently may be developed as ground-floor residential uses, including parking to serve residential uses.

(3) In subdistrict C, no ground-floor residential uses are permitted.

Figure 18.75.065-1: GMU Subdistricts
[IMAGE]


(B) Location of Single-Family Attached Residential Uses. Single-family attached residential uses (townhouses) shall only be permitted within subdistrict A. In subdistrict A, up to 50 percent of a lot or multiple lots if developed concurrently may be developed as single-family attached residential uses, including parking, infrastructure, and open space to serve those uses.

(C) Minimum density for ground-floor residential uses is 18 units per net acre. There is no maximum density.

(D) Open Space. Within residential developments containing 20 or more lots or units there shall be at least 150 square feet of open recreational space per unit provided in common open space. Such space will be considered part of the required landscaping, but must be designed in a manner that affords residents usable open area. Streets, access drives and parking lots shall not be considered open space. Open space must be a usable open recreational area, and may include a club house or indoor recreation facility. All outdoor area shall be landscaped and maintained by the owner, or a homeowners’ association, according to the approved development plans, unless the open space is dedicated to and accepted by the city as a public park.

(E) Landscaping. A minimum of 15 percent of each lot, or multiple lots if developed concurrently, shall be landscaped and maintained free of buildings, pavement, or any other form of impermeable cover. Open space designed to meet the requirements of subsection (D) of this section may be counted towards the required landscaping.

(1) All landscaped areas shall be planted with at least an 80 percent plant cover at maturity. Large areas of bark dust or other nonliving vegetative ground covers shall be avoided.

(2) The elements of landscaping include all forms of planting and vegetation, all adjustments, refinements, or designed developments in ground forms, rock groupings, or water patterns or features, all construction other than completely enclosed buildings or primarily utilitarian engineering structures such as retaining walls. Particular attention shall be given to providing walkways, patios or plazas that create linkages between buildings, uses and activity areas. These are all elements used to develop and refine space between, around, or within buildings and pedestrian and vehicular circulation elements.

(3) Landscaping should be used to separate and buffer parking areas from pedestrian areas, and to accentuate building design and entrances. Landscaping is intended to provide visual relief, buffering from vehicles for pedestrian and bikeways, and accent or framing of buildings, plazas and other activity areas.

(4) Landscaping should be incorporated into plazas and courtyards to provide common spaces serving the development. Uses and buildings should be clustered around these common spaces whenever possible, with entries oriented to these spaces.

(5) All vegetative landscaping shall be maintained with a functioning irrigation system.

(F) Trail Corridor Landscaping. A 30-foot-wide landscaping buffer is required along the northern property line abutting the future Council Creek Regional Trail corridor to soften the transition between development and the trail.

(1) The landscaping buffer area shall meet the requirements of and count towards the minimum percentage required in CMC 18.75.060(J), except that paved pedestrian and bikeways may be integrated into the buffer area.

(2) The landscaping buffer may incorporate both common open space and private yard space associated with individual residential lots. Private yard space may not exceed 15 feet wide out of the 30-foot-wide required buffer.

(3) Fences within the landscaping buffer area shall not exceed 42 inches in height unless approved as a conditional use consistent with Chapter 18.105 CMC and the applicant demonstrates that they are necessary for security purposes.

(4) A landscaping buffer is not required between the trail corridor and any public park or common open space; provided, that the park or open space is a minimum of 30 feet wide.

(G) Multi-family development shall comply with the following dimensional standards:

(1) The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet.

(2) The minimum lot width shall be 30 feet.

(3) The maximum height shall be three stories or 45 feet in height, whichever is less. Building height may be increased to a maximum of four stories or 60 feet in height, whichever is less, for buildings or portions of buildings set back at least 30 feet from the eastern, western, and southern perimeters of the district, and set back at least 120 feet from the northern perimeter of the district, if approved as a conditional use consistent with Chapter 18.105 CMC.

(4) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the foundation of the structure, including porch or deck, shall not be less than five feet. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 20 feet.

(5) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth as measured from the foundation of the structure.

(6) Side Yard. The minimum width of side yards shall be not less than five feet in width as measured from the foundation of the structure.

(7) Building Separation. Buildings within a complex shall be separated by at least six feet, subject to Oregon Residential Specialty Code and/or Oregon Structural Specialty Code requirements.

(H) Single-family attached dwellings on individual lots shall comply with the following dimensional standards:

(1) The minimum lot size shall be 2,000 square feet.

(2) The minimum lot width shall be 20 feet.

(3) The maximum height shall be 35 feet.

(4) Front Yard. The front, as measured from the foundation of the structure, including porch or deck, shall not be less than five feet. Accessory structures, garages or carports shall not be less than 20 feet.

(5) Rear Yard. No rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth as measured from the foundation of the structure.

(6) Side Yard. The minimum width of side yards shall be not less than five feet in width as measured from the foundation of the structure, except that no side yard is required on side(s) where structures are attached.

(I) Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation and Clear Vision Areas.

(1) Where possible, vehicular access to residential subdivisions shall be from abutting arterial or collector streets. Access to individual lots shall be primarily from local streets or alleyways when the alleyway is developed to current public works standards. Direct lot access to arterials or collector streets shall not be permitted, unless there is no alternative as determined by the city engineer.

(2) The minimum public street width shall comply with the standards and design identified in CMC 18.143.040, Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

(3) Internal Access. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and maintained by the owner in accordance with city standards. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 100 feet to any intersection of a public street, unless there is no reasonable alternative as determined by the city engineer. They shall have the following minimum unobstructed pavement width:

(a) Two-way traffic: 24 feet;

(b) One-way traffic: 15 feet.

(4) Internal sidewalks or pathways shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the development.

(5) Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections in accordance with the vision clearance standards set forth in CMC 18.150.070.

(J) Access Streets, Sidewalks, and Drainage.

(1) All streets shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, and the subdivision code.

(2) All driveways for new construction shall have minimum pavement width of 12 feet and shall not be more than 25 feet in width at the curb. Each driveway shall have a concrete curb apron designed to comply with public works standards, and not more than two residential lots may be served by one shared driveway.

(3) For all new construction, curbs, gutters, and a sidewalk subject to public works standards, offset from the curb, shall be provided along the entire lot frontage and shall meet ADA accessibility standards. In the case of remodels or garage additions to an existing use, no sidewalk shall be required if one does not exist, but the driveway apron and paved driveway shall be required. However, a curb tight sidewalk may be approved by the city engineer when it is impractical to provide the offset.

(4) Storm drainage shall meet current public works standards and shall comply with Clean Water Services (CWS) standards for water quality and quantity.

(K) Lighting Streets. Streets and walkways shall be lighted during the hours of darkness in accordance with public works standards.

(L) Mailboxes. Single-family attached and multi-family developments with five or more units shall provide clustered mailboxes, consistent with the locational criteria set by the postmaster. They shall be of uniform style.

(M) Screening. Multi-family developments with five or more units shall provide the following types of screening:

(1) Sight-obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, approved outdoor storage, and parking lots abutting a low density residential development. Such screening shall be six feet in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material, or a densely planted evergreen hedge and chain link fence.

(2) The review body may require non-sight-obscuring screening and/or fencing of parking lots abutting property lines, front yards abutting a public street, or other yards abutting a low density residential development.

(N) Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Chapter 18.145 CMC, as adjusted by the following provisions:

(1) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Resident. One covered parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit either on the individual lot or in an off-street parking bay within 100 feet from the lot being served.

(b) Storage of Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles, such as camping trailers, boats, campers, motor homes, and other such vehicles shall only be parked or stored within an area fully on private property, and shall not be located in the public right-of-way.

(2) Paving and Design. Off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and designed in accordance with the standards of the off-street parking regulations of Chapter 18.145 CMC.

(3) Parking Lot Landscaping. For multi-family developments with five or more units, and all commercial development, there shall be a five-foot landscaped buffer at the perimeter of all parking lot areas. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped so as to break up large paved areas with landscaped islands, such as every 10 spaces. See CMC 18.145.050.

(4) Parking Lot Location. For multi-family developments with five or more units, off-street parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of individual lots and/or buildings. No parking areas shall be located between the front of a building and a public street or primary access road.

(O) On each home site, or on each individual dwelling within a complex, an address number of the home shall be provided in a manner that is clearly visible from the street, as approved by the fire department. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.070 Parking and access.

(A) Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Chapter 18.145 CMC, as adjusted by the following provisions:

(1) On-street parking spaces adjacent to the street frontage of a building or tenant lease space shall be counted toward meeting the minimum off-street parking requirement. Twenty-two feet of uninterrupted street frontage shall count as a single parking space, rounded down to the nearest whole number.

(2) Shared parking is encouraged in this mixed use district. In lieu of CMC 18.145.020(D), applicants may propose to reduce the minimum required off-street vehicle parking requirements in CMC 18.145.030 by up to 25 percent if they can demonstrate that overlapping use patterns and peak hours of demand will reduce the parking needs for the development.

(B) Off-street parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of individual lots and/or buildings. No parking areas shall be located between the front of a building and a public street or primary access road.

(C) Access.

(1) Direct access to the highway will be discouraged with consolidation of access points encouraged. Wherever possible, access is to be provided through internal connections rather than by curb cuts to the highway, with primary access points located at the signalized intersections with the highway and all highway access coordinated with ODOT.

(2) Transit access to and within the district is a priority. Direct pedestrian linkages from transit stops to store entries must be provided which may require multiple entry points to buildings. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.75.080 Signs.

Signs within the GMU district shall conform with Chapter 18.175 CMC. [Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


Chapter 18.80 MAIN STREET CIVIC ZONE (MSC)

(Repealed by Ord. 2019-10)


Chapter 18.85 MAIN STREET DESIGN OVERLAY (MSDO)

(Repealed by Ord. 2019-10)


Chapter 18.90 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (FP)

Sections:

18.90.010    Purpose.

18.90.020    Definitions.

18.90.030    General standards.

18.90.040    Specific standards.

18.90.050    Floodways.

18.90.060    Shallow flooding.

18.90.070    Critical facilities.

18.90.080    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

18.90.090    Abrogation and severability.

18.90.100    Special administrative provisions for the FP zone.

18.90.110    Development application procedures.

18.90.120    Appeal and variances.

18.90.130    Violation and penalties.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 810 and 841; Code 2000 §§ 11.20.91 – 11.20.93.


18.90.010 Purpose.

(A) The city of Cornelius has the primary responsibility for planning, adoption, and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper management of special flood hazard areas within the city limits.

(B) It is the purpose of the FP zone to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses or damages due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 

(1) Protect human life and health;

(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the public; 

(4) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazards;

(5) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard; 

(6) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; 

(7) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; 

(8) Maintain the functions and values associated with special flood hazard areas which reduce the risk of flooding. 

(C) Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The special flood hazard areas are identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” Volumes 1 through 3, dated November 4, 2016 (Flood Insurance Study Number 41067CV001A, 41067CV002A and 41067CV003A), with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) (Map Number 41067C0314E, 41067C0318E and 41067C0319E, dated November 4, 2016), are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and the FIRM are on file at the city of Cornelius community development department located at 1300 S. Kodiak Circle, Cornelius, OR 97113. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in this section shall be the basis for regulation. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.020 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below or within Chapter 18.195 CMC, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 

“Addition” means an alteration to an existing structure that results in any increase in its ground floor area. 

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow. 

“Base flood” means flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letters A, AE, AH, AO, or AR. 

“Basement” means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 

“Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)” means letter from FEMA commenting on whether a proposed project, if built as proposed, would meet the minimum National Flood Insurance Program standards for proposed hydrology changes. If the project, built as proposed, revises the flood insurance rate map and/or flood insurance study, a letter of map revision (LOMR) is required to be submitted no later than six months after project completion. 

“Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or the storage of equipment or materials located within a special flood hazard area. 

“Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.

“Enhancement” means the process of improving upon the natural functions and/or values of an area or feature which has been degraded by human activity. 

“Fill” means any material such as, but not limited to, sand, gravel, soil, rock or gravel that is placed on land including existing and natural floodplains, or in waterways, for the purposes of development or redevelopment. 

“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 

(1) The overflow of inland waters; and/or

(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 

“Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 

“Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from the sources specified in the “flood(ing)” definition. 

“Floodplain management regulations” means the provisions of this chapter in addition to the development and zoning code, building codes, health regulations, and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 

“Floodway, regulatory” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. The regulatory floodway is delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on the flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map. 

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 

“Hydrodynamic loads” means loads induced on buildings or structures by the flow of flood water moving at moderate or high velocity around the buildings or structures or parts thereof, above ground level when openings or conduits exist which allow the free flow of flood waters. Hydrodynamic loads are basically of the lateral type and relate to direct impact loads by the moving mass of water, and to drag forces as the water flows around the obstruction. 

“Hydrostatic loads” means loads caused by water either above or below the ground surface, free or confined, which is either stagnant or moves at very low velocities, of up to five feet per second. These loads are equal to the product of the water pressure times the surface area on which the water acts. The pressure at any point is equal to the product of the unit weight of water (62.5 pounds per cubic foot) multiplied by the height of water above that point or by the height to which confined water would rise if free to do so. 

“Letter of map change (LOMC)” means an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories: 

(1) “Letter of map amendment (LOMA)” means an amendment to the flood insurance rate maps based on technical data showing that an existing structure, parcel of land, or portion of a parcel of land that has not been elevated by fill (natural grade) was inadvertently included in the special flood hazard area because of an area of naturally high ground above the base flood.

(2) “Letter of map revision (LOMR)” means:

(a) LOMR-F (letter of map revision based on fill) is a letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure or parcel of land that has been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood.

(b) A LOMR revises the current flood insurance rate map and/or flood insurance study to show changes to the floodplains, floodways or flood elevations. LOMRs are generally based on manmade alterations that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in modification to the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevation, or the special flood hazard area. A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) may be approved by FEMA prior to issuing a permit to start a project if the project has a potential to affect the special flood hazard area. 

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 

“Manufactured dwelling” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Mechanical equipment” means electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, storage tanks and other service facilities. 

“Mitigation” means the reduction of adverse effects of a proposed project by considering, in the following order: 

(1) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action; 

(2) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation;

(3) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

(4) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action by monitoring and taking appropriate measures;

(5) Mitigating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable substitute floodplain areas. 

“New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

“Permanent foundation” means a natural or manufactured support system to which a structure is anchored or attached. A “permanent foundation” is capable of resisting flood forces and may include posts, piles, poured concrete or reinforced block walls, properly compacted fill, or other systems of comparable flood resistivity and strength.

“Reconstruction” means the repair of a structure damaged by any cause (not limited to flooding) without increasing the floor area of the structure. 

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(1) Built on a single chassis;

(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Rehabilitation” means any improvements and repairs made to the interior and exterior of an existing structure that do not result in an increase in the ground floor area of the structure. Examples include remodeling a kitchen, gutting a structure and redoing the interior, or adding a second story. 

“Restoration” means the process of returning a disturbed or altered area or feature to a previously existing natural condition. Restoration activities reestablish the ecological structure, function, and/or diversity to that which occurred prior to impacts caused by human activity. 

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means zones on flood insurance rate maps that depict the land in the floodplain within a community that is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard area is synonymous with “area of special flood hazard.” Special flood hazard areas on flood insurance rate maps are always designated as zones A, AE, AH, AO, or AR. 

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means, for the purposes of this section, a walled and roofed building, a modular or temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is commenced; or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include improvements to a structure to correct violations identified by the city’s building official or alterations to a structure on the National Register of Historic Places or a comparable Oregon register or inventory.

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations.

“Water surface elevation” means heights, in relation to a specific datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.030 General standards.

In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required: 

(A) Anchoring.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

(2) All manufactured dwellings must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (See FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for techniques). A certificate signed by a registered architect or engineer which certifies that the anchoring system is in conformance with FEMA regulations shall be submitted prior to final inspection approval. 

(B) Construction Materials and Methods.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 

(3) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be elevated to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. In flood zones A, AE, and AH such facilities shall be elevated three feet above base flood elevation. In flood zone AO, such facilities shall be elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum of one foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified). 

(C) Utilities.

(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system. 

(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters. 

(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(D) Subdivision and Partition Proposals.

(1) All subdivision and partition proposals governed by the development and zoning ordinance shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 

(2) All subdivision and partition proposals governed by the development and zoning ordinance shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 

(3) All subdivisions and partition proposals governed by the development and zoning ordinance shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 

(4) All subdivision and partition proposals shall comply with all applicable Clean Water Services (CWS) standards with regard to development within flood area. 

(5) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

(E) Building and Manufactured Dwelling Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits and/or manufactured dwelling permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. 

(F) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard area are required to:

(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 

(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

(3) Meet the requirements of subsection (D)(4) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

(G) Accessory Structures. Relief from elevation or flood-proofing as required for structures in A, AE, AH or AO zones may be granted for accessory structures that are: 

(1) Less than 200 square feet and do not exceed 12 feet in height;

(2) Not temperature controlled;

(3) Not used for human habitation and are used solely for parking of vehicles or storage of items having low damage potential when submerged; 

(4) Not used to store toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality unless confined in a tank installed in compliance with this chapter or stored at least one foot above base flood elevation;

(5) Constructed in accordance with anchoring and construction materials and methods standards in subsections (A)(1) through (D)(4) of this section; 

(6) If in an A, AE or AH zone, constructed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or must meet or exceed the following requirements: 

(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(7) The cost of flood insurance for a structure permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

(H) AH Zone Drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

(I) Grading. Grading within the floodplain shall only occur between May 1st and September 1st of each year. Extension of the grading season in a particular year may only be granted by the community development director following a written request from a contractor, developer, or other project representative, and shall only be granted based on the following criteria:

(1) Precipitation is not anticipated within the requested extension period, based on predictions from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) or another reputable weather service.

(2) The extension request is approved by Clean Water Services.

(3) The extension request will not violate any other applicable federal, state and local requirements, including but not limited to the Endangered Species Act. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.040 Specific standards.

In all special flood hazard areas where base flood data has been provided as set forth in CMC 18.90.010(C) or other base flood data are utilized, the following provisions are required: 

(A) Residential Construction.

(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, at a minimum of two feet above base flood elevation. 

(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 

(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(B) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have either the lowest floor including basement elevated to two feet above the level of the base flood elevation or higher; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 

(1) Be flood-proofed so that the portion of the structure that lies below the portion that is two feet or more above the base flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 

(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 

(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in compliance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the community development director; 

(4) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood-proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described for residential construction in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section; 

(5) Applicants flood-proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood-proofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level). 

(C) Manufactured Dwellings. Manufactured dwellings to be placed or substantially improved within an A, AE, AH or AO zone shall be elevated so that: 

(1) Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply with subsection (A)(2) of this section;

(2) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation; and 

(3) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 24 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with requirements of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above base flood elevation. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.050 Floodways.

Located within special flood hazard areas established in CMC 18.90.010(C) are areas designated as regulatory floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 

(A) Encroachments in the regulatory floodway including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited unless certification is provided by a professional registered civil engineer demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 

(B) If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvement shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of CMC 18.90.040.

(C) Projects for stream habitat restoration may be permitted in the floodway provided: 

(1) The project qualifies for a Department of the Army, Portland District Regional General Permit for Stream Habitat Restoration (NWP-2007-1023); and

(2) The civil engineer shall, as a minimum, provide a feasibility analysis and certification that the project was designed to keep any rise in 100-year flood levels as close to zero as practically possible and that no structures will be impacted by a potential rise in flood elevation; and

(3) An agreement to monitor the project, correct problems, and ensure that flood carrying capacity remains unchanged is included as part of the local approval. 

(D) Before a Regulatory Floodway Is Determined in an AE Zone. In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall occur within an AE zone designated on the community’s flood insurance rate map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 

(E) Temporary storage of goods and materials, not including hazardous materials, is allowed in the floodway for a period of less than 90 days within the dry season (June – October). [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.060 Shallow flooding.

Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas the following provisions apply: 

(A) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 

(B) Residential. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures (including manufactured dwellings) within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum of one foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified).

(C) Nonresidential. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures, including manufactured dwellings used for nonresidential purposes, within AO zones shall either: 

(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum of one foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified); or

(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely flood-proofed to one foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.070 Critical facilities.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.080 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas is guaranteed to be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Cornelius, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.090 Abrogation and severability.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.100 Special administrative provisions for the FP zone.

(A) The community development director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this floodplain (FP) overlay zone by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 

(B) Duties of the community development director shall include, but not be limited to: 

(1) Review all development permit requests to assure that the requirements of this section have been satisfied and that all other necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 

(2) Review all other permit applications to determine compliance with this section.

(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of CMC 18.90.050(A) are met.

(4) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(5) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capability is not diminished. 

(6) Provide base flood elevation and structure elevation requirements to the building official. 

(7) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study or required within this section, obtain and record on an elevation certificate the actual elevation (in relation to a specific datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(8) For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures: 

(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to a specific datum), and 

(b) Maintain the flood-proofing certifications required in this section. 

(9) Maintain for inspection in perpetuity the affidavits of certification required in this section. Affidavits of certification, such as elevation certificates, flood-proofing, floodway no-rise, etc., are required to be submitted by the permit applicant for elevations and structural requirements as specified in this section, both pre- and post-construction, utilizing forms provided for this purpose by FEMA. Elevations may be certified by a licensed surveyor or a registered professional architect or engineer. Structural requirements may be certified by a registered professional architect or engineer. 

(10) Where interpretation is needed requiring the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, the community development director will make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the ruling of the community development director shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the ruling as provided in CMC 18.15.090 (Appeal Procedures). 

(11) When base flood elevation has not been provided as set forth in this chapter, the community development director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data and floodway available from federal, state, or other source in order to administer this chapter. 

(C) All records pertaining to the provisions of this section shall be maintained in the city of Cornelius community development department and shall be available for public inspection. 

(D) When a variance is granted, the community development director shall give written notice that the structure will be allowed to be built with the lowest floor elevation at or below base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation. 

(E) Publicly owned open land recreation parks and accessory restroom facilities, where allowed in the underlying zone, shall be allowed in floodplain areas below the base flood elevation. The accessory restroom facilities shall be located outside of floodplain areas if possible. If it is not possible, the restroom structures shall be located: 

(1) On the highest portion of the park grounds; and 

(2) Be wet-flood-proofed; and 

(3) Maintain riparian setbacks; and 

(4) Adequate backflow valves shall be installed.

If the structure is located in a designated floodway, it shall conform to subsections (E)(1) through (4) of this section and shall be small enough and positioned so that it will not divert floodwaters. Any structure located within the regulatory floodway must have a floodway analysis to assure there is no rise in base flood elevation. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.110 Development application procedures. 

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured dwellings, and for all development including fill and other development activities, as set forth in CMC 18.90.020. 

(A) Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the community development director and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. The application shall also include required information listed in Chapter 18.100 CMC (Site Design Review), Chapter 18.95 CMC (Natural Resource Overlay), and the site development standards of the underlying zone and the applicable sections of this chapter, in addition to the following: 

(1) Elevation in relation to a specific datum of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures as documented on an elevation certificate; 

(2) Elevation in relation to a specific datum to which any proposed structure will be flood-proofed as documented on an elevation certificate; 

(3) If applicable, certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing standards;

(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 

(B) Development Permit Review Criteria. In addition to the applicable site development standards of the base zone, Chapter 18.100 CMC (Site Design Review), and Chapter 18.95 CMC (Natural Resource Overlay) the following review and approval criteria shall apply to proposed fill (including grading or construction) located partially or wholly in the special flood hazard area: 

(1) Fill is not proposed to be located within a regulatory floodway, wetland, riparian area, or other sensitive area regulated by the city of Cornelius or Clean Water Services. 

(2) The fill is necessary for an approved use on the property. 

(3) The fill is the minimum amount necessary to achieve the approved use. 

(4) No feasible alternative upland locations exist on the property. 

(5) The fill does not impede or alter drainage or the flow of floodwaters. 

(6) All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.

Conditions of approval may require that if the fill is found to not meet the criterion in subsection (B)(5) of this section, the fill shall be removed or, where reasonable and practical, appropriate mitigation measures shall be required of the property owner. Such measures shall be verified by a certified engineer or hydrologist that the mitigation measures will not result in a net rise in floodwaters and be in coordination with applicable state, federal and local agencies, including the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Clean Water Services, the Division of State Lands, the Army Corps of Engineers, the National Marine Fisheries Service, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Adequate notice of alteration of the floodplain will be given to the above-referenced agencies. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.120 Appeal and variances.

(A) An appeal of the ruling of the community development director regarding a requirement of this chapter may be made to the city of Cornelius planning commission pursuant to CMC 18.15.090 (Appeal Procedures). 

(B) Variances shall be issued by the community development director on a case by case basis, subject to the following regulations:

(1) Variances shall not be issued by the community development director within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result;

(2) Variances may be issued by the community development director for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level;

(3) Variances shall only be issued by the community development director upon (a) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;

(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;

(5) The community development director shall notify the applicant in writing that (a) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (b) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions as required in subsection (B)(6) of this section; and 

(6) The community development director shall (a) maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and (b) report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator.

(7) Variances may be issued by the community development director for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that (a) the criteria of subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section are met, and (b) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.90.130 Violation and penalties.

Violations of the provisions of this chapter, inclusive, by failure to comply with any of its requirements or prohibitions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of these provisions contained in this chapter, inclusive, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $10,000 for each violation and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the city in the prosecution of said violation. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. [Ord. 2016-012 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 18.95 NATURAL RESOURCES OVERLAY (NRO)

Sections:

18.95.010    Purpose.

18.95.020    Permitted uses.

18.95.030    Administrative review approval.

18.95.040    Conditional uses.

18.95.050    Prohibited uses.

18.95.060    Resource protection exception process.


18.95.010 Purpose.

(A) The purpose of the natural resources overlay is to protect the significant natural resources identified in the city’s natural resources inventory and map. The natural resources overlay shall protect resources and functional values that have been identified by the city and state as providing benefits to the public. The natural resources overlay complies with the direction of the comprehensive plan and State Planning Goal 5.

(B) Natural resources overlay (NRO) is applicable to the resource sites and abutting properties identified in the natural resources inventory and map, the Goal 5 ESEE analysis and to future lands annexed into the city that are identified as or contain Goal 5 resources.

(C) The natural resources overlay shall encourage coordination between city, county, regional, state and federal agencies concerned with natural resources.

(D) Uses shall comply with requirements and regulations of all jurisdictional agencies including but not limited to Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Oregon Department of Forestry, Division of State Lands and Clean Water Services.

(E) All significant natural resources shall be delineated and applicable protection setbacks and requirements shall be determined from Table A in the natural resource protection plan and implemented.

(F) All parcels newly annexed into the city containing Goal 5 natural resources shall receive a NRO designation over the entire parcel. A property owner may subsequently commission a certified wetland/natural resource inventory delineating protected resource boundaries and establishing a new NRO boundary and respective protective setback consistent with Table A (Natural Resource Protection Setbacks) in the city of Cornelius natural resource protection plan, and in conformance with Clean Water Services regulations. [Ord. 837 § 1, 2, 2003; Code 2000 § 11.20.101; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.95.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted outright in the natural resources overlay:

(A) Resource enhancement and restoration activities.

(B) Land divisions per Chapter 17.05 CMC.

(C) Removal of nonnative or invasive vegetative species.

(D) Dedication of rights-of-way.

(E) Temporary emergency procedures necessary for the protection of property.

(F) Actions taken by the city to correct or abate a nuisance.

(G) Approved storm water discharge.

(H) Existing lawn within the riparian area may be maintained, but not expanded into the resource area.

(I) Existing utility lines.

(J) Existing legal nonconforming structures. Replacement of nonconforming structures shall comply with Chapter 18.135 CMC. [Ord. 837 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Code 2000 § 11.20.102.]


18.95.030 Administrative review approval.

The following uses are permitted in the natural resources overlay, subject to a Type I design review approval, including compliance with other natural resource agencies:

(A) Repair, maintenance and replacement of existing utility lines.

(B) Fencing.

(C) Removal of a hazardous tree.

(D) Maintenance of streambank stabilization and flood control structures.

(E) ESEE Analysis Findings and Conclusion. The ESEE analysis findings and conclusions identified in the natural resource protection plan provide site specific exceptions to protection measures based on conflicting uses and mitigating consequences of implementation. The sites are specific to the 2002 Natural Resources Inventory and Map. [Ord. 837 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Code 2000 § 11.20.103.]


18.95.040 Conditional uses.

The following uses are permitted in the natural resources overlay, subject to approval of a conditional use permit, Chapter 18.105 CMC:

(A) Streets, roads, recreational trails and paths in the riparian area.

(B) Fill, grading and/or alteration of topography in the riparian area.

(C) New drainage facilities, utilities and pump stations.

(D) Water related recreational facilities.

(E) New construction or expansion of streambank stabilization and flood control structures.

(F) New development on property with significant natural resources per Chapter 18.110 CMC, Planned Unit Development (PUD) Conditional Use, and CMC 18.95.060, Resource protection exception process.

(G) Resource protection exception process per CMC 18.95.060. [Ord. 837 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Code 2000 § 11.20.104.]


18.95.050 Prohibited uses.

(A) New development on significant natural resource sites and property, except as identified in CMC 18.95.040.

(B) Removal of native trees and vegetation from resource areas. [Ord. 878 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 20.105.]


18.95.060 Resource protection exception process.

When planned development can occur that provides for the protection of the resource and permitted use through increased densities, clustered development or the transfer of development rights, a plan shall be submitted and approved through the administrative review, Type II process. Any associated partition, subdivision or design review applications that are required with the planned development shall be processed as a Type III application and reviewed by the planning commission.

(A) New residential, commercial and industrial development or substantial redevelopment requests involving deviation of natural resource protection requirements shall be reviewed through the conditional use permit/planned unit development process.

(B) Transfer of development rights (TDR) may be applied for as a conditional use permit/planned unit development (PUD). Development rights shall only be transferred between residential zones within the city.

(C) Proportional Increase in Density on an Individual Parcel. Increased density requests shall provide for a development equal or better than required by the base zone.

(1) Residential PUD. If a parcel loses between 10 and 50 percent of its area to natural resource protection setbacks, then the developer may apply for a conditional use permit/planned unit development (PUD).

(a) Meet the required setback and develop to the existing development standards and lot sizes of the underlying zone; or

(b) Meet the required setback and decrease the minimum lot size by 10 to 50 percent. The reduction in lot size, at a maximum shall be equivalent to percentage of the site lost to the natural resource protection setback.

For example: R-7 zone – 5 acre site, loses 1 acre to natural resource protection setback = 20% loss. The applicant may propose a development with lots 20% smaller than the R-7 lot size or 6,534 x 0.80 = 5,227 square foot lot size; and

(c) If a parcel loses more than 50 percent of its area to natural resource protection setbacks, then the developer shall only decrease the minimum lot size by a maximum of 50 percent.

For example: R-7 zone – 5 acre site, loses 3 acres to natural resource protection setback = 60% loss. The applicant shall only be permitted a development with lots 50% smaller than the R-7 lot size or 6,534 x 0.50 = 3,267 square foot lot size.

(2) Commercial or Industrial PUD. Natural resource protection setbacks may be applied to meet private landscaping requirements. New development or substantial redevelopment of properties where natural resource protection setbacks are required may request approval of a conditional use permit (CUP) and/or a planned unit development (PUD) to permit a 1:1 ratio exchange for square footage of native landscaped protection setback area in lieu of required private on site landscaping.

For example: A proposed industrial development property has 350 feet of street frontage, which requires 5 feet of landscaped area along the frontage or 1,750 square feet of landscaping. The industrial lot also abuts a significant natural resource for 35 lineal feet and is required to provide a 50-foot setback, which equals 1,750 square feet of natural resource protection. The applicant would be able to request the use of the natural resource protection setback area in lieu of the required private landscaping requirement through the conditional use permit process.

[Ord. 878 § 1 (Exh. A), 2006; Code 2000 § 20.106.]


Chapter 18.100 SITE DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

18.100.010    Purpose.

18.100.020    Authority.

18.100.030    Types of applications.

18.100.040    Approval criteria.

18.100.050    Special conditions.

18.100.060    Compliance with approvals.


18.100.010 Purpose.

The council finds that projects involving building design and development of land should have special review in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the city, to promote orderly growth of the community, to enhance aesthetic values, to assure development which is suitably related to its environment, to prevent both extremes of monotonous uniformity and substantial dissimilarity, and to conform with the comprehensive plan of development of the city, and, that to promote and implement these policies requires consideration of the particular character and impact of new development over and above that included in the zoning, subdivision and building code, ordinances and regulations.

(A) Purposes and Objectives. The council declares that the purposes and objectives of site development requirements and the site design review procedure are to:

(1) Encourage originality, flexibility, and innovation in site planning and development, including the architecture, landscaping, and graphic design of said development.

(2) Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary, bright, showy, gaudy or cheaply ornate, and inharmonious development.

(3) Conserve and enhance the city’s natural beauty, visual character, and charm by insuring that structures, signs, and other improvements are properly related to their sites, and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping, and that proper attention be given to exterior appearances of structures, signs, and other improvements.

(4) Protect neighboring owners and users by assuring that reasonable provisions have been made for such matters as surface water drainage, suitable sound and sight buffers, the preservation of views, light and air, and those other aspects of design included under the zoning provisions of this code which may have substantial effects on neighboring land uses.

(5) Ensure timely, orderly, and efficient administration of development permits.

(B) Professional Quality Design Required. All development plans shall be designed and drawn by a person trained, skilled, and knowledgeable in site planning and development. Such plans shall be of typical architectural, engineering, or drafting quality and accuracy as to scale and design detail. [Ord. 665 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.11.]


18.100.020 Authority.

(A) Facilities and Design Review Committee. The city manager shall establish a facilities and design review committee (the committee) consisting of at least four city staff members, authorized consultants, or other agency staff, each with appropriate expertise, to properly evaluate proposed development plans. The committee at a minimum shall include representatives from the following departments: community development, public works, building and fire. The committee shall review all Type II and Type III requests. Within three working days of acceptance of a complete application the community development director shall forward copies to the committee. The committee members shall individually or collectively critique and comment on the plans relative to applicable code criteria and requirements. Thirty days prior to the planning commission hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to meet with the committee and review the committee’s recommendation of the request. The community development director shall consider the committee comments and prepare a preliminary staff report for review by the applicant and interested parties pursuant to CMC 18.15.010(B).

(B) Jurisdiction and Powers. Except for Type I review, until an application has been reviewed by the committee and approved by the community development director through Type II review, or the planning commission through a Type III review.

(1) The community development director may make an initial determination whether a proposed project requires an application for site design review or whether the project is exempt under this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the design review approval of ordinary repair, maintenance or replacement of any part of a building, structure, or landscaping. For purposes of this section, the term “major remodeling” means any work that substantially changes the exterior appearance of a building or structure.

(2) Plans submitted for planned unit developments shall be subject to design review of site plans, which shall include any and all information describing the proposed lot and street layout, relationship to adjacent properties, and major road systems, locations of building masses (size, type, and function) and building design. Open spaces, parks and greenways, as well as any recreation facilities, shall be specified.

(C) The provisions of design review shall pertain and conform to the following activities and standards specified in CMC 18.100.030(A), (B), (C) and 18.100.040. No permit for building or site development shall be issued until the plans and other documents required by this title have been reviewed, approved and found to be in conformity with these standards. Design review Type I requests shall be processed per CMC 18.15.010(A), Type I – Administrative Review. Design review Type II requests shall be processed per CMC 18.15.010(B), Type II – Administrative Review. Design review Type III requests shall be processed per CMC 18.15.010(C), Type III – Commission Review.

(D) Cumulative Action. As of the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, cumulative design review actions shall be considered the sum total percent of proposed change(s) to already approved plans. Where applicable:

(1) Design review Type I actions that propose to exceed a sum total of 10 percent change(s) to an approved plan shall be processed as a design review Type II request. The appropriate city application and fee shall be required.

(2) Design review Type II actions that propose a sum total of 50 percent or more change to an approved plan shall be processed as a design review Type III request. The appropriate city application and fee shall be required. [Ord. 665 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.12; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.100.030 Types of applications.

(A) Design review Type I actions are minor changes to plans already approved by the facilities and design review committee or community development director. Design review Type I actions include:

(1) Site clearing, fill and grading involving more than 20 and less than 50 cubic yards, prior to the issuance of a development permit.

(2) Site plans for single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings and accessory dwelling units.

(3) Acceptance or rejection, upon final inspection of all architectural and site development improvements in accordance with approved plans.

(4) Moving of residential and other structures.

(5) Remodeling that changes by 20 percent or more the exterior appearance of the building or structure elevations.

(6) All fences that are nonresidential or require a building permit shall be reviewed relative to screening, buffering, safety, building code and security.

(7) Change in use or business that does not meet the threshold for a Type II or III review, but is identified as a different use by the off-street parking standards or as a change of occupancy as defined by the building official.

(8) Conversion of an existing, legal multi-family residential dwelling (i.e., apartments) to condominiums.

(9) Outdoor seating and outdoor display or storage in the central mixed use, core commercial, and gateway mixed use districts.

(B) Design review Type II actions are changes to previously approved design review plans or other moderate changes to structures or sites, which meet certain thresholds. Type II actions include:

(1) Increases in building area of between 10 and 50 percent when materials substantially match the originals.

(2) Addition or subtraction of similar or compatible approved parking spaces between 10 and 50 percent.

(3) Addition or subtraction of similar or compatible approved landscape area between 10 and 50 percent.

(4) Modification of loading facilities.

(5) Resubmittal of Type III plans which have expired pursuant to CMC 18.100.060(A), and are being resubmitted within one year of expiration and exactly as originally approved.

(6) Review of minor development modifications to previously approved master plans/planned unit developments.

(7) Site clearing, fill and grading involving 50 cubic yards or more, prior to the issuance of a development permit.

(8) Other moderate changes to structures or sites.

(9) New development of multi-family residential projects with three or four units in the core residential district.

(C) Design review Type III actions are those which are major and include:

(1) Review of major development revisions to previously approved master plans/planned unit developments.

(2) General site plans for new development or substantial redevelopment.

(3) New development, buildings or structures not part of a previously approved master plan.

(4) Variances proposed with a design review request.

(5) Building additions with an increase of over 50 percent of the existing building area.

(6) Addition of approved parking over 50 percent of the existing area.

(7) Addition of approved landscape area over 50 percent of the existing area. [Ord. 665 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.13; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.100.040 Approval criteria.

In addition to the other requirements of the zoning code and other city ordinances, a project submitted for design review shall comply with the standards and criteria in subsections (A) and (B) of this section; all applications for a sign permit subject to the provisions of the sign code, Chapter 18.175 CMC, inclusive, shall comply with the rules and regulations of the committee adopted under the provisions of Division III of this title and other applicable provisions of the Cornelius Municipal Code.

(A) Technical Standards. Where applicable, required off-site improvements shall be based on proportional analysis.

(1) Facilities and Services. The public and private facilities and services provided by the development are adequate as to location, size, design and timing of construction in order to serve the residents or establishments to be accommodated and meet city standards and the policies and requirements of the comprehensive plan. The service provider is presumed correct in the evidence which they submit;

(2) Traffic Generation. Based on anticipated vehicular and pedestrian traffic generation and the standards and policies of the comprehensive plan, adequate right-of-way and improvements to streets, pedestrian ways, bikeways, transitways and other ways are provided by the development in order to promote safety, reduce congestion, conserve energy and resources, and encourage transit use, bicycling and walking. Consideration shall be given to the need for constructing, widening and/or improving, to the standards of the comprehensive plan and this code, public streets, bicycle, pedestrian, and other ways in the area of the proposed development impacted by the proposed development. This shall include, but not be limited to, improvements to the right-of-way, such as installation of lighting, signalization, turn lanes, median and parking strips, traffic islands, paving, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, bikeways, transit facilities, street drainage facilities, traffic calming devices, and other facilities needed because of anticipated vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic generation. Access and street design shall comply with the standards identified in Chapter 18.143 CMC, Transportation Facilities, inclusive. Street trees shall be installed to the standards identified in CMC 17.05.040(D)(3)(k). In lieu of actual construction of off-site improvements, the committee may accept written waivers of remonstrance to the formation of local improvement districts for the purpose of providing the needed off-site improvements or cash payment to the city in an amount equal to the estimated cost of said off-site improvements;

(3) Dedication. Adequate dedication or reservation of real property for public use, as well as easements and right of entry for construction, maintenance and future expansion of public facilities and services, shall be required to protect the public from any potentially deleterious effects resulting from the proposed use to fulfill the need for additional, improved services, whether on or off site, created by the proposed use, and to effect the implementation of the standards and policies of the comprehensive plan;

(4) Internal Circulation. There is a safe and efficient circulation pattern within the boundaries of the site. Consideration shall include the layout of the site with respect to the location, number, design and dimensions of vehicular, transit, and pedestrian access, exits, drives, walkways, bikeways, transit stops and facilities, building location and entrances, emergency equipment ways and other related on-site or off-site facilities so that there are adequate off-street parking and loading/unloading facilities provided in a safe, well designed and efficient manner. Consideration shall include the layout of parking, storage of all types of vehicles and trailers, shared parking lots and common driveways, garbage collection and storage points, as well as the surfacing, lighting, screening, landscaping, concealing and other treatment of the same. Developments shall provide a safe and reasonably direct pedestrian connection from the main entrance to the public right-of-way and/or the pedestrian system or both. The pedestrian connection shall be reasonably free of hazards from automobile traffic, so as to help encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel;

(5) Maintenance of Private Facilities. Adequate means are provided to ensure continued maintenance and necessary normal replacement of private common facilities and areas, drainage ditches, streets and other ways, structures, recreation facilities, landscaping, fill and excavation areas, screening and fencing, ground cover, garbage storage areas and other facilities not subject to periodic maintenance by the city or other public agency. Materials, including wastes, shall be stored and managed, and grounds shall be maintained in a manner that will not attract or aid in the propagation of insects or rodents or cause a health hazard;

(6) Public Facilities. The structures and public facilities and services serving the site are designed and constructed in accordance with adopted codes and/or city standards at a level which will provide adequate fire protection and protection from crime and accident, as well as protection from hazardous conditions due to inadequate, substandard or ill-designed development;

(7) Security. Adequate facilities shall be provided to prevent unauthorized entries to the property, facilitate the response of emergency personnel, and optimize fire protection for the building and its occupants. Adequate facilities may include, but not be limited to, the use of lighted house numbers and a project directory for multi-family projects of three or more units;

(8) Grading. The grading and contouring of the site takes place and site surface drainage and on-site storage of surface waters facilities are constructed so there is no adverse effect on neighboring properties, public rights-of-way or the public storm drainage system and that said site development work will take place in accordance with the city site development code;

(9) Utilities. Prior to the development of a site, utilities shall be extended to serve the site or financially secured for extension to serve the site. Connection to city utilities shall be required prior to final inspection and occupancy. Electric, telephone, and other utility services to new development shall be located underground. New utilities for redeveloped parcels shall be located underground from the right-of-way to the redeveloped parcels;

(10) Accessibility. Access and facilities for physically handicapped people are incorporated into the site and building design with particular attention to providing continuous, uninterrupted access routes;

(11) Bicycle Lanes and Sidewalks. Where street improvements on arterials and collectors are required as a condition of development approval, they shall include bicycle lanes or off-street multi-modal pathways, and sidewalks constructed in accordance with city standards.

(B) Design Standards.

(1) Relation of Building to Site. The proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings which have a visual relationship to the proposed structure. Building height, bulk, lot area, coverage, setbacks, and scale should be particularly considered with regard to achieving compatible relationships. Screening, except in the industrial zone, exposed storage areas, utility buildings, machinery, service and truck loading areas, solid waste disposal cans, containers and other structures, and other accessory uses and structures, shall be adequately set back and screened. If a building is constructed, enlarged or altered to meet Type II thresholds and is located within 500 feet of a bus/transit stop, a main entrance door shall be placed on the street side of the bus/transit line and located as close as structurally possible to the bus/transit stop in compliance with this title;

(2) Trees and Vegetation. The development has been designed to, where possible, incorporate and preserve existing trees or vegetation of significant size and species. Consideration shall be given to whether habitat, survival of the tree species, and aesthetics can best be achieved by preserving groves or areas of trees as opposed to only individual trees;

(3) Historic Structures. Consideration is given to the effect of the proposed development on historic buildings or features both on the site and within the immediate area;

(4) Grading and contouring of the site shall take place with particular attention to minimizing the possible adverse effect of grading and contouring on the natural vegetation and physical appearance of the site;

(5) Landscaping. The quality, location, size, and structural and aesthetic design of walls, fences, berms, traffic islands, median areas, hedges, screen planting and landscape areas are such that they serve their intended purposes and have no adverse effect on existing or contemplated abutting land uses;

(6) Lighting. Adequate exterior lighting shall be provided to promote public safety, and shall be designed to avoid unnecessary glare upon other properties;

(7) Solar Access. In determining the appropriate relation of the building or structure to the site, the committee shall require that the building or structure be located on the site in a location and direction that will maintain, where feasible, solar access for adjacent properties and buildings or structures within the site. [Ord. 588 §§ 1, 2, 1981; Ord. 665 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.14; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.100.050 Special conditions.

(A) Open Space, Parks and Recreation Areas. Major residential developments, 20 units or more, shall include park and recreation areas, or both. In all multi-family projects, the required park and recreation area shall include a children’s play area and play equipment for the use of residents and occupants of the multi-family project. The community development director shall have the power to approve plans for these recreation areas. 

(B) Objectionable Uses. Odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, glare, heat, and vibration from commercial and industrial uses, or both, which might create a nuisance or be offensive to other uses in the area or be incompatible with such other uses shall be adequately eliminated or controlled by authorized measures. [Ord. 588 § 3, 1981; Ord. 665 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.15; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.100.060 Compliance with approvals.

(A) Time Limit on Approval. Site design review approvals shall be void after two years unless a building permit has been issued and substantial construction pursuant thereto has taken place.

(B) Certificate of Occupancy. In order to assure completion of the work in the manner and at the time approved, the premises shall not be used or occupied for the purposes set forth in the application until the city has completed a final inspection or issued a certificate of occupancy following completion of the work in substantial conformance to the approved plan. Prior to the final completion of all work, a certificate of occupancy or approval to occupy may be issued for a portion of the premises or conditioned upon further work being completed by a date certain.

(C) Revocation of Approval. The community development director may, upon reasonable notice to the applicant and an opportunity for him to be heard, revoke design review approval previously given and may revoke a certificate of occupancy for any of the following reasons:

(1) Material misrepresentation of fact in the application or in testimony or evidence submitted, whether the misrepresentation is intentional or unintentional.

(2) Failure to complete work within the time and in the manner approved without obtaining an extension of time or modification of plans.

(3) Failure to maintain and use the property in accordance with the approved plans and conditions.

(D) Violation. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy premises for which design review approval is required, or to perform work for which design review approval is required, without complying with the provisions of CMC 18.100.010. It shall be unlawful to willfully violate any term or condition of an approved design review. [Ord. 665 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.16; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.105 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT

Sections:

18.105.010    Purpose.

18.105.020    Authority.

18.105.030    Procedures.


18.105.010 Purpose.

Certain types of uses require special consideration prior to being permitted in a particular district. The reasons for requiring special consideration involves, among other things, the size of the area required, the nature of the traffic problems, the effect such uses have on any adjoining land uses and on the growth and development of the community as a whole. The uses are listed in each use district as a conditional use. [Ord. 640 § 1, 1985; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.31.]


18.105.020 Authority.

The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for a conditional use permit. In permitting a conditional use, the planning commission may impose conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood, or the city as a whole. A conditional use permit shall not grant variances to the regulations prescribed by this title.

(A) Authorization to Grant or Deny Conditional Uses.

(1) Uses designated in this title as conditional uses permitted shall be permitted or enlarged or altered upon approval of the commission in accordance with the standards and procedures specified in this chapter.

(2) The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following requirements:

(a) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions;

(b) Controlling the location and number of vehicular access points to the property;

(c) Increasing street width;

(d) Increasing the number of off-street parking or loading spaces required;

(e) Limiting the number of signs;

(f) Limiting the coverage or height of buildings because of obstruction to view or reduction of light or air to adjacent property;

(g) Requiring sight-obscuring fencing and landscaping where necessary to reduce noise or glare or maintain the property in a character in keeping with the surrounding area; and

(h) Requirements under which any future enlargement or alteration of the use shall be reviewed by the city and new conditions imposed.

(3) Change in use, expansion or contraction of site area, or alteration of structures or uses classified as conditional existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall conform to the regulations pertaining to conditional uses. If the site is found inappropriate for the use requested, the commission may deny approval of the conditional use.

(4) In addition to all other applicable standards and authority regulating the consideration of applications for a conditional use for home occupation, the following standards and conditions shall apply:

(a) A conditional use permit for a home occupation shall be valid for a period of one year following the effective date of the approval. No person operating an authorized home occupation shall have employees engaged in the home occupation on the premises other than members of the person’s immediate family. See CMC 18.20.080 and 18.25.080 for home occupation standards.

(b) No signs, placards, notices or other materials advertising the home occupation shall be erected, placed or permitted to be affixed to the land or dwelling within which the home occupation is being conducted. See Chapter 18.175 CMC for sign code standards.

(c) A conditional use permit for home occupation can be renewed for an additional one-year period, without an additional application fee, if the application for renewal is filed not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of the permit. The planning commission may impose additional conditions upon the permit upon renewal to carry out the purposes of the underlying zoning district. [Ord. 604 § 2, 1983; Ord. 640 § 1, 1985; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.32.]


18.105.030 Procedures.

(A) Application. A request for a conditional use or modification of an existing conditional use may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application form prescribed by the community development director and shall be filed with the community development director.

(B) Approval Criteria. The approval, approval with conditions or denial of an application for conditional use or to enlarge or to alter a conditional use shall be based on findings of fact with regard to each of the following approval standards:

(1) The proposed development will comply with the comprehensive plan;

(2) The applicable requirements of the zoning district are satisfied; and

(3) That the location, size, design, and functional characteristics of the proposed use are such that it can be made reasonably compatible with and have a minimum impact on the livability and appropriate development of other properties in the surrounding neighborhood;

(4) The granting of the proposal will provide for a facility that is consistent with the overall needs of the city.

(C) Modifications. A request to substantially modify an existing conditional use permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new request for a conditional use permit. Minor modifications of an existing conditional use permit may be approved by the community development director. When an interpretation is discretionary, notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.15 CMC.

(D) Public Hearing Required. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application requiring action by the planning commission. The hearing shall be conducted within 45 days after perfection of a completed application. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements of CMC 18.15.030.

(E) Notification of Action. The community development director shall notify the applicant of the conditional use decision rendered by the planning commission, in writing within five days after the decision has been made.

(F) Time Limit on Approvals. A conditional use permit shall become void two years after the date of final approval or after such time less than two years as may be specified as a condition of approval unless prior to that time a building permit has been issued for the project and substantial construction has taken place.

(G) Special Conditions.

(1) The permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure unless otherwise specified in conditions attached to the permit.

(2) The applicant shall file a copy of the approved conditional use permit with the Washington County Department of Records and Elections. Building permits shall not be issued until the applicant has provided evidence satisfactory to the city of compliance. [Ord. 640 § 1, 1985; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.33; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.110 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) CONDITIONAL USE

Sections:

18.110.010    Purpose.

18.110.020    Development requirements.

18.110.030    Procedures.


18.110.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of these provisions to allow a planned unit development as a conditional use in any residential, commercial or industrial zoning district. Uses or combinations of uses may be developed as a single, integral, functional unit or entity. The planned unit development concept supports a growing urban area by encouraging a more creative approach in the development of land, while at the same time enhancing and preserving the value, spirit, character and integrity of surrounding areas which have developed or are developing under conventional district regulations. Deviations from specific site development requirements and a mixture of combinations of residential, commercial and industrial uses is allowable, subject to the provisions of the comprehensive plan, as long as the general purposes for the requirements are achieved and the general provisions of the zoning regulations are observed. It is further the purpose of authorizing planned unit developments to take into account any or all of the following:

(A) Advances in technology and design;

(B) A comprehensive development equal to or better than that resulting from traditional lot-by-lot land use development, in which the design of the overall unit permits flexibility in the placement and uses of structures and the location of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking areas and other facilities;

(C) The potential of the site characterized by special features of geography, topography, size or shape; and

(D) The height and bulk characteristics of structures can vary as long as the ratio of site area to uses and openness of the site will be in harmony with the area in which the proposed development is located. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.41; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.110.020 Development requirements.

The following standards and requirements shall govern the application of a planned unit development and apply in a planned unit development conditional use:

(A) A planned unit development may include any uses and conditional uses permitted in an underlying or abutting zone. Standards governing area, density, off-street parking, or other requirements shall be guided by the standards of the zone that most nearly portrays the character of the zone in which the planned unit development is proposed.

(B) Planned unit developments shall not be less than one acre in area.

(C) Approval compliance, required by CMC 17.05.040(E), for subdivision improvements shall be required to ensure that a development proposal, as submitted, is completed within the required time limit. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.42; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.110.030 Procedures.

The following procedures shall be observed in applying and acting on a planned unit development request:

(A) Application Requirements.

(1) The community development director shall provide forms that specify the information required for submission of a planned unit development (PUD). The applicant shall prepare site plan(s) with other supplementary material as may be required and shall submit the necessary number of copies to the community development director.

(2) Applicability of Planned Unit Development Regulations. The requirements for a planned unit development set forth in these sections are in addition to the conditional use permit (CUP) procedures, authority and standards of Chapter 18.105 CMC. The applicant must submit a request for a PUD in conjunction with an application for a CUP.

(3) Plans submitted for planned unit developments shall be subject to design review of site plans, which shall include any and all information describing the proposed lot and street layout, relationship to adjacent properties and major road systems, locations of building masses (size, type, and function) and building design. The applicant may provide an alternative to the building design information by submitting a justification why it is necessary and appropriate to deviate from this requirement. Open spaces, parks and greenways, as well as any recreation facilities, shall be specified.

(4) An applicant shall submit the required documents as prescribed by the community development director on the application checklist. Once the application is deemed complete, the applicant will provide the necessary copies as determined by the community development director for review by the planning commission. The preliminary plan shall include the following information:

(a) Proposed land uses, building locations, and housing unit densities.

(b) Proposed circulation pattern indicating the status of street ownership.

(c) Proposed open space uses.

(d) Proposed grading and drainage pattern.

(e) Proposed method of water supply and sewerage disposal.

(f) Economic and supporting data to justify any proposed commercial and industrial elements in an area not so zoned.

(g) Relations of the proposed development to the surrounding areas and the comprehensive plan.

(5) Prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, the community development director shall distribute copies of the request to the facilities and design review committee to review and to prepare their recommendation to the planning commission.

(B) Approval Criteria. In order to approve a PUD, findings of fact shall be made to support the following conclusions:

(1) There are special physical or geographic conditions or objectives of development which warrant a departure from the standard title requirements.

(2) Resulting development will be consistent with overall planning and zoning objectives of the city.

(3) The area around the development can be planned to be in substantial harmony with the proposed plan.

(4) If the applicant is proposing phasing the project, then identify the schedule for phasing. If the applicant is not proposing to phase the project, then identify the time frame for completion.

(5) Provide findings that economically justify a proposed commercial or industrial development.

(6) The streets are adequate to support the anticipated traffic and the development will not overload the streets outside the planned area.

(7) Proposed utility and drainage facilities are adequate for the population densities and type of development proposed.

(C) Other Requirements.

(1) The planning commission shall notify the applicant whether, in its opinion, the foregoing provisions have been satisfied and if not, whether they can be satisfied with further plan revision.

(2) Following this meeting, the applicant may proceed when approval is given by the commission.

(3) Conditions. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the commission may attach conditions it finds are necessary to carry out the purposes, objectives and standards of the planned unit development conditional use.

(4) Zoning Map. Planned developments shall be established as conditional uses with other regular zones, and an approved planned unit development shall be identified on the zoning map or map amendments with the letters PD in addition to the abbreviated designation of the pre-established zoning.

(5) Availability of Plan. A certified print of the approved development plan shall be maintained without charge in the office of the community development director.

(6) Building Permits. Building permits in a planned unit development shall be issued only in accordance with the approved development plan. Any major changes in the approved development plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for processing as an amendment to the ordinance codified in this title. Minor amendments to the approved development plan may be processed as a Type II process. Minor amendments include, for example, those that reduce residential density; increase public amenities or public open space areas; or result in minor shifts in building heights or locations, easement configuration, or other interior site improvements. The classification of a minor versus major amendment to an approved development plan shall be at the discretion of the community development director.

(D) Approval of Plan and Time Limitation on Development.

(1) Before a planned unit development shall be approved by the commission, a preliminary subdivision plat shall be prepared to be considered in conjunction with the planned unit development plan. This requirement shall not apply in the event subdivision of the land would not be required under the subdivision regulations of the city.

(2) If no construction has begun or no use established in the planned unit development within one year after approval of the final plan, the final plan shall lapse and be of no further legal effect. In its discretion and for finding of good cause, the commission may extend for one year the period for beginning of construction or the establishment of use. The applicant shall present his case for cause before the planning commission at its regularly scheduled meeting. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.43; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 18.115 VARIANCES

Sections:

18.115.010    Authorization to grant or deny variances.

18.115.020    Procedures.


18.115.010 Authorization to grant or deny variances.

The planning commission (the commission) may authorize variances from the requirements of this title where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, the literal interpretation of this title would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship, except that no variance shall be granted to allow the use of property for purposes not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the planning commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the purpose of this title. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.51.]


18.115.020 Procedures.

(A) Application Requirements. A request for a variance may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the community development department on forms prescribed by the community development director or designee. The application shall include written analysis addressing the approval criteria. The application shall be accompanied by a base fee in accordance with CMC 18.05.080.

(B) Approval Criteria. No variance shall be granted by the commission unless it can be shown that all of the following conditions exist:

(1) Special conditions exist, which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same district.

(2) Strict interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this title.

(3) The authorization of the variance shall not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this title, be injurious to property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or be otherwise detrimental to the objectives of any city development plan or policy.

(4) The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute pecuniary hardship or inconvenience.

(5) The variance requested is the minimum variance from the provisions and standards of this title which will alleviate the hardship.

(C) Public Hearing. Before acting on a request for a variance, it shall be considered by the commission at the next available public hearing after the filing of a complete application, in compliance with state noticing laws.

(1) Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18.15 CMC.

(2) Recess of Hearing by the Commission. The commission may recess a hearing on a request for a variance in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons who it decides may be interested in the proposed variance. Upon recessing for this purpose, the commission shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed.

(3) Action of the Commission. The commission may attach conditions to an authorized variance which it feels are necessary to protect the public interest and carry out the purpose of this title. The city recorder shall notify the applicant in writing of the commission’s action.

(D) Time Limit on Approval. Authorization of a variance shall be void after one year or after such time less than two years as may be specified as a condition of approval unless, when appropriate, a building permit has been issued and substantial construction has taken place.

(E) Appeal of a Decision. The applicant shall have the right to appeal or contest any decision of the planning commission in the manner set forth in CMC 18.15.090. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.52; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 18.120 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS

Sections:

18.120.010    Purpose.

18.120.020    Types of applications.

18.120.030    Procedures.

18.120.040    Temporary business/event permit.

18.120.050    Temporary buildings.

18.120.060    Temporary building occupancy.


18.120.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are established with the recognition that temporary uses serve a useful purpose in the life of the community. Such activity does not mandate application of the requirements relating to permanent activity, but there is the potential of adverse impact on surrounding property created by temporary activity, and therefore specific requirements are necessary. These regulations are not intended to govern temporary uses in permanent buildings which meet all title requirements. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.61.]


18.120.020 Types of applications.

For the purpose of this chapter, temporary uses are defined below. The various uses are separated into three types depending upon their respective impacts.

(A) Temporary Business/Event Permit. A person, firm, organization, group or corporation which intends to conduct an event and/or business within the city for a period not to exceed 90 days in any 12-month period.

(B) Time Limit on Approvals.

(1) A permit for a temporary business/event cannot exceed 90 days’ total duration.

(2) A permit for a temporary business/event for up to 90 days may be issued without notice.

(C) Temporary Building Occupancy. Situations periodically arise where businesses need to occupy a building without bringing the site up to the specifications of the development code. A true hardship must exist when allowing occupancy without meeting all standards of the development code. Examples of a hardship can include damage or loss by fire, flooding, a business losing its lease, which is forced to move, or other hardships as determined by the community development director, but may not include financial hardship. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.62; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.120.030 Procedures.

A request for a temporary use permit may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application form prescribed by the community development director and shall be filed with the community development director. The community development director shall have the initial authority to determine the type of all proposed temporary uses. Such a determination shall be based upon the general characteristics of the use as described for each type. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.63; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.120.040 Temporary business/event permit.

Activities operating up to 90 days shall be approved by the community development director. In hardship situations the city may exempt registered nonprofit organizations located within the city from the temporary use permit fee and temporary sign permit fee. The applicant shall submit a written request for fee exemption with their application materials to be reviewed by the city manager. [Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A) 2018.]


18.120.050 Temporary buildings.

(A) Approval Criteria. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with and is subject to the following requirements:

(1) Temporary space to supplement a permanent structure:

(a) Temporary buildings are allowed for existing business activities located within the city, and not for new activities desiring to locate in the city.

(b) The temporary structure shall be located on the same lot or a lot immediately adjacent to the existing activity. If the adjacent lot is separately owned, written authorization from the owner must be provided.

(c) Such request shall be reviewed by the community development director in accordance with CMC 18.15.010, Application review.

(2) Temporary buildings for real estate offices:

(a) The office is located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land for sale.

(b) The property used for the temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose; provided, however, that a dwelling or structure designed primarily for other purposes may be used temporarily for a sales office.

(c) Application for a temporary real estate office shall be approved by the community development director.

(3) Temporary buildings while permanent space is being constructed and construction offices:

(a) A building permit has been issued for the permanent structure and the permit has not expired.

(b) The temporary structure shall be located on the same lot or a lot immediately adjacent to the construction site. If the adjacent lot is separately owned, written authorization from the owner must be provided.

(c) The request shall be approved by the community development director.

(4) All temporary activities shall be conducted at the particular location authorized.

(5) Temporary uses shall be conducted wholly on private property.

(6) No temporary use shall be permitted in the vision clearance area of an intersection as specified under CMC 18.150.070.

(7) Signs shall be of the type and size specified by the sign standards of the city. They shall be sufficiently stable to resist movement by high winds, and be affixed to the ground or other nonmovable object.

(8) The operator of a temporary use must have the permit available for inspection upon request by city personnel.

(9) The community development director may impose additional conditions consistent with the scope and purpose of this title necessary to safeguard the public health and safety and to minimize potential adverse impact created by the use on surrounding property and uses.

(10) Adequate parking and provisions for safe circulation must be provided. The applicant shall demonstrate that the site has adequate parking facilities to accommodate the anticipated needs. The community development director may make such conditions as are necessary to ensure that adequate parking exists and that automobiles entering or exiting the site do not create a safety hazard.

(11) The property owners must give written authorization for the use of their property by the applicant for a temporary use.

(12) The community development director may require a cash deposit or other security intended to guarantee that any property used will be left after the use terminates in a neat and orderly condition.

(B) Time Limit on Approvals.

(1) Permits shall be valid for up to six months. An applicant may apply for one 60-day extension which shall be approved by the community development director. An extension shall be allowed only when an applicant can demonstrate to the community development director that permanent space will become available within the 60-day limit through lease, rent or construction.

(2) Temporary real estate sales permits shall only be valid for one year. Upon re-application, unlimited extensions for up to a year may be granted. However, each request shall be approved by the community development director.

(3) The temporary building may remain on the site until the permanent structure is completed or until the building permit expires, whichever occurs first.

(4) The community development director is authorized to suspend or revoke any permit if the director has probable cause to believe that the conditions of the permit or any provisions of this title have been violated or that the use is causing a nuisance to the public or surrounding properties. In any case where the director finds a serious danger to the public health or safety, the director may suspend the permit without a hearing. In all other cases, the applicant may appeal the director’s decision of revocation per CMC 18.15.010(A)(4).

(C) Appeal of a Decision. Pursuant to CMC 18.15.090. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.65; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.120.060 Temporary building occupancy.

(A) Approval Criteria. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with and is subject to the following requirements:

(1) The building meets all building and fire code standards.

(2) Within 120 days, the site can meet title criteria or assurance the business will vacate the site.

(3) Documentation, as determined by the community development director, of hardship.

(4) Documentation, as determined by the community development director, that a permanent solution can be found within 120 days from date of occupancy.

(5) The site shall be vacated at the end of 120-day time limit if the building and/or the site does not conform to all standards of the development and zoning code. The applicant shall enter into such agreement as determined by the city attorney and community development director to ensure that this condition is met. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.66; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 18.125 AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE

Sections:

18.125.010    Procedure.


18.125.010 Procedure.

(A) Authorization to Initiate Amendments. An amendment to the text or the zoning map of the ordinance codified in this title may be initiated by the city council, by the planning commission, or by application of a property owner or his authorized agent. The planning commission (the commission) shall, within 40 days after a hearing, recommend to the city council (the council) approval, disapproval, or modification of the proposed amendment.

(B) Application Requirements. A request for a zone change may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the community development department on forms prescribed by the community development director or designee.

(C) Approval Criteria. The applicant shall demonstrate the request meets the following criteria:

(1) The proposal conforms with the city’s comprehensive plan.

(2) The permitted uses of the proposed new zone will not materially and/or adversely affect the character of the neighborhood.

(3) The proposal will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same zoning category or in appropriate complementary categories, without creating a “spot zone.”

(D) Public Hearing. Before taking final action on a proposed amendment, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements of CMC 18.15.030. The planning commission may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it decides may be interested in the proposed amendment. Upon recessing for this purpose, the commission shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed. After receipt of the report on the amendment from the commission, the council shall hold a public hearing on the amendment.

(1) Hearing by Council. A public hearing held by the council on the proposed amendment to the ordinance codified in this title shall be as provided in ORS Chapter 227.

(2) Record of Amendments. The city recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text and map of the ordinance codified in this title in a form convenient for the use of the public.

(E) Zoning of Annexed Areas. The provisions of this chapter regarding amendments to the ordinance codified in this title shall not apply to action authorized by this section, but the commission shall proceed promptly to recommend a comprehensive zoning plan for the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In order to afford zoning protection to newly annexed areas prior to the time when a comprehensive zoning plan is adopted, interim zoning shall be established as follows:

(1) An area annexed to the city which is not zoned shall be automatically classified as an R-7 zone.

(2) Zoning regulations applicable to an area annexed to the city which is zoned by the county at the time of annexation shall continue to apply in accordance with ORS 227.310 unless, at the time of annexation or at a subsequent time, the council rezones the annexed area. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.70; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.130 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:

18.130.010    Comprehensive plan adopted.


18.130.010 Comprehensive plan adopted.

(A) The Cornelius comprehensive plan was adopted in July 1978, revised in 1984 and 1988 and amended in 2000, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2009, 2011, and 2014.

(B) The city recorder shall endorse the number of Ordinance No. 808, and the date of its adoption upon a copy of the comprehensive plan, which shall be kept on file in the office of the community development director as the official copy of the plan. All amendments to the plan shall be by ordinance, and the ordinances shall be endorsed upon the official comprehensive plan of development on file in the office of the city recorder.

(C) Amendment. The city council (the council) shall adopt and may from time to time amend and revise the comprehensive plan for the use of some or all of the land within the city. The plan may be adopted and revised in whole or in part.

(D) Approval Criteria. No comprehensive plan amendment shall be approved unless findings are made to support the following conclusions demonstrating conformance to state and local law.

(1) The proposed plan and amendments shall conform to the requirements of the Oregon Statewide Planning Goals, and applicable administrative rules of the State Land Conservation and Development Commission.

(2) The proposed amendments shall comply with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state, city and other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over land use regulation within the city.

(3) The proposed amendment shall address the criteria identified in Chapter 1 of the city comprehensive plan.

(E) Amendment Procedures.

(1) An amendment to the text or the map of the comprehensive plan may be initiated by the council, the planning commission or by application of a property owner, or his or her authorized agent.

(2) Application for amendment by a property owner or his or her authorized agent shall be filed on forms prescribed by the community development director and available from the community development department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee for related services incurred by the city in the processing of the application.

(3) The fees and deposits to be paid by the applicant requesting an amendment to the text or land use map of the comprehensive plan may be established or amended by resolution of the council.

(F) Public Hearing.

(1) Before taking final action on a proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. After the public hearing before the planning commission, the council shall hold a public hearing to consider the written report and recommendation of the planning commission relative to the proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements of CMC 18.15.030.

(2) The planning commission and the council may recess their hearing in order to obtain additional information or to provide for further notice of the proceedings. Upon recessing, the planning commission or the council shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed. Any continued public hearing must be to a date certain and be not more than 40 days from the date on which the meeting was continued. The hearing before the council shall be not more than 40 days after the written report and recommendation of the planning commission is filed with the community development director. [Ord. 671 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.80; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


Chapter 18.135 NONCONFORMING USES

Sections:

18.135.010    Purpose.

18.135.020    Nonconforming structures.

18.135.030    Nonconforming uses of land.

18.135.040    Nonconforming uses of structures.


18.135.010 Purpose.

Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted there may exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their perpetuation. It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses not permitted elsewhere in the same district except as specifically provided elsewhere in this title.

(A) Pending Building Permit. In order to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall require any change in the location, plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof, for which a required city building permit has been granted prior to the enactment of this title, or which was lawfully permitted and for which the required building permit has been issued within an area annexed to the city prior to annexation thereof. If a building permit is revoked or for any reason becomes void, all rights granted by this subsection are extinguished and the project shall thereafter be required to conform to all the provisions of this title.

(B) Validation of a legal nonconforming use, structure and/or use of a structure shall be reviewed, approved or denied as a community development director’s interpretation, pursuant to Type I procedures set forth in CMC 18.15.010(A). [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.91; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003.]


18.135.020 Nonconforming structures.

Except as provided in CMC 18.135.010(A), where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title, that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(A) No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered in a way that will not change or will decrease its nonconformity.

(B) Restoration or Replacement of a Damaged Nonconforming Structure.

(1) A nonconforming single-family dwelling unit may be replaced or restored to the original footprint in all residential zoning districts and the central mixed use zoning district regardless of the extent of damage or destruction. Replacement shall begin within one year of the damage or destruction. If replacement begins more than one year after the damage or destruction, the structure shall conform to the regulations specified in this title.

(2) Except as stated in subsection (B)(1) of this section, if a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent not exceeding 70 percent in value based on an insurance appraisal, the structure may be replaced or restored. If the extent of damage exceeds 70 percent in value, the nonconforming structure shall not be replaced or restored, except in conformity with the provisions of this title. Replacement shall begin within one year of the damage or destruction. If replacement begins more than one year after the damage or destruction, the structure shall conform to the regulations specified in this title.

(C) Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.

(D) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section, above any lawful nonconforming structure which would be destroyed as a result of an action by a governmental agency where the agency takes property through the exercise of its power of eminent domain or requires dedication of property for public purposes, may be moved or reconstructed on the same lot, and if necessary, may be extended to an abutting lot in the same ownership; provided, that the resulting placement of the structure does not increase the nonconformity of the structure. Such modification shall be subject to review by the facilities and design review committee and, if within its established jurisdiction, the planning commission. The request for such reviews shall be made prior to the destruction of the structure and if not made by such time the rights granted by this subsection shall be terminated. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.92; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.135.030 Nonconforming uses of land.

At the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this title, lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this title, and where such use involves no individual structure other than small or minor accessory buildings, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:

(A) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title;

(B) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title;

(C) If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which such land is located;

(D) No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this title shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land;

(E) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A), (B), (C), and (D) of this section, any lawful nonconforming structure which would be destroyed as a result of an action by a governmental agency where the agency takes property through the exercise of its power of eminent domain or requires dedication of property for public purposes may be moved or reconstructed on the same lot, and, if necessary, may be extended to an abutting lot in the same ownership; provided, that the resulting placement of the structure does not increase the nonconformity of the structure. Such modification shall be subject to review by the facilities and design review committee and, if within its established jurisdiction, the planning commission. The request for such reviews shall be made prior to the destruction of the structure and if not made by such time the rights granted by this subsection shall be terminated. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.93.]


18.135.040 Nonconforming uses of structures.

Where a lawful use involving individual buildings or structures, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(A) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except to accommodate a changing of the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.

(B) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.

(C) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure and premises may be changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that the planning commission, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the planning commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this title.

(D) When a nonconforming use of a structure and premises is discontinued or abandoned for one year, the structure and premises shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.

(E) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming use status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at time of destruction.

(F) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A), (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, any lawful nonconforming structure which would be destroyed as a result of an action by a governmental agency where the agency takes property through the exercise of its power of eminent domain or requires dedication of property for public purposes may be moved or reconstructed on the same lot, and if necessary, may be extended to an abutting lot in the same ownership; provided, that the resulting placement of the structure does not increase the nonconformity of the structure. Such modification shall be subject to review by the facilities and design review committee and, if within its established jurisdiction, the planning commission. The request for such reviews shall be made prior to the destruction of the structure and if not made by such time the rights granted by this subsection shall be terminated. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.30.94.]


Chapter 18.140 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR’S INTERPRETATION

Sections:

18.140.010    Purpose.

18.140.020    Authority.

18.140.030    Type of application.


18.140.010 Purpose.

To provide a process to interpret the language, terms, provisions, standards and requirements of the development and zoning code that are not clearly delineated or when questions, conflicts and different interpretations occur. [Code 2000 § 11.30.101; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003.]


18.140.020 Authority.

The community development director shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of the development and zoning code, CMC Title 18. [Code 2000 § 11.30.102; Ord. 841 Exhs. 1, 2, 2003.]


18.140.030 Type of application.

Application for a community development director’s interpretation shall be made pursuant to Type I procedures set forth in CMC 18.15.010(A). [Code 2000 § 11.30.103; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.141 ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF

Sections:

18.141.010    Purpose.

18.141.020    Authority.

18.141.030    Type of application.


18.141.010 Purpose.

To provide the community development director a process to grant or deny a deviation from a quantifiable provision of yard setbacks, lot coverage, lot area, lot dimension, or parking standard, to relieve a hardship created by a unusual condition or circumstances. [Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.141.020 Authority.

The community development director may expand or reduce a required yard setback, lot coverage, lot area, lot dimension, or parking standard, to relieve a hardship created by an unusual condition or circumstances not more than 10 percent of the established standard. [Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.141.030 Type of application.

Application for a community development director’s administrative relief shall be made pursuant to Type I procedures set forth in CMC 18.15.010(A). [Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


Chapter 18.143 TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES

Sections:

18.143.010    Purpose and intent.

18.143.020    General provisions.

18.143.030    Traffic impact analysis.

18.143.040    Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

18.143.050    Access standards.

18.143.060    Transit supportive amenities.

18.143.070    Intelligent transportation systems.


18.143.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish design standards and performance requirements for all streets and other transportation facilities constructed or reconstructed within the city of Cornelius. [Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Code 2000 § 11.40.61; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006.]


18.143.020 General provisions.

(A) All transportation facilities shall be designed and improved in accordance with the standards of this code and the adopted Cornelius public works standards. In addition, when development abuts or impacts a transportation facility under the jurisdiction of one or more other governmental agencies, the city shall condition the development to obtain permits required by the other agencies.

(B) In order to protect the public from potentially adverse impacts of the proposal, to fulfill an identified need for public services related to the development, or both, development shall provide traffic capacity, traffic safety, and transportation improvements in proportion to the identified impacts of the development.

(C) For applications that meet the threshold criteria of CMC 18.143.030(B), Analysis Threshold, this analysis or limited elements thereof may be required.

(D) The decision-making authority may impose development conditions of approval per this title. Conditions of approval may be based on the traffic impact analysis.

(E) Dedication of rights-of-way shall be determined by the decision-making authority.

(F) Traffic calming may be approved or required by the decision-making authority in a design of the proposed and/or existing streets within the area of influence or any additional locations identified by the city engineer. Traffic calming measures shall be designed to city standards.

(G) Intersection performance shall be determined using the Highway Capacity Manual 2000 published by the Transportation Research Board. The city engineer may approve a different intersection analysis method prior to use when the different method can be justified. Terms used in this subsection are defined in the Highway Capacity Manual 2000.

(H) City street intersections shall maintain a level of service (LOS) of “D” during the p.m. peak hour of the day. An LOS of “E” may be accepted for local street approaches or driveway access points that intersect with collector or arterial streets, if these intersections are found to operate safely. [Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Code 2000 § 11.40.62; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.143.030 Traffic impact analysis.

For each development proposal that exceeds the analysis threshold of subsection (B) of this section, the application for land use or design review approval shall include a traffic impact analysis as required by this code. The traffic impact analysis shall be based on the type and intensity of the proposed land use change or development and its estimated level of impact to the existing and future local and regional transportation systems.

(A) Engineer Certification. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared and certified by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed in the state of Oregon.

(B) Analysis Threshold. A traffic impact analysis is required when the proposed land use change or development will generate 200 vehicles or more per day (vpd) in average weekday trips as determined by the city engineer.

(C) A traffic impact analysis or some elements of a traffic impact analysis may be required when projects that generate less than 200 average daily vehicle trips and the volume threshold under subsection (B) of this section is not met, but the city engineer finds that the traffic impacts attributable to the development have the potential to significantly impact the safe and efficient operation of the existing public transportation system.

(D) Study Area. The traffic impact analysis shall evaluate the area of influence of the proposed development and all segments of the surrounding transportation system where users are likely to experience a change in the quality of traffic flow. At a minimum, the analysis will consider all road segments, access points, and intersections within the influence area. The city engineer may identify additional locations for study if existing traffic operation, safety, or performance is marginal or substandard. Prior to report preparation, the applicant shall submit the proposed scope and analysis assumptions of the traffic impact analysis. The city engineer shall determine whether the scope and analysis assumptions are adequate.

(E) Traffic impact analysis shall be based on the type and intensity of proposed land use change or development and its estimated level of impact to the existing and future local and regional transportation systems.

(1) The traffic impact analysis report shall at a minimum contain the following information:

(a) A description of the proposal and/or development including the intended use of the site.

(b) Vicinity map shall identify the influence area map, which includes the existing traffic conditions, the functional classification of the subject roads, existing right-of-way and pavement widths, striping, channelization, and all existing driveways and intersections within the influence area.

(c) Traffic forecasts of future traffic within the influence area.

(d) Traffic impact shall be analyzed to evaluate access, safety, feasibility, operation and performance, considering the movement of site-generated traffic relating to existing conditions, traffic flow, access points and intersections within the influence area. Mitigation for identified deficiencies shall be recommended to provide safe and efficient traffic flow.

(e) Technical appendices and other information that demonstrates the technical adequacy of the analysis.

(2) Traffic Forecasts. The report shall include complete documentation of trip generation calculations including Institute of Transportation Engineers’ (ITE) trip generation use code(s), from the most recent published edition. Traffic flow diagrams displaying distribution, assignment, existing, added and total traffic shall be included. Intersections, access points and turning movements within the area of influence shall be included.

(3) Trip Generation. Estimates for trip generation shall be made for peak-hour traffic. The peak-hour traffic in the analysis will be justified and will at a minimum include the a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Trip generation estimates shall be based on the most recent issue of the ITE trip generation. The city engineer may approve different trip generation rates when trip generation rates are not available in ITE’s trip generation or different rates are justified.

(4) Trip Distribution and Assignment. Traffic generated by the proposed development shall be logically distributed and assigned to the street system within the influence area and any additional locations identified by the city engineer. The trip distribution information shall be based on Washington County, Metro, or ODOT for local traffic patterns no more than 12 months old, or alternative data approved by the city engineer.

(5) Performance analysis shall be based on safety considerations that evaluate conflicting turning movements among driveways, intersections and internal traffic. Geometric design concerns shall be addressed and operational improvements shall be considered, evaluated and recommended when determined to be necessary by the standards of Washington County, ODOT or the city engineer. Adequate sight distance shall be addressed at the proposed road access point(s) of the existing and the ultimate road configuration based on the improvements identified in the city transportation system plan. Bicycle, pedestrian and transit issues shall be identified and evaluated. Other operational, circulation, safety, capacity and improvement issues shall be evaluated and addressed as required by the code and the city engineer.

(6) The traffic impact analysis shall identify traffic impacts attributable to a development and the appropriate mitigation measures where a development causes traffic impacts that bring a road below acceptable levels of service, or impacts a road that is already operating below acceptable levels of service, or impacts a road that has a documented safety problem. Mitigation measures shall be implemented as a condition of approval. Mitigation shall include alternative methods to safely and efficiently improve traffic flow through improvements that address the identified deficiencies. Improvements shall be consistent with those identified in the transportation system plan. If traffic signal warrants are met in conformance with the Highway Capacity Manual and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, traffic signals shall be required with development. Before a signal can be installed on a state highway, a traffic signal and location shall have been approved by the State Highway Engineer.

(7) State and County Facilities. Access to state (ODOT) and/or Washington County facilities or both requires approval from those agencies. Traffic analyses shall meet ODOT and county requirements, in addition to those of the city for a traffic impact analysis. [Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Code 2000 § 11.40.63; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006.]


18.143.040 Street design cross-sections per transportation system plan.

Street cross-sections include the right-of-way, paved section, sidewalk and planter strip widths. The functional classification of a street as designated in the transportation system plan shall determine its design and width. Identification of functional classifications for streets in the city limits is found in the adopted Cornelius transportation system plan. Street design standards, which are based on functional classification and use, are found in the adopted Cornelius public works standards. Full street connections shall be provided at intervals consistent with the adopted Cornelius public works standards for the identified street classification, except as modified by Chapter 18.115 CMC, or where prevented by topography, barriers such as railroads or freeways, or environmental constraints such as major streams and rivers.

(A) Deviations to Adopted Street Cross-Sections. A deviation from the adopted street cross-sections and/or widths or both shall require demonstration of a hardship or other exceptional circumstances resulting from conditions of the property. Hardship or exceptional circumstances may include, but are not limited to, unique topographic conditions, environmental protection requirements, and existing development and buildings. A request for a deviation shall comply with this title and, where applicable, the transportation planning rule (TPR). [Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.64; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.143.050 Access standards.

Access standards establish requirements and regulations for safe and efficient vehicle access to and from a site and enhance general circulation within a site.

(A) Access Spacing. Access spacing shall be designed in conformance with the adopted Cornelius public works standards.

(1) Access spacing for all state facilities shall be coordinated with the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT).

(B) An access report shall be submitted with all new development and/or redevelopment proposals that demonstrates the street/driveway is safe as designed and meets adequate stacking, site distance, deceleration distance, on-site circulation and deceleration requirements as set by the city, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), and relevant agencies.

(C) Driveway/Access Points. The location and number of driveways or access points have a direct effect on safe and efficient traffic flow. The following access management standards shall apply toward new driveways:

(1) Driveway spacing shall be designed in accordance with adopted public works standards. In some cases, driveway setbacks may be greater than the standard depending upon the influence area, as determined by city engineer review of a traffic impact report submitted by the applicant’s traffic engineer. If the subject property has less than 150 feet of street frontage, the applicant shall first investigate a shared access as an option. If a shared access is not possible, the driveway shall be placed as far from the intersection as possible.

(2) Based on the applicants’ proposal and its compliance with the comprehensive plan, transportation system plan and the development and zoning code, the city shall require the closing or consolidation of existing driveways or other vehicle access points, the recording of reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), and installation of traffic control devices or other measures as a condition of approval to mitigate the impacts of the development.

(3) New developments shall provide cross-over easements to ensure potential shared driveway access points where existing conditions (i.e., surrounding land uses, lot configurations, physical characteristics, etc.) warrant consideration.

(4) Access to arterials shall only be from public streets. When a site that has private access onto a principal arterial is redeveloped, the private access shall be eliminated if alternate access exists or can be developed to the site.

(5) Direct access to a collector street shall only be considered if there is no alternative way to access the site. If direct access is permitted by the city, the applicant shall be required to mitigate for any safety or neighborhood traffic management impacts deemed applicable by the city engineer. In no case shall the design of driveways, drive aisles or service drives require or encourage the backward movement or other maneuvering of a vehicle within a street, except for single-family and duplex residences.

(6) Proposed shared-use paths shall be located to provide access to existing or planned commercial services and other neighborhood facilities, such as schools, shopping areas and park and transit facilities. To the greatest extent possible, access shall be reasonably direct, providing a route or routes that do not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or that do not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel. [Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.65; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.143.060 Transit supportive amenities.

(A) New commercial, industrial and institutional buildings developed on sites adjacent to major transit stops shall provide transit-related improvements. Major transit stops are identified as part of the regional transit system or as otherwise defined in Chapter 18.195 CMC. Properties are considered “at” a major transit stop when they are within 200 feet of the stop. A proposed development that is adjacent to or includes an existing or planned major transit stop will be required to plan for access to the transit stop and provide for transit improvements, in consultation with TriMet and consistent with an agency adopted or approved plan at the time of development. Requirements apply where the subject parcel(s) or portions thereof are within 200 feet of a major transit stop. Development requirements and improvements may include the following:

(1) Intersection or mid-block traffic management improvements to allow for pedestrian crossings at major transit stops.

(2) Building placement within 20 feet of the transit stop, a transit street or an intersection street, or a pedestrian plaza at the stop or a street intersections.

(3) Transit passenger landing pads accessible to disabled persons to transit agency standards.

(4) An easement or dedication for a passenger shelter and an underground utility connection to a major transit stop if requested by TriMet.

(5) Lighting to TriMet standards.

(6) Intersection and mid-block traffic management improvements as needed and practicable to enable marked crossings at major transit stops.

(B) For an existing use or proposed use on a site located within one-quarter mile from a bus stop where at least 10 off-street parking spaces are required, the applicant may apply for a reduction in the number of required spaces by 10 percent through the provision of transit supportive amenities, subject to city approval. [Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.66; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.143.070 Intelligent transportation systems.

Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) manage and enhance operational performance through advanced technologies and management techniques to help relieve congestion, promote safety and provide suitable transportation strategies.

In order to provide for efficient installation of future intelligent transportation systems (ITS), all roadway improvement projects, including private development with frontage improvements, shall install three-inch conduit to support local interconnect infrastructure. The location, design and type of conduit shall be approved by the city engineer. [Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.67.]


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



Chapter 18.145 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING

Sections:

18.145.010    General provisions.

18.145.020    Off-street parking.

18.145.030    Required off-street parking spaces.

18.145.040    Off-street loading.

18.145.050    Design and maintenance standards for off-street parking and loading facilities.

18.145.060    Landscaping required.

18.145.070    Parking lot design standards.

18.145.080    Drainage of off-street parking and loading facilities.

18.145.090    Security required.


18.145.010 General provisions.

(A) The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces are continuing obligations of the property owner. No building or other permit shall be issued until plans are presented that show property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space as required by this title. The subsequent use of property for which the building permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of parking and loading space required for the specific use. Use of property in violation of the off-street parking and loading requirements located herein shall be a violation of this code. Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building change the use to which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing off-street parking or loading requirements, it shall be a violation of this code to begin or maintain the altered use until the required increase in off-street parking or loading is provided, except as provided in the central mixed use (CMU) and corridor commercial (CC) zoning districts (see CMC 18.145.020(C)).

(B) Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces shall not be located in a required yard.

(C) Owners of two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the hours of operation do not overlap; provided, that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the community development director in the form of deeds, leases, or contracts to establish the joint use.

(D) A plan drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirement is to be fulfilled, shall accompany the request for a building permit, site plan review, or certificate of occupancy. The plan shall show all those elements necessary to indicate that these requirements are being fulfilled and shall include but not be limited to:

(1) Delineation of individual parking and loading spaces and their dimensions;

(2) Circulation area necessary to serve spaces;

(3) Access to streets, alleys and properties to be served;

(4) Curb cuts;

(5) Location and dimensions of all landscaping, including the type and size of plant material to be used, as well as any other nonliving landscape material incorporated into the overall plan, excluding single- and two-family residences and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone; and

(6) Specifications as to signs and bumper guards, excluding single- and two-family residences and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone.

(E) Requirements for types of buildings and uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the community development director, based upon the requirements of comparable uses listed. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.11; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.145.020 Off-street parking.

(A) At the time of erection of a new structure or at the time of enlargement or change in use of an existing structure within any zone in the city, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with CMC 18.145.030. If parking space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the parking space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space than is specified in the standards of this section when applied to the entire use. In cases of enlargement of a building or use of land existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the number of parking spaces required shall be based only on floor area or capacity of such enlargement.

(B) Where square feet are specified, the area measured shall be the gross floor area primary to the functioning of the particular use of the property but shall exclude space devoted to off-street parking or loading. Where employees are specified, persons counted shall be those working on the premises during the largest shift at the peak season, including proprietors.

(C) In the central mixed use and corridor commercial zoning districts, change of use of an existing commercial structure will not require additional parking to be constructed. However, construction of a new building or addition to an existing building will require the provision of off-street parking as required in CMC 18.145.030.

(D) If several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately with a reduction of 10 percent to account for cross-patronage and shared parking benefits. Where the peak hours of operation of two or more uses do not substantially overlap, such uses may share off-street parking spaces as required by this title.

(E) Parking spaces in public streets or alleys shall not be eligible as fulfilling any part of the parking requirements, except as allowed in the central mixed use and core commercial zoning districts.

(F) Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable motor vehicles for residents, customers, patrons, and employees only, and shall not be used for the storage or sale of vehicles or other materials and shall not be rented, leased or assigned to any other person or organization not using or being directly served by the use.

(G) Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling, unless specified elsewhere in the code. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.12; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.145.030 Required off-street parking spaces.

(A) Off-street parking shall be provided based on the primary use of the site according to the following standards and regardless of the zone in which the use is located (see Map 1 following this chapter).

	Table 1  Minimum and Maximum Required Off-Street Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Requirements (unless otherwise noted, standard is per 1,000 sf of gross floor area)

	 	 	Maximum Parking Standards	 

	Land Use	Minimum Parking Standards	Zone A	Zone B	Minimum Bicycle Parking Standards

	RESIDENTIAL

	HOUSEHOLD LIVING

	Single Units, Attached 	1.0/DU	none	none	none 

	Single Units, Detached	1.0/DU	none	none	none 

	Duplexes 	1.0/DU	none	none	none

	Multi-Family Units	DU < 500 sq ft: 1.0/DU;  1 bedroom: 1.25/DU; 2 bedroom: 1.5/DU; 3 bedroom: 1.75/DU	 none	none	1.0/2 DUs except elderly, which is 1.0/20 DUs 

	Manufactured Units	1.0/DU	none	none	none

	Mobile Home Parks	1.0/DU	none	none	none

	GROUP LIVING	1.0/room  1.0/2.5 beds	none 2.7/1,000	1.0/5 beds

	TRANSITIONAL HOUSING	1.0/2.5 beds	none	none	1.0/5 beds 

	HOME OCCUPATION	none	none	none	none 

	CIVIC

	Basic Utilities	none	none	none	none

	Colleges	1.0/5 students/staff	1.0/3.3 students/staff	1.0/3.3 students/staff	1.0/3.0 students/staff 

	Community Recreation	2.0/1,000	2.5/1,000	4.0/1,000	0.3/1,000

	Cultural Institutions	2.5/1,000	3.5/1,000	4.5/1,000	0.5/1,000

	Medical Centers	2.0/1,000	3.7/1,000	4.2/1,000	0.2/1,000

	MOTOR VEHICLE RELATED

	Motor Vehicle  Sales/Rental	1.0/1,000 but no less than 4	1.3/1,000 but no less than 4	2.0/1,000 but no less than 4	0.2/1,000 sales area

	Motor Vehicle Servicing/Repair	2.0/1,000 but no less than 4	2.3/1,000	2.6/1,000	0.2/1,000

	Vehicle Fuel Sales	3.0 + 2.0/service bay	4.0 + 2.0/service bay	4.0 + 2.0/service bay	0.2/1,000

	OFFICE	2.7/1,000	3.4/1,000	4.1/1,000	0.5/1,000

	COMMERCIAL

	Commercial Lodging 	1.0/room	1.2/room	1.4/room	1.0/10 rooms

	Eating and Drinking Establishments	fast food: 9.9/1,000 other: 15.3/1,000 	12.4/1,000 19.1/1,000	14.9/1,000  23/1,000	All: 1.0/1,000 

	Self-Service Storage	1/5,000 sf up to 20,000 sf; 1/20,000 sf thereafter	none	none	1/50,000 sf

	ENTERTAINMENT ORIENTED

	Major Event Entertainment	1.0/3 seats or  1.0/6' bench	1.0/2.5 seats or  1.0/5' bench	1.0/2 seats or  1.0/4' bench	1.0/10 seats or  40' bench

	Outdoor Entertainment	4.0/1,000	4.5/1,000	5.0/1,000	0.4/1,000 

	Indoor Entertainment	4.3/1,000  theater: 1.0/3 seats	5.4/1,000  theater: 1.0/2.5 seats	6.5/1,000  theater: 1.0/2.0 seats	0.5/1,000  1.0/10 seats

	Adult Entertainment	2.5/1,000 1.0/3 seats	3.5/1,000 1.0/1.25 seats	6.5/1,000 1.0/2.0 seats	0.5/1,000 1.0/10 seats

	GENERAL RETAIL

	Sales-Oriented	3.7/1,000	5.1/1,000	6.2/1,000	0.3/1,000

	Personal Services	2.5/1,000  bank with drive-in: 4.3/1,000	3.0/1,000  5.4/1,000	4.5/1,000  6.5/1,000	1.0/1,000  1.0/1,000

	Repair-Oriented	3.3/1,000	4.0/1,000	4.5/1,000	0.3/1,000

	Bulk Sales	1.0/1,000 but no less than 10	1.3/1,000	2.0/1,000	0.3/1,000

	Outdoor Sales	1.0/1,000 sales area	1.3/1,000 sales area	2.0/1,000 sales area	0.1/1,000 sales area

	Animal-Related	3.3/1,000	4.0/1,000	4.5/1,000	0.3/1,000

	INDUSTRIAL

	Industrial Services	0.8/1,000	1.2/1,000	1.8/1,000	0.1/1,000

	Manufacturing; Production; Light Industrial; General Industrial; Heavy Industrial	1.6/1,000	none	 none	0.1/1,000 

	Research and Development	2.0/1,000	3.0/1,000	3.8/1,000	0.5/1,000

	Warehouse/Freight Movement	< 150,000 sq ft: 0.5/1,000  > 150,000 sq ft: 0.3/1,000	0.8/1,000  0.4/1,000	1.2/1,000  0.5/1,000	0.1/1,000

	Waste-Related	5	7	10	none

	Wholesale Sales	0.8/1,000	1.2/100	1.8/1,000	0.1/1,000

	OTHER

	Agriculture/Horticulture	2.5/1,000 sales area but no less than 4	none	none	none 

	Cemeteries	exempt	exempt	exempt	none

	Detention Facilities	1.0/2.5 beds	none	none	1.0/15 beds

	Wireless Communication Facility	none	none	none	none

	Postal Services	2.5/1,000	3.0/1,000	4.5/1,000	0.3/1,000

	Public Support Facilities	none	none	none	none 

	Religious Institutions 	0.25/seat in main assembly area	0.6/seat in main assembly area	0.8/seat in main assembly area	1.0/20 seats in main assembly area

	Schools	preschool: 5.0 + 1/classroom elementary/JR: 2.0/classroom SR: 1.0/5 students/staff	preschool: 7.0 + 1/classroom elementary/JR: 2.5/classroom SR: 1.0/3.3 students/staff	preschool: 10.0 + 1/classroom elementary/JR: 3.5/classroom SR: 1.0/3.3 students/staff	preschool: 1.0/classroom elementary/JR: 6.0/classroom SR: 6.0/classroom

	Social/Fraternal Clubs/Lodges	10.0/1,000 main assembly area	12.0/1,000 main assembly area	14.0/1,000 main assembly area	2.0/1,000 main assembly area

All uses providing drive-in service as defined by this title shall provide on the same site a reservoir for inbound vehicles as follows:

	Land Use	Reservoir Requirement

	Drive-In Banks	5 spaces/service terminal

	Drive-In Restaurants	10 spaces/service window

	Drive-In Theaters	10% of theater capacity

	Gasoline Service Stations	3 spaces/pump

	Mechanical Car Washes	3 spaces/washing unit

	Parking Facilities – Free Flow Entry	1 space/entry driveway 

	Ticket Dispense Entry	2 spaces/entry driveway

	Manual Ticket Dispensing	8 spaces/entry driveway

[Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.13; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.145.040 Off-street loading.

(A) Buildings and structures to be built or substantially altered which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain off-street loading space as follows:

	Table 2  Off-Street Loading Requirements

	Land Use	Loading Space Required 

	Industrial

	Floor Area:

	Under 25,000 sq ft	1

	25,000 to 50,000 sq ft	2

	50,000 to 100,000 sq ft	3

	Commercial

	Floor Area:

	Under 5,000 sq ft	0

	5,000 to 25,000 sq ft	1

	25,000 to 50,000 sq ft	2

	50,000 to 100,000 sq ft	3

	Table 3  Minimum Loading Berth Dimensions

	Land Use	Length – Linear Feet	Width – Linear Feet

	All uses except wholesale and industrial	35	12 

	Wholesale storage and industrial	65	12 

(B) Passengers. A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children shall be located on the site of any school having a capacity greater than 25 students.

(C) Merchandise, Materials or Supplies. Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain off-street loading berths in sufficient numbers and size to adequately handle the needs of the particular use. If loading space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.

(D) Any area to be used for the maneuvering of delivery vehicles and the unloading or loading of materials shall be separated from designated off-street parking areas and appropriately designed to prevent the encroachment of delivery vehicles into off-street parking areas or into a public street.

(E) The facilities review committee may modify the off-street loading requirements as they apply to any individual case only for good cause shown, and it shall set reasonable safeguards and conditions to ensure that any such modification conforms to the intent of this title. Modification may be granted if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the committee that loading operations of the use or structure in question will not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public street.

(F) Exceptions and Adjustments. Loading areas within a street right-of-way within the Cornelius Town Center may be approved when all of the following conditions are met:

(1) Area is signed for short duration only (i.e., less than one hour);

(2) Expected visits are infrequent (less than three operations occur daily between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. or all operations occur between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. at a location that is not adjacent to a residential zone);

(3) Area does not unreasonably obstruct traffic;

(4) Area does not obstruct a primary emergency response route; and

(5) Designation is acceptable to the applicable roadway authority. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.14; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.145.050 Design and maintenance standards for off-street parking and loading facilities.

(A) Except as otherwise defined in this code, “one standard parking space” means a minimum of a parking stall of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length. To accommodate compact cars more efficiently, up to 25 percent of the available parking spaces may have a minimum dimension of eight feet in width and 16 feet in length, so long as they are identified as compact car stalls and are not readily accessible to large cars.

(B) Excluding single-family and duplex residences and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone, groups of two or more parking spaces shall be served by a service drive so that no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street or other public right-of-way would be required.

(C) Service drives shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress consistent with CMC 18.150.070, and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site.

(D) Each parking and/or loading space shall be accessible from a street and the access shall be of a width and location as described in this section.

(E) Parking space configuration, stall and access aisles shall be of sufficient width for all vehicles turning and maneuvering.

(F) Except for single- and two-family residences and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone, any area intended to be used to meet the off-street parking requirements as contained in this title shall have all parking spaces clearly marked using a permanent paint. All interior drives and access aisles shall be clearly marked and signed to show direction of flow and maintain vehicular and pedestrian safety.

(G) Except for single- and two-family residences and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone, all areas used for the parking and/or storage and/or maneuvering of any vehicle, boat and/or trailer shall be improved with asphalt or concrete surfaces according to the same standards required for the construction and acceptance of city streets. Off-street parking spaces for single- and two-family residences and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone shall be improved with an asphalt or concrete surface to specification as approved by the building official.

(H) Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot or adjacent to interior landscaped areas or sidewalks shall be provided with a wheel stop at least four inches high located three feet back from the front of the parking stall. The facilities and design review committee or the planning commission may approve parking spaces without wheel stops, provided the abutting sidewalk is increased by three feet in width and/or the appropriate landscaping is planted where the bumper would overhang.

(I) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be drained in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer.

(J) Artificial lighting on all off-street parking facilities shall be designed to deflect all light away from surrounding residences and so as not to create a hazard to the public use of any road or street.

(K) Signs which are provided on parking lots for the purpose of meeting this section shall be as prescribed by the building official.

(L) All parking lots shall be kept clean and in good repair at all times. Breaks in paved surfaces shall be repaired promptly, and broken or splintered wheel stops shall be replaced so that their function will not be impaired.

(M) Bicycle parking spaces shall be conveniently located with respect to the street, bicycle path/lane and building entrance. Bicycle parking spaces shall not conflict with off-street vehicle parking spaces and drive aisles. There shall be at least 36 inches of clearance between parked bicycles and other obstructions or buildings.

(1) Short-Term Bicycle Parking. Short-term bicycle parking shall be provided to encourage shoppers, customers, and other visitors to use bicycles by providing a convenient and readily accessible place to park bicycles.

(a) Short-term bicycle facilities shall be in the form of either a lockable enclosure or a stationary rack, either covered or uncovered, to which the bicycle can be locked.

(b) Short-term bicycle facilities shall be located within 30 feet of the main entrance to the building, in a location that is easily accessible for bicycles.

(c) Short-term bicycle facilities may be located within the right-of-way adjacent to the street frontage of a property within the central mixed use and core commercial districts if approved by the city engineer.

(2) Long-Term Bicycle Parking. Long-term bicycle parking provides employees, students, residents, commuters, and others who generally stay at a site for several hours a weather-protected place to park bicycles.

(a) A minimum of 50 percent of the bicycle parking spaces shall be provided as long-term bicycle parking in any of the following situations:

(i) When 10 percent or more of automobile vehicle parking is covered.

(ii) If more than four bicycle parking spaces are required.

(iii) Multi-family residential development with nine or more units.

(b) Secured bicycle parking facilities shall be provided on site; facilities can include a bicycle storage room, bicycle lockers, covered racks, or other secure storage space inside or outside of the building. Long-term bicycle parking facilities shall be located not more than 75 feet from a building entrance. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.15; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.145.060 Landscaping required.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to improve the appearance of off-street parking and open lot sales and services areas in Cornelius and to protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the surrounding neighborhoods and thereby promote the general welfare by providing for installation and maintenance of landscaping for screening, buffering and aesthetic qualities, finding that the particular characteristics and qualities of Cornelius justify regulations to perpetuate its aesthetic appeal on a city-wide basis. It is also the purpose of this section to allow for increased seepage by providing openings in the impervious surface, increased safety by breaking up large expanses of pavement, and increased shading to reduce overheating of car interiors, and reduce glare and radiation from large numbers of vehicles.

(B) Minimum Requirements. All areas used for the display and/or parking of any and all types of vehicles, trailers, boats or heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use, hereinafter referred to as “other vehicular uses,” shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements provided in this section. Activities that are of a drive-in nature such as, but not limited to, filling stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks, restaurants, and the like shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements also. The following areas are not required to meet the landscaping standards:

(1) Where all of the parking or other vehicular uses are located under, on or within buildings; and

(2) Parking areas serving single- and two-family uses and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone as normally such residential areas shall not be required to meet.

(C) Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanship-like manner and according to accepted good planting procedures with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described. All elements of landscaping exclusive of plant material except hedges shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code requirements. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment as herein provided in CMC 18.145.050(H). The community development director or the building official shall inspect all landscaping and no certificates of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements herein provided.

(D) Maintenance. The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All plant growth in interior landscaped areas shall be controlled by pruning, trimming or otherwise so that:

(1) It will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public utility;

(2) It will not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access; and

(3) It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced visibility. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.16, Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.145.070 Parking lot design standards.

(A) Required Landscaping Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way. A strip of land at least five feet in width located between the abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking area or vehicle use area which is exposed to an abutting right-of-way, except in required vision clearance areas as provided in CMC 18.150.070.

(B) Perimeter Landscaping Relating to Abutting Properties. On the site of a building or structure or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such areas will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from abutting property, a five-foot landscaped strip shall be between the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area exposed to abutting property.

(C) Where the boundary of a parking lot in a nonresidential zone adjoins a residential district, a 10-foot landscaped strip shall be provided along the entire length abutting the residential zone, and shall be landscaped with evergreen plant material and maintained at a minimum height of 36 inches.

(D) Parking Area Interior Landscaping. Landscaped islands shall be provided a minimum of every 10 parking spaces with a depth equivalent to the depth of the adjacent parking spaces and a minimum width of six feet to break up large expanses of pavement, improve the appearance and climate of the site, improve safety, and delineate pedestrian walkways and traffic lanes. Except for industrial development within industrial zones, the following interior landscaping shall be met:

(1) Sight Distance for Landscaping at Points of Access. When an accessway intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way, all landscaping within vision clearance areas pursuant to CMC 18.150.070 shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between three feet and 10 feet above the curb line; provided however, visibility areas shall be allowed, provided they are so located so as not to create a traffic hazard. Landscaping except required grass or ground cover shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of any accessway pavement.

(2) Parking lots that are more than three acres in size shall provide street features along major drive aisles. These features shall include at a minimum curbs, sidewalks and street trees and/or planter strips or both.

(3) Access to and from parking spaces/areas shall not permit backing onto a public street and/or a public vehicle travel lane or both, except for single-family or duplex dwellings and multi-family uses with not more than four units in the core residential zone. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.17; Ord. 874 Exh. (1)(B), 2006; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.145.080 Drainage of off-street parking and loading facilities.

Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be drained to avoid flow of water across public sidewalks. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.18; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.145.090 Security required.

(A) Completion Time for Parking Lots. Required parking spaces shall be improved and available for use before the final inspection. An extension of time may be granted by the community development director, provided a security equal to 150 percent of the cost of the parking lot is posted with the city of Cornelius and the parking space is not required for immediate use. If the parking improvements are not completed within six months, the city shall have access to the security to complete the installation and/or revoke occupancy. Upon completion of the installation, any portion of the remaining security shall be returned to the owner. Costs in excess of the posted security shall be assessed against the property and the city shall thereupon have a valid lien against the property, which shall become due and payable. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.19; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]

Map 1
[IMAGE]



Chapter 18.147 STREET VACATIONS

Sections:

18.147.010    Purpose.

18.147.020    Applicability.

18.147.030    Application.


18.147.010 Purpose.

The purpose of street vacation is to recognize that changes to the city’s existing street system are occasionally required. Therefore, the following application has been established to allow limited changes to the city’s existing street system without adversely affecting safe and efficient circulation throughout the city. A street vacation is a legislative action which is not subject to the 120-day rule of ORS 227.178. This section is carried out by the approval criteria listed herein. [Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Code 2000 § 11.40.76.]


18.147.020 Applicability.

Alterations to the city’s existing streets that involve the vacation of streets’ rights-of-way, easements, or both shall be reviewed by the city council. [Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Code 2000 § 11.40.77.]


18.147.030 Application.

There is a single street vacation application which is subject to the following requirements:

(A) Procedure Type. For legislative action, the decision-making authority is the city council.

(B) Approval Criteria. In order to approve a street vacation application, the city council shall make findings of fact based on evidence provided by the applicant demonstrating that all the following criteria are satisfied:

(1) The proposal satisfies the threshold requirements for a street vacation application.

(2) All city application fees related to the application under consideration by the decision-making authority have been submitted.

(3) The proposed street vacation meets the eligibility provisions of ORS 271.080.

(4) The proposed street vacation will not adversely impact street connectivity as identified in the transportation system plan of the comprehensive plan.

(5) The proposed street vacation will not adversely impact police, fire, and emergency services in the area.

(6) That the vacation of the street will not hinder accessibility to any aboveground or underground public facilities.

(7) Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further city approval, shall be submitted to the city in the proper sequence.

(C) Submission Requirements. An application for a street vacation shall be made by the owner of property abutting the right-of-way or easement, or the owner’s authorized agent, to the city council, mayor, or their designee on a form provided by the community development director and shall be filed with the director.

(D) Conditions of Approval. The city council may impose conditions on the approval of a street vacation application to ensure compliance with the approval criteria. [Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Code 2000 § 11.40.78.]


Chapter 18.150 SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS

Sections:

18.150.010    Accessory uses and structures.

18.150.020    Fences.

18.150.030    Satellite dishes – Applicability and administration.

18.150.040    Projections from buildings.

18.150.050    General exception to building height limitations.

18.150.060    Uses requiring special regulation.

18.150.070    Clear vision zones.

18.150.080    Model homes.


18.150.010 Accessory uses and structures.

(A) Uses and structures normal, incidental and subordinate to the uses allowed as permitted uses in any zone are allowed as accessory uses and structures subject to the provisions of this section.

(B) Accessory uses and structures for conditional uses shall be allowed only after approval has been granted through the conditional use permit process.

(C) All accessory structures must comply with the following provisions:

(1) They shall have no more than 450 square feet of floor area if incidental to residential structures;

(2) They shall not exceed one story, a maximum of 12 feet;

(3) They shall not be allowed in a required front yard;

(4) They shall not be located within eight feet of main building or other accessory building unless attached to that building;

(5) They shall be located no closer than three feet to any lot line nor built over an easement, whichever is the most restrictive;

(6) They shall cause no encroachment upon or interference with the use of any adjoining property or public right-of-way;

(7) They shall be built in accordance with building codes.

(D) Accessory structures that do not comply with the above provisions are subject to either a Type II or Type III conditional use permit approval, as determined by the community development director. See Chapter 18.105 CMC.

(E) Decks, porches and steps may be constructed within a residential yard setback area; provided, that the intruding portion meets all of the following requirements:

(1) The finished floor and/or step does not exceed 30 inches in height above existing grade; and

(2) Any fixed bench, railing, or other attachment does not exceed 40 inches in height above the existing grade; and

(3) Maintains a minimum three-foot setback in the side and rear yard. All front yard and/or corner lot setbacks must be met as required by the specific zoning district.

(4) All other uncovered decks, porches and steps shall not project more than 24 inches into a required rear or side yard setback. [Ord. 709 § 2, 1991; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.21; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.150.020 Fences.

(A) Regardless of the front, side or rear yard requirements of the zone, fences and hedges may be located within yards as follows:

(1) Adequate sight distances shall be maintained and unobstructed at street intersections and driveways.

(2) Fences and hedges up to six feet in height may be located within the side or rear property line.

(3) Fences and hedges up to four feet in height may be located within the front yard within six inches of a sidewalk, or if no sidewalk exists, where the sidewalk would be constructed.

(B) Fences and hedges up to six feet in height may be located within a side or rear yard facing a street; provided, that adequate sight distances are maintained and unobstructed at street intersections and driveways.

(C) All nonresidential fences shall be subject to design review relative to screening, buffering, safety and security. [Ord. 638 § 1, 1985; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.23.]


18.150.030 Satellite dishes – Applicability and administration.

(A) The approval standards contained within this section apply to satellite dishes over four feet in diameter. Satellite dishes four feet or less in diameter shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 18.150.010, Accessory uses and structures.

(B) A satellite dish shall be a use permitted outright in any zone provided the approval standards within this section are satisfied.

(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, the provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the community development director.

(D) Any decision of the community development director relating to the landscaping requirements of this section may be appealed by the applicant to the planning commission. The applicant shall file a notice of appeal of the community development director’s decision with the community development director not more than 10 days after the date of the community development director’s decision. The appeal shall be scheduled on the agenda of the planning commission within 45 days of the date the notice of appeal is filed with the community development director. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the council in accordance with the provisions and procedure of CMC 18.15.090.

(E) Approval Standards. No satellite dish shall be located within:

(1) Any required yard area within any zone; and

(2) A front yard or street side yard in any residential zone.

(F) When a satellite dish is placed within the front yard or a street side yard in a nonresidential zone, the dish shall be screened by landscaping materials selected by the community development director from a landscaping materials list adopted by the city council to be used in connection with the administration and enforcement of this section. The materials at the time of planting shall be at least four feet in height above the ground level, shall be fully branched and shall be planted at such distance apart as to create a sight-obscuring screen. The owner of the property or the person or entity having the use and possession of the property shall be required to maintain the landscaping materials so that the same are living, free from disease and provide the screening in conformance with the standards of this section.

(G) Exception. A landscaping screen shall not be required in situations where the satellite dish is screened from view from adjoining properties by an existing fence, hedge or landscaping screen.

(H) Enforcement. Failure to replace diseased or dead plant material which screens a satellite dish shall be a violation of this title and shall require the removal of the satellite dish from the front yard area. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.24; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.150.040 Projections from buildings.

Cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features may project not more than two feet into a required yard or into required open space as established by coverage standards. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.24.]


18.150.050 General exception to building height limitations.

The following types of structures or structural parts are not subject to the building height limitations of this title: chimneys, tanks, spires, belfries, domes, monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, masts, antennas, aerials, ventilators, cooling towers, elevator shafts, transmission towers, smokestacks, flagpoles, solar panels, and other similar projections. [Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010.]


18.150.060 Uses requiring special regulation.

In addition to other standards and requirements by this title, all uses included in this section shall comply with the provisions stated herein. Should a conflict arise between the requirements of this section and other requirements of this title, the more restrictive provision shall control.

(A) Kennels, Riding Academies and Stables. Kennels, riding academies and stables shall be located not less than 200 feet from any lot line. Applications for such use when required by this title shall include information which describes the applicant’s intended actions to ensure that odors, dust, noise, and drainage from the use will not create a nuisance, hazard or health problem to adjoining property uses.

(B) Nursery Schools, Day or Child Care Facilities. Nursery schools and day or child care facilities shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor play areas with a minimum area of 100 square feet per one-third the total licensed capacity of children. The community development director may approve reduction of this requirement if the facility cares only for infants up to six months in age. In all districts, a fence of at least five feet but not more than six feet in height shall be provided separating the outdoor play area from abutting lots.

Facilities licensed for 40 or more children may be required to have a driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children. The facilities and design review committee shall determine whether the special driveway design is required.

If a conditional use permit is required, in addition to that normally required for a conditional use permit, the following information shall also be supplied:

(1) The maximum number of children the facility is proposed to be licensed to care for;

(2) Ages of the children to be cared for;

(3) List of any exceptions to the rules governing standards for day care facilities the applicant will be applying for to the children’s services division.

(C) Drop Boxes. Recycling receptacles or charity drop boxes shall not be located in any residential district or in any public right-of-way. Recycling receptacles or charity drop boxes are permitted in any commercial or industrial zone. Recycling receptacles and charity boxes proposed for a mixed use zone (e.g., central mixed use and gateway mixed use zoning districts) shall apply for the appropriate permits to authorize placement.

(D) Park’n Ride Facilities. A Park’n Ride facility is a parking facility near a transit station or stop for the purpose of parking motor vehicles by transit riders. Approved off-street parking lots connected with a nonresidential use may be used jointly as Park’n Ride lots if, by determination of the facilities and design review committee, the Park’n Ride use will not conflict with the parking needs of the site’s principal use both in terms of traffic volume and hours of use, and as long as there are no specific conditions placed on the site by facilities and design review, the planning commission, or the city council which would preclude such use. Park’n Ride lots as principal uses are permitted in those zones allowing parking structures and surface parking lots. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.26; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.150.070 Clear vision zones.

Except in the central mixed use (CMU) zoning district, a clear vision zone shall be maintained on the corners of all property adjacent to the intersection of two streets, a street and a railroad, or a driveway providing vehicular access to a public street.

(A) The clear vision zone is defined as the triangular area beginning at the intersection of the projected curb lines, and extending 15 feet along the leg of each intersection. No fence, berm, wall, hedge or other planting or structure shall be placed within the clear vision zone that would impede visibility between a height of 30 inches and 10 feet as measured from the top of curb, or in the absence of a curb, from the established street center line grades. If the relation of the surface of the lot to the streets is such that visibility is already obscured, nothing shall be done to increase the impediment to visibility within the vertical and horizontal limits set forth above. Poles, tree trunks, and similar objects less than 12 inches in width may be allowed in the clear vision zone if they meet the vertical requirements noted above.

(B) A private access shall be treated as a public street for the purpose of this section. The edge of the paved surface area of the private access, be it roadway, curb or sidewalk, shall be treated as the curb line in determining the vision clearance zone.

(C) The requirements of visibility at intersections in the CMU zoning district shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the facilities and design review committee in accordance with traffic and transportation engineering standards. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.27; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.150.080 Model homes.

In residential projects, model homes are sometimes built to be used for lot and home sales purposes and/or as examples of available floor plans, materials and finishes. To facilitate early sales, such model homes are generally constructed prior to completion of all the streets and utility lines within the development, and temporary sales offices may be established within a constructed model home. When sales are complete, the sales office use is discontinued and the structure converts to its intended use as a dwelling unit. The permitting of model homes and associated temporary sales offices (“model homes”) shall be subject to the following regulations:

(A) This policy shall not apply to land partitions.

(B) This policy shall only apply to single-family detached units.

(C) A temporary use permit, in conformance with CMC 18.120.050(A)(2), shall be obtained prior to the installation of any model home and/or the establishment of a temporary sales office within a model home.

(D) A Type I site design review application, per CMC 18.100.030(A)(2), shall be required for each proposed model home, prior to issuance of building permit(s). The applicant shall demonstrate within the Type I site design review application that the model home will be in compliance with development standards of the approved project.

(E) If the applicant is requesting a model home building permit(s) prior to the recordation of the subdivision final plat, then the number of model homes to be permitted may not exceed the number of original legal parcels within the project area. Legal parcels that contain an existing dwelling unit may not have a model home permitted until the final subdivision plat is recorded, unless the existing dwelling unit is demolished prior to the issuance of a building permit.

(F) The applicant shall have a registered professional surveyor stake the model home foundation to demonstrate to the building inspector that the structure will be placed consistent with the preliminary subdivision plat approval and proposed final subdivision plat. If the model home is to be constructed prior to the recordation of the final subdivision plat, the model home must also comply with setback and other design standards applicable to the original legal parcel(s).

(G) A maximum of one model home is allowed for subdivisions with one to 10 lots, two model homes for subdivisions with 11 to 20 lots, and no more than three model homes for subdivisions with 21 or more lots. The limit on model homes may apply to each phase of a multi-phased master planned subdivision. In such cases, the number of lots within each phase will determine the number of model homes that may be permitted for the corresponding phase.

(H) The city engineer or their representative shall determine which lots are available for the construction of a model home. The lots shall be within close proximity to a preexisting arterial, collector, or other preexisting public street as acceptable to the city engineer. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a model home, the base lift for access to the model home from the existing public right-of-way must be constructed and approved by the city. If the base lift or other foundational elements of the roadway are contaminated by soil or other materials prior to the final lift it will be cleaned or the contamination otherwise remedied to the sole satisfaction of the city prior to final paving.

(I) Temporary vehicle parking and maneuvering areas shall provide parking as necessary for model home and sales office employees and guests. The parking requirement for model homes is three spaces per model home plus one space per salesperson. Parking requirements may be met through a combination of (1) an off-street parking lot or model home driveway parking, and/or (2) on-street parking where the parking spots are located near the model home unit and no parking spaces shall be located in front of an occupied residence. On-street parking spaces for model homes shall have signage stating their intended use during the period when the parking spaces allocated for model home use. The parking signage shall be removed upon conversion of the model home unit into a permanent residence.

(J) The applicant shall submit a written statement in a form approved by the city attorney that holds the city of Cornelius harmless of any consequences that would arise by allowing issuance of building permits for model homes. All cost to remedy problems that arise shall be borne by the applicant. Approval of the building permit(s) for one or more model homes shall not be construed to mean that the public improvements are defect-free, complete, or accepted by the city or that the development is in compliance with any city code or requirements.

(K) No connection of the model home to any water, sanitary, or storm sewer utility shall be allowed unless the system(s) are deemed substantially complete by an authorized representative of the city.

(L) The applicant shall be responsible for location of utility connections.

(M) Fire protection shall be available to the model home(s) during both construction and occupancy as a sales office. Fire protection plans shall be submitted and shall be subject to review and approval by the Fire Marshal.

(N) Emergency vehicle access shall be provided to the model home(s) during both construction and occupancy as a sales office.

(O) No residential occupancy of a permitted model home shall be allowed until the public improvements for the subdivision have been accepted by the city council and a certificate of occupancy is issued by the building department.

(P) Any structural or architectural modifications or features on the model home related to its use as a sales office shall be removed before it is converted to a dwelling unit. [Ord. 2017-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


Chapter 18.155 SOLAR ACCESS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

18.155.010    Purpose.

18.155.020    Applicability.

18.155.030    Solar-oriented residential lots.

18.155.040    Access to sunshine.

18.155.050    Shading.

18.155.060    Alternative compliance.


18.155.010 Purpose.

It is the city’s intent to encourage the use of both active and passive solar energy systems for heating air and water in homes and businesses, as long as natural topography, soil, or other subsurface conditions or other natural conditions peculiar to the site are preserved. While the use of solar energy systems is optional, the right to solar access is protected. Additionally, a goal of this section is to ensure that site plan elements do not excessively shade adjacent properties, creating a significant adverse impact upon adjacent property owners. Thus, standards are set forth to evaluate the potential impact of shade caused by buildings, structures, and trees. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.31; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.155.020 Applicability.

All development shall be designed throughout to accommodate active and/or passive solar installations to the extent reasonably feasible. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.32; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.155.030 Solar-oriented residential lots.

At least 65 percent of the lots less than 10,000 square feet in area in single- and two-family residential developments must conform to the definition of a “solar-oriented lot” (see CMC 18.195.190) in order to preserve the potential for solar energy usage. [Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.155.040 Access to sunshine.

The elements of the development plan (e.g., buildings, circulation, open space and landscaping) shall be located and designed, to the maximum extent feasible, to protect access to sunshine for planned solar energy systems or for solar-oriented rooftop surfaces that can support a solar collector or collectors capable of providing for the anticipated hot water needs of the buildings in the project between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. PST, on December 21st. [Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.155.050 Shading.

(A) The physical elements of the development plan shall be, to the maximum extent feasible, located and designed so as not to cast a shadow onto structures on adjacent property greater than the shadow which would be cast by a 25-foot hypothetical wall located along the property lines of the project between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., PST, on December 21st. This provision shall not apply to structures within the central mixed use (CMU) and corridor commercial (CC) zoning districts.

(B) The impact of trees shall be evaluated on an individual basis considering the potential impacts of the shading and the potential adverse impacts that the shading could create for the adjacent properties in terms of blocking sunlight in indoor living areas, outdoor activity areas, gardens, and similar spaces benefiting from access to sunlight. [Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.155.060 Alternative compliance.

Upon request by an applicant, the planning commission may approve an alternative site layout that may be substituted in whole or in part for a plan meeting the standards of this chapter.

(A) Procedure. Alternative compliance plans shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with submittal requirements for plans as set forth in this section. The plan shall clearly identify and discuss the modifications and alternatives proposed and the ways in which the plan will equally or better accomplish the purpose of this chapter than a plan which complies with the standards of this chapter.

(B) Review Criteria. In approving an alternative plan, the planning commission shall find that the proposed alternative plan accomplishes the purposes of this chapter equally or better than a plan which complies with the standards of this chapter.

In reviewing the proposed alternative plan, the planning commission shall take into account whether the alternative design enhances neighborhood continuity and connectivity, fosters nonvehicular access, and preserves existing natural or topographic conditions on the site. [Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


Chapter 18.160 SOLAR BALANCE POINT

Sections:

18.160.010    Purpose.

18.160.020    Applicability.


18.160.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to promote the use of solar energy, to minimize shading of structures by structures and accessory structures, and, where applicable, to minimize shading of structures by trees. Decisions related to this chapter are intended to be ministerial. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.34.]


18.160.020 Applicability.

This title applies to an application for a building permit for all structures in all single-family zones and for detached single-family structures in any zone, except to the extent the approval authority finds the applicant has shown that one or more of the conditions listed in subsection (C) or (D) of this section exist, and exemptions or adjustments provided for there are warranted. In addition, nonexempt vegetation planted on lots subject to the provisions of CMC 18.155.020(E) shall comply with the shade point height standards as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section.

(A) Solar Site Plan Required. An applicant for a building permit for a structure subject to subsections (B) and (C) of this section shall submit a site plan that shows the maximum shade point height allowed under subsection (B) of this section, and the allowed shade on the proposed structure’s solar features as provided in subsection (E) of this section. If applicable, the site plan also shall show the solar balance point for the structure as provided in subsection (F) of this section

(B) Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The height of the shade point shall comply with either subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section.

(1) Basic Requirement. The height of the shade point shall be less than or equal to the height specified in Table A or computed using the following formula. If necessary interpolate between the five-foot dimensions listed in Table A.

H = (2 x SRL)-N+150 5

Where: 

H = the maximum allowed height of the shade point (see Figures 4 and 5 following Chapter 18.165 CMC).

SR = shade reduction line (the distance between the shade point and the northern lot line, see Figure 6 following Chapter 18.165 CMC); and

N = the north-south lot dimension; provided, that a north-south lot dimension more than 90 feet shall use a value of 90 feet for this section, and provided the maximum allowed height of the shade point may be increased one foot above the amount calculated using the formula or Table A for each foot that the average grade at the rear property line exceeds the average grade at the front property line.

	Table A Maximum Permitted Shade Point Height (in Feet)

	 North-South lot dimension (in feet)

	Distance to reduction line from northern lot line (in feet)	100+	95	90	85	80	75	70	65	60	55	50	45	40

	70	40	40	40	41	42	43	44	 	 	 	 	 	 

	65	38	38	38	39	40	41	42	43	 	 	 	 	 

	60	36	36	36	37	38	39	40	41	42	 	 	 	 

	55	34	34	34	35	36	37	38	39	40	41	 	 	 

	50	32	32	32	33	34	35	36	37	38	39	40	41	 

	45	30	30	30	31	32	33	34	35	36	37	38	39	40

	40	28	28	28	29	30	31	32	33	34	35	36	37	38

	35	26	26	26	27	28	29	30	31	32	33	34	35	36

	30	24	24	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31	32	33	34

	25	22	22	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31	32

	20	20	20	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30

	15	18	18	18	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28

	10	16	16	16	17	18	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26

	5	14	14	14	15	16	17	18	19	20	21	22	20	24

(2) Performance Option. The proposed structure, or applicable nonexempt vegetation, will shade not more than 20 percent of the south-facing glazing of existing habitable structure(s) or, where applicable, the proposed structure or nonexempt vegetation will comply with CMC 18.155.020(A). If CMC 18.155.020(B), Protected Solar Building Line Option, is used, nonexempt trees and the shade point of structures shall be back from the protected solar building line two and one-half feet for every one foot of height of the structure or of the mature height of nonexempt vegetation over two feet.

(C) Exemption from the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The community development director or his or her designee shall exempt a proposed structure or nonexempt vegetation from subsections (A) and (B) of this section if the applicant shows that one or more of the conditions in this section exist, based on plot plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, suncharts or photographs, or other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.

(1) Exempt Lot. When created, the lot was subject to Chapter 18.155 CMC and was not subject to the provisions of CMC 18.155.020(E).

(2) Pre-Existing Shade. The structure or applicable nonexempt vegetation will shade an area that is shaded by one or more of the following:

(a) An existing or approved building or structure;

(b) A topographic feature;

(c) A nonexempt tree that will remain after development of the site. It is assumed a tree will remain after development if it is situated in a building setback required by this code; is part of a developed area or landscaping required by this code, a public park or landscape strip, or legally reserved open space; is in or separated from the developable remainder of a parcel by an undevelopable area or feature; or is on the applicant’s property and not affected by the development. A duly executed covenant also can be used to preserve trees causing such shade.

(3) Slope. The site has an average slope that exceeds 20 percent in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south based on a topographic survey by a licensed professional land surveyor.

(4) Insignificant Benefit. The proposed structure or nonexempt vegetation shades one or more of the following:

(a) An undevelopable area; or

(b) The wall of an unheated space, such as a typical garage; or

(c) Less than 20 square feet of south-facing glazing.

(5) Public Improvement. The proposed structure is a publicly owned improvement.

(D) Adjustments to the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The community development director shall increase the maximum permitted height of the shade point determined using subsection (B) of this section to the extent it finds the applicant has shown one or more of the following conditions exist, based on plot plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, suncharts or photographs, or other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.

(1) Physical Conditions. Physical conditions preclude development of the site in a manner that complies with subsection (B) of this section due to such things as a lot size less than 3,000 square feet, unstable or wet soils, or a drainage way, public or private easement, or right-of-way.

(2) Conflict Between the Maximum Shade Point Height and Allowed Shade on the Solar Feature Standards. A proposed structure may be sited to meet the solar balance point standard described in subsection (A) of this section or be sited as near to the solar balance point as allowed by subsection (F) of this section if:

(a) When the proposed structure is sited to meet the maximum shade point height standard determined using subsection (B) of this section, its solar feature will potentially be shaded as determined using subsection (E) of this section; and

(b) The application includes a form provided by the city that:

(i) Releases the applicant from complying with subsection (B) of this section and agrees that the proposed structure may shade an area otherwise protected by subsection (B) of this section;

(ii) Releases the city from liability for damages resulting from the adjustment; and

(iii) Is signed by the owner(s) of the properties that would be shaded by the proposed structure more than allowed by the provisions of subsection (B) of this section;

(c) Before the city issues a permit for a proposed structure for which an adjustment has been granted pursuant to this subsection, the applicant shall file the form provided for in this section in the office of the county recorder with the deeds to the affected properties.

(E) Analysis of Allowed Shade on Solar Feature.

(1) The applicant is exempt from this subsection if the lot(s) south of and adjoining the applicant’s property is exempt from subsection (B) of this section.

(2) Applicants shall be encouraged to design and site a proposed habitable structure so that the lowest height of the solar feature(s) will not be shaded by buildings or nonexempt trees on lot(s) to the south. The applicant shall complete the following calculation procedure to determine if the solar feature(s) of the proposed structure will be shaded. To start, the applicant shall choose which of the following sources of shade originating from adjacent lot(s) to the south to use to calculate the maximum shade height at the north property line:

(a) Existing structure(s) or nonexempt trees; or

(b) The maximum shade that can be cast from future buildings or nonexempt trees, based on Table C. If the lot(s) to the south can be further divided, then the north-south dimension shall be assumed to be the minimum lot width required for a new lot in that zone.

(3) The height of the lowest point of any solar feature of the proposed structure shall be calculated with respect to either the average elevation or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line of the lot to the south.

(4) The applicant shall determine the height of the shadow that may be cast upon the applicant’s solar feature by the source of shade selected in this subsection by using the following formula or Table B.

(SFSH) = SH-(SGL/2.5)

Where:

SFSH = the allowed shadow height on the solar feature (see Figure 8 following Chapter 18.165 CMC).

SH = the height of the shade at the northern lot line of lot(s) to the south as determined in this subsection.

SGL = the solar gain line (the distance from the solar feature to the northern lot line of adjacent lot(s) to the south; see Figure 7 following Chapter 18.165 CMC).

	Table B

	Maximum Permitted Height of Shadow at Solar Feature (in feet)

	 	Allowed Shade Height at Northern Lot Line of Adjacent Lot(s) to the South (in Feet) 

	Distance from Solar Gain Line to Lot Line (in Feet)	22	21	20	19	18	17	16	15	14	13	12

	50	2	1	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	45	4	3	2	1	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	40	6	5	4	3	2	1	 	 	 	 	 

	35	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	 	 	 

	30	10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	 

	25	12	11	10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2

	20	14	13	12	11	10	9	8	7	6	5	4

	15	16	15	14	13	12	11	10	9	8	7	6

	10	18	17	16	15	14	13	12	11	10	9	8

	5	20	19	18	17	16	15	14	13	12	11	10

Table C may be used to determine (SH) in the above formula.

	Table C

	North-south lot dimension of adjacent lot(s) to the south	100	95	90	85	80	75	70	65	60	55	50	45	40

	Allowed shade height at the north property line of adjacent lot(s) to south	12	12	12	13	14	15	16	17	18	19	20	21	22 

(5) If the allowed shade height on the solar feature calculated in this subsection is higher than the lowest height of that calculated in this subsection the applicant shall be encouraged to consider any changes to the house design or location which make it practical to locate the solar feature so that it will not be shaded in the future.

(F) Solar Balance Point. If a structure does not comply with the maximum shade point height standard in subsection (B) of this section and the allowed shade on a solar feature standard in subsection (E) of this section, then the solar balance point of the lot shall be calculated (see Figure 8 following Chapter 18.165 CMC). The solar balance point is the point on the lot where a structure would be the same from complying with both of these standards.

(G) Yard Setback Adjustment. The city shall grant an adjustment to the side, front, and/or rear yard setback requirement(s) by up to 50 percent if necessary to build a proposed structure so it complies with either the shade point height standard in subsection (B) of this section, the allowed shade on a solar feature standard in subsection (E) of this section, or the solar balance point standard in subsection (A) of this section (see Figure 8 following Chapter 18.165 CMC). This adjustment is not intended to encourage reductions in available solar access or unnecessary modification of setback requirements, and shall apply only if necessary for a structure to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. The following list illustrates yard adjustments permitted under this section:

(1) R-7 Zone:

(a) A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 10 feet.

(b) A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than three feet. A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than three feet.

(2) R-10 Zone:

(a) A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 13 feet.

(b) A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 13 feet. A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than five feet.

(H) Review Process. Compliance with the standards in this chapter shall use a Type I procedure specified in CMC 18.15.010(A). [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.35; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.165 SOLAR ACCESS PERMIT

Sections:

18.165.010    Purpose.

18.165.020    Applicability.


18.165.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect solar access to solar features on lots designated or used for a single-family detached dwelling under some circumstances. It authorizes owners of such lots to apply for a permit that, if granted, prohibits solar features from being shaded by certain future vegetation on and off the permittee’s site. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.37.]


18.165.020 Applicability.

An owner or contract purchaser of property may apply for and/or be subject to a solar access permit for a solar feature if that property is in an R-7 or R-10 zone, or is or will be developed with a single-family dwelling. The city’s decision whether or not to grant a solar access permit is intended to be ministerial.

(A) Approval Standards for a Solar Access Permit. The community development director or his designee shall approve an application for a solar access permit by a Type I procedure if the applicant shows:

(1) The application is complete;

(2) The information it contains is accurate; and

(3) Nonexempt vegetation on the applicant’s property does not shade the solar feature.

(B) Duties Created by Solar Access Permit.

(1) A party to whom the city grants a solar access permit shall:

(a) Record the permit, legal descriptions of the properties affected by the permit, the solar access height limit, and the site plan required in subsection (C)(3) of this section, with such modifications as required by the community development director, in the office of the county recorder with the deeds to the properties affected by it, indexed by the names of the owners of the affected properties, and pay the fees for such filing;

(b) Install the solar feature in a timely manner as provided in subsection (F) of this section; and

(c) Maintain nonexempt vegetation on the site so it does not shade the solar feature.

(2) An owner of property burdened by a solar access permit shall be responsible and pay all costs for keeping nonexempt vegetation from exceeding the solar access height limit. However, vegetation identified as exempt on the site plan required in subsection (C)(3) of this section, vegetation an owner shows was in the ground on the date an application for a solar access permit is filed, and solar friendly vegetation are exempt from the solar access permit.

(C) Application Contents. An application for a solar access permit shall contain the following information:

(1) Unless part of a proposed subdivision, a legal description of the applicant’s lot and a legal description, owners’ names, and owners’ addresses for lots, all or a portion of which are within 150 feet of the applicant’s lot and 54 degrees east and west of true south measured from the east and west corners of the applicant’s south lot line. The records of the Washington County department of assessment and taxation shall be used to determine who owns property for purposes of an application. The failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the action if a good faith attempt was made to notify all persons who may be affected.

(2) A scaled plan of the applicant’s property showing:

(a) Vegetation in the ground as of the date of the application if, when mature, that vegetation could shade the solar feature.

(b) The approximate height above grade of the solar feature, its location, and its orientation relative to true south.

(3) A scaled plan of the properties on the list required in subsection (C)(1) of this section showing:

(a) Their approximate dimensions; and

(b) The approximate location of all existing vegetation on each property that could shade the solar feature(s) on the applicant’s property.

(4) For each affected lot, the requested solar access height limit. The solar access height limit is a series of contour lines establishing the maximum permitted height for nonexempt vegetation on lots affected by a solar access permit (see Figure 11 following Chapter 18.165 CMC). The contour lines begin at the bottom edge of a solar feature for which a permit is requested and rise in five-foot increments at an angle to the south not less than 21.3 degrees from the horizon and extend not more than 54 degrees east and west of true south. Notwithstanding the preceding, the solar access height limit at the northern lot line of any lot burdened by a solar access permit shall allow nonexempt vegetation on that lot whose height causes not more shade on the benefitted property than could be caused by a structure that complies with Chapter 18.160 CMC, Solar Balance Point, for existing lots.

(5) A fee as required by resolution of the city council. If reviewed in conjunction with a proposed subdivision, no additional fee shall be charged, and the application will be processed consistent with subdivision regulations.

(6) If available, a statement signed by the owner(s) of all of the property(ies) to which the permit will apply if granted, verifying that the vegetation shown on the plan submitted pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section accurately represents vegetation in the ground on the date of the application. The city shall provide a form for that purpose. The signed statements provided for herein are permitted but not required for a complete application.

(D) Application Review Process.

(1) Unless waived by the community development director, prior to filing an application for a solar access permit, an applicant’s representative shall pay the required application fee and meet with the community development director to discuss the proposal and the requirements for an application. If a meeting is held, the community development director shall convey a written summary of the meeting to the applicant by mail within five calendar days of the meeting.

(2) After the pre-application meeting is held or waived, the applicant may file an application containing the information required in subsection (C) of this section.

(3) Within five working days after an application is filed, the community development director shall determine whether the application is complete and, if it is not complete, notify the applicant in writing, and specify what is required to make it complete.

(4) Within 14 calendar days after the responsible official decides an application for a solar access permit is complete, the community development director shall issue a written decision tentatively approving or denying the request, together with reasons therefor, based on the standards of subsection (A) of this section.

(a) If the tentative decision is to deny the permit, the responsible official shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant.

(b) If the tentative decision is to approve the permit, and the owners of all affected properties did verify the accuracy of the plot plan as permitted under subsection (C)(6) of this section, the community development director shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant and affected parties by certified mail, return receipt requested.

(c) If the tentative decision is to approve the permit, and the owners of all affected properties did not verify the accuracy of the plot plan as permitted under subsection (C)(6) of this section, the community development director shall send a copy of the tentative decision to the applicant and to the owners of affected properties who did not sign the verification statement pursuant to subsection (C)(6) of this section, by certified mail return receipt requested. If the community development director determines that the owners of a given property affected by the permit are not the occupants of that property, then the community development director also shall send a copy of the notice to the occupants of such property.

(i) The notice sent to the applicant shall include a sign that says a solar access permit for the property has been tentatively approved, and that informs readers where to obtain more information about it. The applicant shall be instructed to conspicuously post the sign so it is visible from right-of-way adjoining the property, and to sign and return a form provided by the community development director certifying that the sign was posted as provided herein not more than 14 days after the tentative decision was mailed.

(ii) The notice shall include the plot plans required in subsections (C)(2) and (3) of this section, the proposed solar access height limits and duties created by the permit.

(iii) The notice shall request recipients to verify that the plot plan shows all nonexempt vegetation on the recipient’s property, and to send the community development director comments in writing within 14 calendar days after the tentative decision is mailed if the recipient believes the applicant’s plot plan is inaccurate.

(d) Within 28 days after notice of a tentative decision is mailed to affected parties, the community development director shall consider responses received from affected parties and/or an inspection of the site, modify the plot plan and the permit to be consistent with the accurate information, and issue a final decision. The community development director shall send a copy of the permit and solar access height limits to the owners of each property affected by the permit.

(5) If the application is approved, the applicant shall record the permit, associated solar access height limits, legal descriptions for the affected properties, and the site plan required in subsection (C)(3) of this section, with such modifications as required by the community development director, in the office of the county recorder with the deeds to the properties affected by it before the permit is effective.

(E) Permit Enforcement Process.

(1) Enforcement Request. A solar access permittee may request the city to enforce the solar access permit by providing the following information to the community development director:

(a) A copy of the solar access permit and the plot plans submitted with the permit; and

(b) The legal description of the lot(s) on which alleged nonexempt vegetation is situated, the address of the owner(s) of that property, and a scaled site plan of the lot(s) showing the nonexempt vegetation; and

(c) Evidence the vegetation violates the solar access permit such as a sunchart photograph, shadow pattern, and/or photographs.

(2) Enforcement Process. If the community development director determines the request for enforcement is complete, he or she shall initiate an enforcement action pursuant to CMC 18.05.090; provided, the community development director shall not enforce the permit against vegetation the owner of which shows was in the ground on the date the permit application was filed with the city.

(F) Expiration and Extension of a Solar Access Permit.

(1) Expiration. Every permit issued by the community development director under the provisions of this chapter shall expire if the construction of the solar feature protected by such permit is not commenced within of 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the construction of the solar feature protected by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. If the permittee does not show construction of the solar feature will be started within of 180 days of the date of the permit or the extension, or if the solar feature is removed, the community development director shall terminate the permit by recording the notice of expiration in the office of the county recorder with the deeds to the affected properties. If attached to a subdivision, it shall expire with the plat.

(2) Extension. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he or she may commence work under that permit when he or she is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The community development director may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding of 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.38; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



Chapter 18.168 LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES

Sections:

18.168.010    Purpose.

18.168.020    Applicability.

18.168.030    Application.


18.168.010 Purpose.

Allow and encourage development practices and tools that integrate, enhance and promote the preservation and protection of significant natural resources by using low-impact techniques that support the overall natural resource system. [Ord. 878 § 1 (Exh. B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.81.]


18.168.020 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter are not required for new development or redevelopment. The provisions are applicable only when the property owner and applicant voluntarily decide to utilize the elements of this chapter to address land-use criteria in compliance with an associated land-use application. [Ord. 878 § 1 (Exh. B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.82.]


18.168.030 Application.

A separate application shall not be required to apply or receive approval to implement low-impact development practices. Proposed implementation of low-impact development practices shall be incorporated into the appropriate land-use application.

(A) Procedure. When a property owner and applicant choose to utilize provisions in this section to address approval criteria or other development standards, they shall cite and demonstrate compliance with the appropriate low-impact development practice.

(B) Low-Impact Development Practices.

(1) Engineering. Proposals that use these techniques shall require review and approval by the city engineer.

(a) Allow a street modification for reduced impervious surface (hard surface width, alternative pervious surfaces, etc.) or design speed, given all engineering requirements for safe motor vehicle movement are met. The modification shall result in preservation of a significant natural resource as identified in the natural resource protection plan.

(b) For public or private alleys, drives or aisles, the use of pervious materials for large vehicle maneuvering, parking, bicycle and pedestrian ways.

(c) Approve pervious pavement for areas that do not require access for large vehicles (80,000 pounds).

(d) Bridges and culverts that are built with a natural bottom shall demonstrate that they will not create long-term maintenance issues and/or fill up and create potential flood hazards.

(2) Hardscape.

(a) Off-street parking standards may permit a reduction of required number of parking spaces when a development provides direct pedestrian/bicycle connection from its intended use to a transit stop or public trails and pathway access improvements (See CMC 18.143.060(B)).

(b) Residential driveways or drive aisles that are located in a rear yard may have a gravel surface up to the point of where a vehicle is to be parked. The parking surface shall be impervious. All single-family or duplex residential lots are required to have the driveway that abuts the public right-of-way be impervious, and it shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length.

(c) Commercial and industrial projects may request through the appropriate design review process the use of gravel for secondary driveways or drive aisles that have been engineered and designed to support year-around use by emergency vehicles (i.e., fire trucks). These gravel driveways/drive aisles shall not be used for parking, loading and/or unloading of vehicles.

(d) Allow for a reduction in parking lot landscaping, when the applicant demonstrates a one percent reduction in the required amount of landscaping, for every two percent of existing mature tree canopy cover preserved. The total reduction shall not exceed 20 percent.

(e) Vehicle maneuvering areas that are approved for outdoor storage and display of agriculture equipment, machinery and all terrain vehicles (ATVs: recreational vehicles designed primarily for off-road use, excluding motorhomes, cars, trucks, vans, SUVs and motorcycles) do not have to be placed on impervious surface. They may be displayed on an approved dust-free, pervious surface.

(3) Landscape.

(a) Allow a reduction in the amount of required landscaping in exchange for equivalent preserved upland natural resources.

(b) Allow a reduction of up to 25 percent of the required landscaping, when it is proportional to the area planted in exclusively native plants.

(c) In commercial zones permit an approved 1:1 reduction in required landscaping, when substituted with a pervious, usable hard surface plaza or patio area approved for outdoor use and related to the intended use of the site.

(4) Building Design.

(a) When a natural resource is identified and preserved on the original subject parcel, a proportional amount of lot coverage for residential zoned properties may be increased. All yard setbacks shall be maintained as approved.

(b) Offer storm water credits for “green roofs” that meet state and local building standards/requirements. To qualify for “green roof” storm water credits, the proposal shall be submitted with a service provider letter from Clean Water Services (CWS) certifying that CWS approves of the performance level of the “green roof.”

(c) An applicant may request an increase in building height in mixed use, commercial and industrial zoning districts through approval of an administrative conditional use permit (Type II process), when an off-street parking structure/facility is incorporated into the design of a building that demonstrates:

(i) An overall reduction in the impervious surface that is equal to or greater than the impervious surface needed for the required parking spaces based on the off-street parking standard; or

(ii) If there is a direct correlation with preservation of a significant natural resource.

(5) Applications and documents related to the request, which will require further city approval, shall be submitted to the city in the proper sequence. [Ord. 878 § 1 (Exh. B), 2006; Code 2000 § 11.40.83.]


Chapter 18.170 CULTURAL/HISTORIC RESOURCES

Sections:

18.170.010    Purpose.

18.170.020    Authority and scope of review.

18.170.030    Resource designation.

18.170.040    Development permits.


18.170.010 Purpose.

These provisions are intended to promote the preservation and enhancement of the city’s identified cultural and historic sites and artifacts. The purpose of these regulations are:

(A) To encourage public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the city’s cultural and historic resources;

(B) To foster community, neighborhood, and ownership pride based on preservation, enhancement, and use of cultural and historic resources;

(C) To protect and enhance property values and the aesthetic quality of the community;

(D) To identify and resolve conflicts between the preservation of historic resources and alternative land uses;

(E) To facilitate restoration and upkeep of historic buildings by integrating the management of resources and relevant data into the development permit process; and

(F) To provide standards and procedures for designating cultural and historic resources, allowing normal and necessary maintenance, managing restoration, and regulating alteration and demolition of identified resources. [Ord. 666 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.41.]


18.170.020 Authority and scope of review.

The review of development permits related to designated resources shall be consistent with the procedures set forth herein. The city council may, by resolution, appoint a review commission to review special permits and/or designation of resource sites. In the absence of an historical review commission, the planning commission shall act in that capacity for review of development permit requests. The scope of review on any resource site shall be limited to the exterior appearance and features of the structure. The remaining lot area and undesignated accessory structures are not subject to special review under this section. [Ord. 666 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.42; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003.]


18.170.030 Resource designation.

All registered cultural and historic resources shall be designated by a CHR designation on the comprehensive plan map. Addition or removal of a designated resource shall be managed as required by the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO).

(A) A resource shall only be designated upon findings of significance consistent with the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) policies and requirements.

(B) A resource of potential historic, cultural, or archeological significance discovered during the review of a development permit or construction at the site shall be protected by a temporary stop work, not to exceed 45 days, to allow for notification of appropriate agencies and for preliminary findings as to the site’s level of resource significance. On or before the forty-fifth day, the city council shall hold a public hearing to determine the site appropriateness for designation.

(1) If the site is found to be significant with a need for protection, the council shall initiate a plan amendment and the provision of this section shall apply.

(2) If negative findings are made as to significance, the council shall order the stop work to be lifted.

(C) Except in the case of a request for designation by the owner of a resource site, the burden of proof of significance and evaluation of conflicting use impacts shall be on the city and affected agencies or interested parties. If the owner requests designation, the burden of proof shall be on the owner.

(D) The burden of proof of compliance with permit criteria set forth herein for exterior improvements or alterations of designated resources shall be on the applicant.

(E) The designation of a resource may be removed only by comprehensive plan map amendment based upon compelling evidence that the designation was in error, is no longer of significance to the public, or that the public will benefit to a greater degree by an alternative use.

(F) The designation of a resource shall be only established with the property owner’s consent. [Ord. 666 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.43; Ord. 841 Exh. 1, 2003.]


18.170.040 Development permits.

(A) Any alteration of the exterior of a designated historic or cultural resource, as defined by the Uniform Building Code, or any relocation of such a resource, shall be reviewed through the appropriate review procedure as prescribed by the community development director.

(B) No development permit shall be issued for exterior alteration or relocation of any designated resource or any potential resource which is under consideration for designation while a public hearing or any appeal thereof is pending.

(C) Approval of a development permit to alter the exterior of or relocate a designated resource shall be based on findings of adherence to the following guidelines:

(1) Retention of Original Construction. All original exterior materials and details shall be preserved to the maximum extent feasible.

(2) Height. Additional stories may be added to historic buildings provided:

(a) The added height complies with requirements of the building and development codes; and

(b) The added height does not exceed that which was traditional for the style of the building.

(D) Demolition of Resource.

(1) If a demolition permit for an identified significant historic structure is submitted, the city shall institute a 60-day notice period before holding a public hearing on the matter before the planning commission. Notice shall be generally posted with specific notice to:

(a) State Historic Preservation Office;

(b) The county museum;

(c) Local newspaper;

(d) City historical commission.

(2) When reviewing an application for demolition of a historic structure, the planning commission shall consider the following:

(a) The state of repair of the building;

(b) The reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair;

(c) The purpose of preserving such designated historical buildings and sites;

(d) The character of the neighborhood;

(e) Alternative to demolition, proposed by interested parties;

(f) The proposed use of the site, if the resource is demolished;

(g) All other factors the planning commission feels are appropriate.

(3) Based on the above considerations, the planning commission shall either:

(a) Immediately issue a demolition permit; or

(b) Grant an extension of up to 60 days for interested parties to formulate a legitimate acquisition plan. Such alternative action must, however, be implementable within 180 days of presentation to the planning commission;

(c) If no appropriate alternative is presented after the 60-day extension, the demolition permit shall be issued.

(E) Reference shall be made to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings for guidance in the review of a development permit involving a historic and cultural resource.

(F) Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in CMC 18.170.030 shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair in or on any resource designated by CMC 18.170.030 that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof.

(G) Abatement of a Historic and Cultural Resource. Abatement of an unsafe building or structure may proceed, through a Type III procedure, upon findings by the review authority that the condition of the building or structure is beyond practical repair or restoration, is a continuous threat to the safety of life or property which cannot otherwise be eliminated, or does not otherwise comply with the Uniform Building Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. [Ord. 666 § 1, 1987; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.44; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


Chapter 18.175 SIGNS

Sections:

18.175.010    Short title.

18.175.020    Purpose.

18.175.030    Authority – Permits.

18.175.040    Types of signs – Permanent signs, temporary signs, prohibited signs, existing signs and exempt signs.

18.175.050    Limitations on permitted signs –Number, height, size and location.

18.175.060    Master sign program.

18.175.070    Conditional use permits for signs.


18.175.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “sign code” of the city of Cornelius. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.50; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005.]


18.175.020 Purpose.

The general purpose of this chapter is to provide one of the principal means for implementation of the Cornelius comprehensive plan, to ensure continued aesthetic improvement to the city’s environment, and to promote traffic safety, all by classifying and regulating the locations, size design, type and number of signs and related matters. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.51; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.175.030 Authority – Permits. 

It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate any sign without first obtaining a sign permit and paying the required city fee. Applications for sign permits must be made on forms provided by the city planning department and accompanied by a scale drawing of each sign proposed.

(A) If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been started within 180 days and completed within 225 days after the date of issuance, the permit will become null and void. The time for commencing and completing work may be extended for an additional 45 days upon showing a reasonable cause for delay, if the request for extension is filed in writing with the community development director prior to the expiration of the original time period.

(B) Permits may be revoked by the community development director upon failure of the holder to comply with any provision of the sign code requirements. All signs and other advertising structures must conform to adopted and applicable editions of the Uniform Building Code. In addition to other requirements, all signs shall satisfy wind and deadload requirements, and all wood parts coming into contact with the ground must be treated. All exposed sign parts must be painted or treated in a manner to prevent deterioration. When required by the building code, plans must be stamped by a registered engineer or architect licensed by the state of Oregon.

(C) Permit Fees. Prior to issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall pay a one-time fee to the city in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.

Fees for alteration of nonconforming signs are the same as for new signs. Signs that have faces on more than one side shall be calculated by totaling the area of all sign faces.

(D) The community development director may authorize the placement of seasonal displays and signs on public property, including streets and public ways, subject to review by the public works director and building official for compliance with public works and building code standards.

(E) Violations of the Sign Code. The building official and the community development director or both of the city of Cornelius are hereby authorized to enforce the terms and provisions of the sign code.

(1) Removal of Illegal Signs. If any sign or other advertising structure regulated by this or any other code has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this or any other code, written notice will be given to the owner. If the owner or occupant of the land upon which the sign is erected fails to remove or alter the sign to comply with the applicable code within 30 days after the date of said notice, the sign shall constitute a nuisance and a violation. Signs or other advertising structures, which constitute an immediate peril to persons or property, may be removed by the building official summarily and without notice.

(2) Approved Materials and Maintenance. All parts of any sign must be of such materials or treated in such a manner that normal rainfall, moisture or sunlight will not harm or deface the surface. Unsafe portions of the sign will be repaired or replaced, i.e., deteriorated wood or metal.

(3) Signs to Be Removed. Any sign, which no longer advertises a licensed business or product, must be removed. The owner will be notified by certified mail and asked to remove the sign within 30 days.

(4) Damaged or Deteriorated Signs. All signs shall be kept in good condition and repair. Signs which are damaged or become deteriorated shall be repaired, replaced or removed. The owner or occupant of the land upon which the sign is located shall be given written notification to repair or remove the sign, and in the event that repairs or removal are not effected within a 30-day period after the date of said notice, then the building official shall be authorized to remove the sign at the expense of the owner.

(5) Materials and Attachment of Letters. All letters, figures or characters must be attached in a safe and secure manner, as determined by the building official, to the sign structure. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.52; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005.]


18.175.040 Types of signs – Permanent signs, temporary signs, prohibited signs, existing signs and exempt signs.

(A) Permanent Signs. Signs attached to a building, structure, or the ground in some manner and of materials intended for long term use. Authorized permanent signs shall not have a time limitation. A sign permit and fee are required.

(B) Temporary Signs. A sign, banner, pennant or advertising display constructed of fabric, wood, or other light materials not permanently attached to a building structure or the ground. A permit and fee are required.

(1) Temporary signs shall be permitted for no more than 90 days.

(2) Temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet per face, except in the residential zones.

(3) Temporary signs in residential zones shall not exceed four square feet in size.

(4) Temporary signs shall not exceed six feet in height.

(5) One temporary sign at a time shall be permitted for a permitted event/activity per property annually.

(6) Temporary signs shall conform to locational requirements of permanent signs. No signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way.

(C) Prohibited Signs. It is unlawful to erect, display or maintain any sign or advertising structure falling within any of the following descriptions:

(1) All signs, except as permitted in the sign code.

(2) Any sign located within public rights-of-way, except as identified in the central mixed use or corridor commercial zoning districts and in subsection (E) of this section.

(3) Signs that obstruct doorways, fire escapes or windows.

(4) Signs that constitute a traffic hazard as determined by the facilities and design review committee. Signs shall not be erected or placed so as to obstruct free and clear vision or, by reason of their position, shape or color, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.

(5) Signs adjacent to rights-of-way may not protrude into the right-of-way.

(6) Signs that interfere with the operation and maintenance of public or private utilities.

(7) Roof signs, except by approval of a conditional use permit.

(D) Existing Signs. All signs existing prior to May 1, 2000, and all signs erected after May 1, 2000, which are in compliance with applicable sign regulations in effect on May 1, 2000, so long as they are maintained, both cosmetically and structurally, shall be lawful.

(1) Nonconforming Signs. A nonconforming sign shall not be changed, enlarged, or altered without complying with the existing sign code. A nonconforming sign is a lawful sign that exists on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code, which is not in compliance with applicable sign regulations in effect on May 1, 2000.

(E) Exempt signs shall conform to the standards of this section. No fee or permit will be required for the following:

(1) Architect, engineer or contractor signs on a job site, which do not exceed 32 square feet in area and are removed within five days of the completion of the project.

(2) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger signs, public/semi-public signs and such temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved.

(3) Signs or banners on or over public thoroughfares within the city, erected by city personnel.

(4) Temporary property for sale, real estate, garage sale and property management signs located on the subject property in compliance with this section.

(5) Signs affixed to the interior of a window.

(6) Political campaign signs – Political campaign signs must not be placed within the public right-of-way, must adhere to the size limitation of the underlying zoning, and must be removed within 10 days after an election. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.53; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.175.050 Limitations on permitted signs –Number, height, size and location.

(A) Height shall not exceed 20 feet from grade to top of sign for freestanding and/or ground signs. The height of a sign shall be measured from the finished ground level, excluding mounds, berms, etc., to the top of the sign or the highest portion of the sign structure or frame, whichever is greater.

(B) Size. The size of a sign shall be the entire area within any type of perimeter or border, which encloses the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area with a parallelogram or a triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of the parallelogram or triangle. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign. Conforming and/or nonconforming signs in existence at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be counted in establishing the permitted area or size of all new signs to be allowed on the property. The total area of all signs (freestanding and wall) on any one piece of property may not exceed the maximum permitted under subsection (B) of this section.

(1) Ground and freestanding signs as defined in Chapter 18.195, Definitions, may be permitted on any street, but may not protrude into the right-of-way, except as permitted within the central mixed use or corridor commercial zoning districts. All signs shall comply with the vision clearance standards. One ground and/or freestanding sign shall be allowed per business establishment or tax lot, whichever is less. Tax lots created by fee ownership land division and contiguous tax lots under the one ownership shall be considered one tax lot for the purposes of calculating the number of freestanding signs allowed. The maximum overall dimensions or maximum area of such signs may not exceed the following:

 

	Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts

	 	C2	GMU	CMU, CC	MI, LI

	Number	1	1	1	1

	Size (Maximum square feet for all faces combined)	64'	64'	36'	64'

	Size (Maximum for any one face)	32'	32'	18'	32'

	Height Maximum	20'	20'	16'	20'

(a) No permanent ground sign may be within 30 feet (measured diagonally at corner locations) of another permanent ground sign.

(b) In the case of a through lot which has a distance of 200 feet or greater at its shortest measurement point between the streets, and the frontages are on streets which have a collector or higher status, a freestanding sign may be placed on each street frontage, so long as all freestanding signs on the lot are a minimum of 200 feet apart.

(c) In the central mixed use and corridor commercial zoning districts signs shall emphasize pedestrian orientation. Signs shall project no more than two feet out from a building elevation, or 12 inches into a pedestrian space (i.e., sidewalks, courtyards, etc.), with the exception of signs on weather protection features such as awnings and arcades. Signage projecting into ODOT right-of-way shall be subject to ODOT standards. Sign lettering in the central mixed use and corridor commercial districts shall not exceed 12 inches in height. Movable/portable outdoor signs or displays shall be limited to business hours only and shall be no more than two feet wide by three feet tall with a maximum of one sign per business.

(d) Projecting signs in mid-block alleys in the CMU district require a minimum 13-foot vertical clearance.

(2) Wall signs shall be permitted for each business not to exceed 20 percent of a linear building face. The 20 percent may be divided among the building faces, for example, 10 percent of two building faces or five percent of four building faces. The area of each sign shall be computed by applying the allowable percentage to the wall to which the sign will be attached. The building front includes all wall and window area. The 20 percent shall include the total area of all lettering, characters or designs. The background color or colors will also be included in the case of trademarks. No wall sign shall project more than 12 inches from the wall surface it is attached to, except for awnings that serve as coverage for the sidewalk.

(C) Applicability. Except with written approval by the community development director, approved signage shall only apply to a licensed business(es) located on the same tax lot(s). [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.54; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.175.060 Master sign program.

For developments containing three or more businesses or that exceed 300 feet in lineal street frontage, a master sign program may be required by the planning commission through the site design review process. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.55; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005.]


18.175.070 Conditional use permits for signs.

Certain signs may require special consideration where unique conditions involving topography, nonconforming uses and/or structures, size or shape of property, regulatory requirements, building design, or other situations exist. An application to request a conditional use permit for a sign(s) shall be made per Chapter 18.105 CMC and the appropriate fee paid. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.40.56; Ord. 857 Exh. 1, 2005.]


Chapter 18.177 MARIJUANA REGULATIONS

Sections:

18.177.010    Purpose and intent.

18.177.020    Compliance with state law.

18.177.025    Definitions.

18.177.030    Business license required.

18.177.040    Approval process.

18.177.050    Standards.


18.177.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing standards and regulations in the city of Cornelius for the operation of marijuana-related activities and facilities as allowed by state law. [Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.177.020 Compliance with state law.

The operation of medical marijuana facilities shall be pursuant to OAR Chapter 333, Division 8. The operation of recreational marijuana facilities shall be pursuant to OAR Chapter 845, Division 25. Any conflict between the regulations herein and the applicable state law shall default to the more comparatively restrictive of the two. [Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.177.025 Definitions.*

“Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

“Consumer” means an adult person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds or uses marijuana items for a purpose other than resale.

“Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp as defined in ORS 571.300.

“Marijuana processing facility” means a building or structure used in whole or in part for processing marijuana as defined in Chapter 614, Oregon Laws 2015 as the processing, compounding or conversion of marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates or cannabinoid extracts, and which is registered with the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475B.435 or licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission under ORS 475B.090. Processing does not include packaging or labeling.

“Marijuana waste” means the unwanted part or parts of a marijuana plant including, but not limited to, trimmings, shake, stems, remnants, by-products or any other vegetative elements of a marijuana plant that a generator wishes to dispose of. Marijuana waste for the purposes of this chapter does not include part or parts of a marijuana plant that have been treated or contaminated with solvents, or other chemicals that would be considered household hazardous waste or hazardous waste.

“Medical marijuana dispensary” means a retail facility, registered by the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475B.450, that is allowed to receive marijuana, immature marijuana plants, or usable marijuana products (such as edible products, ointments, concentrates or tinctures) and to transfer or sell that marijuana, immature plants, or usable products to a person with a valid Oregon Medical Marijuana Program card (a patient or the patient’s caregiver) or to persons over the age of 21 as described in Enrolled Senate Bill 460, Oregon Legislative Assembly 2015 Regular Session.

“Premises” or “licensed premises” includes the following areas of a location licensed under Section 19, 20, 21 or 22, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015:

(1) All public and private enclosed areas at the location that are used in the business operated at the location, including offices, kitchens, restrooms and storerooms, including all public and private areas;

(2) All areas outside of a building that the Oregon Liquor Control Commission has specifically licensed for the production, processing, wholesale sale, or retail sale of marijuana items; and

(3) For a location that the commission has specifically licensed for the production of marijuana outside of a building, the entire lot or parcel, as defined in ORS 92.010, that the licensee owns, leases, or has a right to occupy.

(4) “Premises” or “licensed premises” does not include a primary residence.

“Production facility” means a building or structure used in whole or in part for producing marijuana as defined in Chapter 614, Oregon Laws 2015, as the manufacture, planting, cultivation, growing or harvesting of marijuana, and which is registered with the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475B.420 or licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission under ORS 475B.070. Producing does not include drying or cultivation of immature plants received from a producer, or the cultivation and growing of an immature marijuana plant by a processor, wholesaler, or retailer if that party purchased or otherwise received the plant from a licensed producer.

“Propagate” means to grow immature marijuana plants or to breed or produce the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae.

“Retail sales facility” means a building or structure used in whole or in part for retail sales to a consumer of recreational marijuana, cannabinoid products, and miscellaneous items, and which is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

“Testing laboratory” means a building or structure used in whole or in part for testing of marijuana items, and which is accredited under ORS 438.605 to 438.620 and licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

“Wholesale sales facility” means a building or structure used in whole or in part for wholesale sales of marijuana, cannabinoid products, and miscellaneous items to a person other than a consumer, and which is registered with the Oregon Health Authority or licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. [Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2016-014 adds these provisions as Section 18.177.020. The section has been renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.


18.177.030 Business license required. 

Any person or entity intending to operate a medical marijuana dispensary, retail sales facility, processing facility, production facility, or wholesale sales facility within the city of Cornelius shall first be required to obtain a city business license and pay the applicable business tax pursuant to Chapter 5.05 CMC. [Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.177.040 Approval process.

A medical marijuana dispensary, retail sales facility, processing facility, production facility, or wholesale sales facility may only be permitted as a Type III conditional use under Chapter 18.105 CMC and only in zones where such facilities or uses are specifically allowed. Applications for any of the above-listed types of facilities shall be required to notice all properties within 1,000 feet of the property of the proposed facility for all required public notices. The city will require a proof of a license from the state (either OHA or OLCC) confirming the security plan and all other required improvements, prior to final occupancy. [Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


18.177.050 Standards.

(A) Hours of Operation. Medical marijuana dispensaries or retail sales facilities shall operate only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. An individual dispensary or retail sales facility may set hours within those specified, but may not be open outside those parameters.

(B) Public Access Prohibited. Access to a medical marijuana dispensary or retail sales facility shall be limited to employees, personnel, and customers over the age of 21.

(C) Security Measures Required.

(1) Landscaping shall be continuously maintained to provide clear lines of sight from public rights-of-way to all building entrances.

(2) Exterior lighting shall be provided and continuously maintained.

(3) Any security bars installed on doors or windows visible from the public right-of-way shall be installed interior to the door or window, in a manner that they are not visible from the public right-of-way.

(D) All marijuana products and paraphernalia sold must be enclosed in an opaque bag or container upon exiting a dispensary or retail facility.

(E) Marijuana Waste.

(1) Prior to disposal, marijuana waste shall be rendered unusable by either grinding and mixing (at a ratio of at least 1:1) with other compostable materials or yard waste, or by mixing with noncompostable solid waste such as paper, cardboard, plastic, soils, or other approved materials.

(2) Marijuana waste shall be temporarily stored in a secured indoor container until it is rendered unusable.

(3) Any facility generating marijuana waste shall use the services of a solid waste franchisee or self-haul such materials to a properly licensed and approved solid waste disposal or recycling facility.

(4) An alternative waste security system approved by the community development director, demonstrating that the alternative system will render marijuana waste unusable equally or better than the required grinding, mixing, and disposal system.

(F) Odor Mitigation Measures Required. Production and processing facilities shall install and maintain enhanced ventilation systems designed to prevent detection of marijuana odor from adjacent properties or the public right-of-way. Such systems shall include the following features:

(1) Installation of activated carbon filters on all exhaust outlets to the building exterior;

(2) Location of exhaust outlets a minimum of 10 feet from the property line and 10 feet above finished grade; and

(3) Maintenance of negative air pressure within the facility; or

(4) An alternative odor control system approved by the building official based on a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state of Oregon, demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor equally or better than the required activated carbon filtration system.

(G) Co-Location Prohibited. A medical marijuana dispensary or retail sales facility shall not be located at the same address with any facility or business at which medical marijuana is consumed by cardholders.

(H) Mobile or Temporary Businesses Prohibited. A medical marijuana dispensary or retail sales facility may not operate as a mobile or temporary business as defined in the Cornelius Municipal Code.

(I) Drive-In or Drive-Through Facilities Prohibited. A medical marijuana dispensary or retail sales facility shall not have a drive-in or drive-through facility.

(J) Marijuana Production Limits. In addition to limits imposed by OAR Chapter 333, Division 8 and OAR Chapter 845, Division 25, no more than one Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) licensed marijuana production or Oregon Health Authority (OHA) registered medical marijuana grow site shall be allowed per legal parcel or lot.

(K) Proximity Restrictions. A medical marijuana dispensary, retail sales facility, processing facility, production facility, or wholesale facility shall not be located within the specified proximity of any of the uses listed below. For purposes of this subsection, the distance specified is measured from the closest points between property lines of the affected properties:

(1) Schools. Within 1,000 feet of a public or private elementary, middle, or high school or other school attended primarily by children under 18 years of age.

(2) Public and Private Plazas and Parks. Within 500 feet of a public or private plaza or active use park. As used in this subsection, a public plaza or park includes a plaza or park owned and maintained by the city of Cornelius or its assigns. A private plaza or park includes a plaza or park owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association (HOA).

(3) Other Uses. Within any distance from any other use as specified by state law.

(L) Other Dispensaries or Retail Sales Facilities. A medical marijuana dispensary or recreational marijuana retail sales facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of another medical marijuana dispensary or recreational marijuana retail sales facility.

(M) Outdoor Marijuana Production Prohibited. All outdoor cultivation of marijuana within the city is prohibited, except in the case of an individual registered residential medical marijuana grow site authorized under OAR 333-008. Except as noted herein, it is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the city of Cornelius to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the outdoor cultivation of marijuana.

(N) Exceptions to Proximity Restrictions. A medical marijuana dispensary, retail sales facility, processing facility, production facility, or wholesale facility that exists at the time any use listed in subsection (K) of this section is developed, converted, or constructed and as a result is located within 1,000 feet of any of the above-listed facilities may remain at that location until such time as the business license expires or the approved use ceases to legally exist. Following a business license expiration or cessation of operations, the property shall be subject to the proximity restrictions in effect at the time of cessation. [Ord. 2016-014 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2017-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017.]


Chapter 18.180 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLAN CHECKING FEES

Sections:

18.180.010    Definitions.

18.180.020    Applicability.

18.180.030    Submission of plans.

18.180.040    Construction permit fee.

18.180.050    Public works construction permit.

18.180.060    Stop work order.


18.180.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter:

(A) A “public improvement” includes any improvement of public streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs, gutters, sewers, sewer collection lines, sewer lateral, sewage pumping station, sewer pressure line, sewage treatment device, water line, water pumping station, water treatment device, water valves and hydrants, storm drainage sump, storm drainage line, storm drainage ditch, dike, fill, excavation and any improvements defined in ORS 223.387.

(B) Domestic wells, septic tanks and any type of construction regulated by the State Building Code as adopted by the city and city subdivision regulations are excluded from the terms of this chapter, except that such nonpublic systems must be authorized for private use by the city council, based on recommendations from the community development director and city engineer. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.11; amended during 2007 recodification.]


18.180.020 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to construction as defined in this chapter proposed by any private party, quasi-public body, public agency or governmental unit except the city. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.12.]


18.180.030 Submission of plans.

Complete plans, including sufficient detail to ensure full and complete disclosure of all work contemplated, shall be submitted to the city for approval, subject to the following:

(A) Plans shall be prepared with reference to the survey grid system adopted by the city, and no other system of locations or elevations shall be used. The city will furnish, upon request at the price established by resolution, required photogrammetric maps. No other maps shall be used, except as may be approved by the public works director as being more up-to-date or accurate.

(B) Plans shall indicate pertinent connections to nearby public works with detailed information on method of connection.

(C) Plans shall indicate drainage or visibility effects on adjoining or nearby property, together with appropriate mitigation.

(D) Where applicable to the improvement, plans shall indicate methods of providing for future connections of adjoining, beyond or nearby property to the public improvement. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.13.]


18.180.040 Construction permit fee.

(A) The applicant shall pay a public works construction permit fee. The rate of such fee shall be determined by resolution of the city council.

(B) The permit fee is intended to defray typical or average, but not necessarily actual, costs incurred by the city in providing technical services related to any public works construction performed through a private engineer and contractor at the applicant’s expense. Typical services provided by the city include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Meeting with the applicant, his engineer or agent to review city standards, specifications, or ordinances and procedures;

(2) Providing the engineer with information on existing conditions and facilities;

(3) Providing information and data for any state or county approvals that are required;

(4) Providing a detailed review of all construction drawings, engineering and specifications;

(5) Making inspections necessary to assure compliance with city standards and specifications, exclusive of work related to processing change orders, progress pay estimates, or other matters not directly affecting the city;

(6) Keeping notes and records sufficient for preparation of “as-built” drawings by the engineer;

(7) Updating city map files and records by incorporating “as-built” information; and

(8) Meeting with various utility companies to review and coordinate all utility construction and installations.

(C) Any required soils or materials testing, when performed by a private or independent testing firm, shall be paid for by the applicant, separate from the permit fee.

(D) When construction plans are incomplete or when it is not practicable to determine a fair valuation of work to be performed, the engineer’s preliminary cost estimate may be used to determine the permit fees. However, when the permit fee is to be based on estimated construction cost, the fee may be adjusted upward by not more than 20 percent by the city engineer. A decision by the city engineer regarding the approved cost estimate shall be final. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.14; amended during 2007 recodification.]


18.180.050 Public works construction permit.

After approval of plans and payment of the fee established in CMC 18.180.040, a permit for public works construction shall be issued by the city engineer. The construction authorized by the city shall be clearly specified on the permit. The city engineer and any authorized consultant personnel employed by the city shall have free access to the property until the construction is completed and approved by the city. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.15; amended during 2007 recodification.]


18.180.060 Stop work order.

All persons or organizations making a public improvement as defined in CMC 18.180.010 without a valid permit, or in violation of the terms and conditions of their permit, shall cease and desist from the improvement upon issuance of a stop work order by the community development director or designee. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.16; amended during 2007 recodification.]


Chapter 18.185 PARK SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE

Sections:

18.185.010    Purpose.

18.185.020    Procedure.

18.185.030    Authority.

18.185.040    Additional charges.


18.185.010 Purpose.

In the interest of promoting usable public open spaces within the city, the city shall develop a parks and open spaces system that maintains no less than the current year’s level of service. Development of vacant land will increase the general demand on the existing parks and the improvements within them so that without additional parks and improvements the general recreation accessibility and opportunities to all residents will diminish proportionately with the increase in population. Therefore, in order to provide for the current level of service the city shall implement a park and recreation system development charge in a manner set forth in the parks and open spaces master plan and described in this chapter. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.21; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.185.020 Procedure.

The methodology used to establish a reimbursement fee shall be proportional to the impact of added housing on the parks system, and shall consider the following factors:

(A) The cost or market value of then-existing facilities (LOS), including land and improvements, excluding system development charge (SDC) funds expended;

(B) The value of unused capacity, and/or the proportional cost of increased capacity provided from improvements to existing facilities;

(C) Rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements;

(D) The costs associated with complying with the provisions of ORS 223.287 to 223.314, including the costs of developing methodologies for calculating charges, and costs of annual accounting and reporting of SDC revenues and expenditures; and

(E) Other relevant factors. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.22.]


18.185.030 Authority.

The parks and open spaces master plan contains the methodology for the parks and recreation system development charges. The amount of the SDC shall be set by resolution, adopted by the city council.

(A) The building official shall calculate the system development charge due and the amount shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for each residential unit authorized to be constructed on the permit. The full amount due shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit, unless special payment provisions have been authorized by the city council to mitigate financial hardship, but shall be paid prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.

(B) The park SDC’s may only be expended for capital improvements to the parks system, including acquisition and development. Improvements must be listed on the city’s capital improvement schedule, as set forth in Section 5 of Exhibit B of the parks and open spaces master plan to be eligible for the SDC funding. The city council may from time to time update the capital improvements schedule by resolution. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.23; amended during 2007 recodification.]


18.185.040 Additional charges.

The system development charge imposed under the provisions of this chapter is in addition to any and all applicable taxes, assessments, charges, licenses or fees otherwise provided by law. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.24.]


Chapter 18.190 GENERAL REFERENCE INFORMATION

Sections:

18.190.010    Housing assistance plan – Adopted.

18.190.020    Parks and open space master plan – Adopted.

18.190.030    Street names – Renaming certain streets.


18.190.010 Housing assistance plan – Adopted.

The city of Cornelius housing assistance plan prepared by CH2M-Hill, dated July 30, 1979, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city recorder, is adopted by reference and incorporated in this code. [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.31.]


18.190.020 Parks and open space master plan – Adopted.

That certain parks and open space master plan of the city of Cornelius, Oregon, dated February 1999. The plan shall be known and pleaded as “The Parks and Open Space Master Plan of the City of Cornelius, Oregon, February 1999.” [Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.32.]


18.190.030 Street names – Renaming certain streets. 

The following streets located within the city are renamed as follows:

(A) The cul-de-sacs on South Dogwood Drive to be named: Dogwood Circle, Dogwood Place, and Dogwood Court.

(B) The cul-de-sacs on South Tarrybrooke Drive to be named: Tarrybrooke Place, Tarrybrooke Circle, and Tarrybrooke Court.

(C) South Julie Lee Court and South Lee Court to be named: South Dogwood Terrace. [Ord. 686 § 1, 1988; Ord. 810, 2000; Code 2000 § 11.50.33.]




Chapter 18.195 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.195.005    Applicability.

18.195.010    A definitions.

18.195.020    B definitions.

18.195.030    C definitions.

18.195.040    D definitions.

18.195.050    E definitions.

18.195.060    F definitions.

18.195.070    G definitions.

18.195.080    H definitions.

18.195.090    I definitions.

18.195.100    J definitions.

18.195.110    K definitions.

18.195.120    L definitions.

18.195.130    M definitions.

18.195.140    N definitions.

18.195.150    O definitions.

18.195.160    P definitions.

18.195.170    Q definitions.

18.195.180    R definitions.

18.195.190    S definitions.

18.195.200    T definitions.

18.195.210    U definitions.

18.195.220    V definitions.

18.195.230    W definitions.

18.195.240    X definitions.

18.195.250    Y definitions.

18.195.260    Z definitions.


18.195.005 Applicability.

For purposes of this title, the following mean. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.010 A definitions.

“Abut” means contiguous to, adjoining with a common boundary line.

“Access” means the place, means or way by which pedestrians, vehicles or both shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use. A private access is an access not in public ownership or control by means of deed, dedication or easement.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means a second or secondary, self-contained, dwelling unit with separate entrance and kitchen, developed in conjunction with an existing single-family residence.

“Accessory structure or use” means a structure or use incidental and subordinate to the main use of the property, including a home occupation, which is located on the same lot with the main use and contributes to the comfort or convenience of persons occupying the property, but not including the keeping of livestock other than ordinary household pets.

“Acre, gross” means 43,560 square feet.

“Acreage, gross” means the proposed size of the site expressed in acreage, including any unbuildable area.

“Acreage, net” means the proposed size of the site expressed in acreage minus any unbuildable area. The following areas are deemed unbuildable for the purposes of calculating net acreage:

(a) Street dedications and those areas used for private streets and common driveways; and

(b) Environmentally constrained lands, such as open water areas, floodplains, water quality facilities, wetlands, natural resource areas, and other preservation areas set aside in separate tracts or dedicated to a public entity; and

(c) Land set aside in separate tracts or dedicated to a public entity for schools, parks, or open space purposes.

“Adequate services” means public water, public sewer, fire protection, drainage and access (local and minor collector roads).

“Adjacent” means near or close. For example, an industrial district across the street from a residential district shall be considered as “adjacent.”

“Alley” means a narrow street through or partially through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.

“Animal hospital” means a place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and related care.

Apartment house. See “Dwelling, multi-family.”

“Area” means the total area of a sign, including all decorative or structural trim, facing, announcement, demonstration, display, illustration, or any other attention getting device, exclusive of essential structural supports.

“Awning” means a roof-like structure of fabric stretched over a rigid frame projecting from the elevation of a building designed to provide continuous overhead weather protection. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.195.020 B definitions.

“Banner” means a sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always include the letters A or V.

“Basement” means a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half of its height, measured from the floor to its ceiling, below the average adjoining finished grade.

“Billboards” means signs advertising products, services or events other than those specifically available on the premises.

“Block face” means the distance between the right-of-way line of one intersecting street to the right-of-way line of the next closest intersecting street. Cul-de-sacs shall not be considered as intersecting streets.

“Boarding, lodging, or rooming house” means a building where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation for not less than three nor more than 15 guests.

“Building” or “structure” shall be as defined by the building code and shall also include a structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, retaining walls, stairways, required off-street parking facilities, any well, whether for water, oil or other products, and any underground storage facilities; but excluding driveways, walks, and similar slab construction not exceeding the surrounding ground level by six inches.

“Building area” means the gross cubic area of any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

“Bulk retail use” means a retail use that is housed in a warehouse style building, is developed as a warehouse style building both on the interior and exterior, sells primarily institutional sized or multi-pack products in bulk quantities, has limited hours of operation and is not part of a larger shopping center. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.030 C definitions.

“Camping vehicle” means either a vacation trailer or a self-propelled vehicle or structure equipped with wheels for highway use and which is intended for human occupancy and is being used for vacation and recreational purposes, but not for residential purposes, and is equipped with plumbing, sink, or toilet.

“Canopy” means a permanent, fixed shelter.

“Certified child care center” means a child care facility that is certified to care for 13 or more children, or a facility that is certified to care for 12 or fewer children and located in a building constructed as other than a single-family dwelling.

“City” means the city of Cornelius, Oregon.

“Child” means a person under the age of 13 years.

“Child care home, state registered or certified” means a family child care home where child care is offered in the home of the provider to not more than 16 children, including children of the provider, regardless of full-time or part-time status.

“Clinic, outpatient” means an establishment where human patients are examined or treated by physicians, surgeons, optometrists, dentists or similar state licensed professionals of the healing arts, with patients not lodged overnight.

“Commission” means the city planning commission.

“Condominium, residential” means individual ownership of a housing unit in a multiunit housing structure.

Contiguous. See “Abut.”

“Coverage, lot” means that percentage of the total lot area covered by buildings, including covered parking areas.

“Crown cover” means the area within the drip line or perimeter of the foliage of a tree.

“Cul-de-sac” means a short dead-end street with a circular turn-around at the end. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.195.040 D definitions.

“Density, net” means the number of dwelling units per unit of land expressed as the number of acres of land per dwelling unit. The net density for any lot is computed by dividing the net acreage of the parcel by the number of dwelling units.

“Deteriorated” means to have reached a state or condition that promotes degradation or decline in the quality and/or appearance of a structure, so as not to represent the authorized/permitted condition.

“Development” means the act of bringing about growth, to construct or alter a structure, to make a physical change in the use or appearance of land, to divide land into parcels, or to create or terminate rights of access.

“Development” means any short plat, partition, subdivision or planned unit development that is created under the city’s land division or zoning regulations.

Development. For the purpose of the flood area zone in this code, “development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.

“Development permit” means any permit required for development, including but not limited to construction, enlargement or alteration of a structure or to make a physical change in the use or appearance of the land.

“District” or “zoning district” means a portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title.

“Drive-in use” means any commercial use which permits the driver to transact business from his automobile.

“Drive-up window facility” means a facility, whether it be a primary or accessory use, other than automobile service station, which is designed to allow patrons to make purchases or receive services at a window or service area while remaining in their motor vehicles.

“Dwelling, common wall single-family” means a dwelling unit that shares a common wall with one other dwelling unit with a zero lot line setback, with each dwelling unit located on a separate lot.

“Dwelling, duplex,” or “dwelling, two-family” means a detached building containing two dwelling units located on a single parcel.

“Dwelling, multi-family” means a building containing three or more dwelling units.

“Dwelling, single-family” means a detached building containing one dwelling unit.

“Dwelling, single-family attached” means three or more dwelling units attached on common walls, separated by property lines on the common wall(s). A typical example of this dwelling type is a townhouse.

“Dwelling unit” means any building or portion of a building which contains living facilities in one or more rooms which include provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation for not more than one family. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.195.050 E definitions.

“Emergency access” means entry to or passage through an area by police, fire, and other authorized emergency response personnel in the course of, and specifically for the purpose of performing, their official duties, including responding to emergencies, inspections, drills, and simulation exercises.

“Employee” means all persons (including proprietor, executives, professional people, production, sales and distribution employees) working on the premises during the largest shift.

“Erect” means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and also includes the painting of wall signs.

“Exempt tree or vegetation” means the full height and breadth of vegetation that the city manager or his designee has identified as “solar friendly” and any vegetation listed on a plat map, a document recorded with the plat, or a solar access permit as exempt. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.060 F definitions.

“Facing” or “surface” means the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.

“Family” means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit in which board and lodging may also be provided for not more than three additional persons, excluding servants; or a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit.

“Fence, sight-obscuring” means a fence or living evergreen planting arranged in such a way as to obstruct vision.

“Fill” means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is deposited, placed, pulled, moved or transported on the site and includes the conditions resulting therefrom. The placement of fill is development of land.

“Flag lot” means a lot or parcel that is set back from the street at the rear or at the side of another lot or parcel, with vehicular access to the street provided by an accessway.

“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry areas from:

(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Floodplain” means the area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which may be subject to periodic inundation of floodwaters.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Floor area” means the area included in surrounding walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts.

“Floor area ratio” means the amount of gross floor area in relation to the amount of net site area, expressed in square feet. For example, a floor area ratio of two to one means two square feet of floor area for every one square foot of site area.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground, or a sign supported by any structure primarily for the display and support of the sign.

“Front lot line” means, for purposes of the solar access regulations, a lot line abutting a street. For corner lots, the front lot line is that with the narrowest frontage. When the lot line abutting a street is curved, the front lot line is the chord or straight line connecting the ends of the curve. For a flag lot, the front lot line is the lot line that is most parallel to and closest to the street, excluding the pole portion of the flag lot (see Figure 1 following Chapter 18.165 CMC). [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; amended during 2007 recodification; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.195.070 G definitions.

“Garage, private” means an accessory building or portion of a main building used for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned or used by occupants of the main building.

“Garage, public” means a building other than a private garage used for the care and repair of motor vehicles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for compensation, hire or sale.

“Garage sale” means a sale as regulated by Chapter 5.30 CMC, Business.

“Garden store” means a retail store for the sale of garden supplies and plants that are used in the care and development of residential property.

“Grade (ground level)” means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the building. In case a wall is parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.

“Ground sign” means a sign supported by one or more supports placed upon the ground, not attached to any building.

“Grove” means a stand of three or more trees of the same species or mix, which form a visual and biological unit. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.080 H definitions.

“Height of building” means the vertical distance from the “average grade” to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the point midway between the ridge and the eaves of a pitch or hip roof.


[IMAGE]


“Height of sign” means the vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the sign. This measurement is taken from the finished ground level, excluding mound, berms, etc., to the top of the sign or the highest portion of the sign structure or frame, whichever is greater.

“Home occupation” means any lawful activity conducted within a dwelling by members of the immediate family on property located within a residential zone for the purpose of earning income which activity involves:

(a) Personal appearances by customers on the property, by more than one customer per week or by 10 or more customers at any one time during any one-month period; or

(b) Any advertising which informs potential customers of the location of the residential dwelling for the purpose of attracting customers to the dwelling; or

(c) Any commercial activity which creates noise levels audible beyond the property line of the property upon which the residential dwelling is located; or

(d) Activities which attract more than two commercial deliveries of goods and services daily; or

(e) Outside storage of materials or products which are used in or created by the income producing activity.

Home occupations may include offices, studios, specialized instructional schools, or registered or certified family child care homes. Home occupations shall be accessory to the primary use of the dwelling for residential use.

“Hospital” means an establishment which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving medical, obstetrical, or surgical care and nursing service on a continuous basis.

“Hotel” means a building in which lodging is provided for guests for compensation and in which no provision is made for cooking in the lodging rooms. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.195.090 I definitions.

“Illuminated sign” means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes.



“Improvements, land” means improvements and amenities that shall be constructed on a site that will have a public impact either with development or during construction, but shall be privately maintained, such as private streets, mass site grading, ponds, benches, etc.

“Improvements, public” means land divisions and needed work to create new lots for the time of the construction that a public agency will own and maintain, such as public streets, sidewalks, sewers and water.

“Inoperable vehicle sign” means any sign attached or painted on a vehicle or trailer that is not operable and does not have a current valid license.

“Interior lot line” means any lot line which is not a street side lot line.

“Interior yard” means any yard which is not a street side yard. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.100 J definitions.

Reserved.


18.195.110 K definitions.

“Kennel” means a lot or building in which four or more dogs or cats at least four months of age are kept commercially for board, propagation or sale. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.120 L definitions.

“Land development” means approved improvements that will be privately maintained, but may have a public impact, such as mass site grading, private streets, amenities (ponds, benches, gazebos, etc.).

“Land development application” shall include any application or proceeding relating to the use and/or development of real property.

“Landscaping” means an exterior planted or vegetated area designed to be aesthetically appealing. The elements of landscaping include all forms of planting and vegetation, all adjustments, refinements, or designed developments in ground forms, rock groupings, or water patterns. Landscaping does not include artificial plants, shrubs or flowers, completely enclosed buildings or primarily utilitarian engineering structures such as walks, steps, walls, shelters, play areas, etc. These are the elements used to develop and refine space between, around, or within buildings and vehicular circulation elements.

“Lawful” means conformable to law, authorized or established by law. (From Webster’s Seventh Dictionary.)

“Lot” means a tract, parcel, or unit of land that is created by partitioning a subdivision of land.

“Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.

“Lot, corner” means a lot abutting on two intersecting streets other than an alley; provided, that the streets do not intersect at an angle greater than 135 degrees.

“Lot depth” means the horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.

“Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.

“Lot line” means the property line bounding a lot.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.130 M definitions.

“Marijuana facility” means a permanent or temporary structure housing an activity involved with the growing, processing, wholesaling or selling of marijuana, cannabinoid product, cannabinoid concentrate, or cannabinoid extract regulated by the Oregon Health Authority or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

“Marquee” means a permanently fixed structure extending over the entrance to a building and serving some purpose other than strictly to provide shelter.

“Master plan” means a plan for a defined geographic area in single or multiple ownership that is consistent with the comprehensive plan and includes a land use and circulation plan, development standards, design guidelines, an open space plan, utilities plans and a program of implementation measures and other mechanisms needed to carry out the plan. The plan shall be created through the land use review processes of this code pursuant to Chapters 18.100 and 18.105 CMC, as applicable.

“Mobile home” means:

(a) Residential Trailer. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes, and was constructed before January 1, 1962.

(b) Mobile House. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes, and was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

(c) Manufactured Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction safety standards regulations in effect at the time of construction.

“Mobile home accessory building or structure” means any awning, portable, demountable, or permanent cabana, ramada, carport, porch, skirting, or steps established for use of the occupant of the mobile home and which are designed or intended to be attached to and which depend, in whole or in part, upon the mobile home for structural support.

“Mobile home construction and safety standard, federal” means a standard for construction, design and performance of a mobile home promulgated by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the Federal National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1970 (Public Law 93.383).

“Mobile home park” means any place where four or more mobile homes are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. “Mobile home park” does not include a lot or lots located within a subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one mobile home per lot if the subdivision was approved by the local government unit having jurisdiction under a title adopted pursuant to ORS 92.010 to 92.190.

“Mobile structure” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, each built on a permanent chassis.

“Motel” or “auto court” means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units generally for the temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, includes auto courts, hostels and motor lodges.

“Moving sign” means any sign or advertising structure, with mechanical or electronic parts, which create any visible moving features or displays. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2016-011 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016.]


18.195.140 N definitions.

“Nonconforming structure or use” means a lawful existing structure or use at the time Ordinance No. 266 or any amendment becomes effective which does not conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located.

“Nonexempt tree or vegetation” means vegetation that is not exempt.

“North-south dimension” means the length of a line beginning at the mid-point of the northern lot line and extending in a southerly direction perpendicular to the northern lot line until it reaches a property boundary (see Figure 3 following Chapter 18.165 CMC).

“Northern lot line” means the lot line that is the smallest angle from a line drawn east-west and intersecting the northernmost point of the lot, excluding the pole portion of a flag lot. If the north line adjoins an undevelopable area other than a required yard area, the northern lot line shall be at the north edge of such undevelopable area. If two lot lines have an identical angle relative to a line drawn east-west, then the northern lot line shall be a line 10 feet in length within the lot parallel with and at a maximum distance from the front lot line (see Figure 2 following Chapter 18.165 CMC).

“Nursery,” or “day care facility” means a facility that provides day care for up to 12 children, including the provider’s children. This term applies to the total day care operation (physical setting, equipment, staff, provider, program, and care of children) and includes day care center, group day care home, home of a family care provider, nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, child care development center, and child playschool, except those facilities excluded by law. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.150 O definitions.

“Obsolete sign” means any sign which no longer applies to the business, property or site upon which it is located.

“Outline illumination” means lighting around the exterior of a sign face consisting of exposed reflective-type bulbs, strobe lights, incandescent lamps exceeding 40 watts, and fluorescent lamps.

“Owner” means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.160 P definitions.

“Park” means any public or private land reserved for recreational, educational, cultural, or open space uses.

“Parking,” as the principal use, means a facility providing for the temporary parking of automobiles and transportation vehicles which arrive and depart daily and remain for a short term.

“Parking space” means a rectangle not less than 20 feet long and eight and one-half feet wide, together with maneuvering and access space required for a standard American automobile to park within the rectangle.

“Partition land” means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year.

(a) “Partition land” does not include:

(i) Divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots;

(ii) Divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including but not limited to, court orders and proceedings involving testate or intestate successions;

(iii) Adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created, and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by zoning regulations.

(b) “Major partition” means when partitioning involves creation of a public street or right-of-way.

“Pedestrianway” means any sidewalk or walkway that is intended and suitable for pedestrian use.

“Planning commission” means the city planning commission.

“Plat” includes a final map, diagram, drawing, replat, or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision.

“Plaza” means an outdoor area suitable for use by persons and inaccessible to motor vehicles, except police and emergency response vehicles. Plazas must contain special, high-quality pavement materials, such as brickwork, cobblestones, or textured concrete, and may not be paved with chip-seal, asphalt, or similar compounds. Plazas typically contain a combination of specially paved surfaces, landscape elements, seating, and shelter providing full or partial shade. Plazas must be accessible from the public sidewalk, and may support activities such as sitting, informal gathering, eating, and commercial activity in compliance with standards in this title. Distinct types of plazas are defined below:

(a) “Entry plaza” means a semi-private plaza that supports pedestrian passage and provides a transition between the public sidewalk and private interior of a building. An arch, gate, pavement change, or other features may be used to designate the transition between the public sidewalk and the entry plaza.

(b) “Public plaza” means a plaza adjacent to a public sidewalk, which may function as an urban mini-park, provide plaza entrances to one or more buildings or tenant lease spaces, or support passage among areas, such as mid-block access through a block or to parking lots located centrally within the block.

“Portable sign” means a sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground, a sign designed to be moved from place to place. These signs primarily include but are not limited to A-frame signs, signs attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable, including trailer reader boards, paper, cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles.

“Projected street or roadway” means a street or highway as shown on the comprehensive plan map for which the right-of-way, or any portion thereof, has not as yet been acquired for public use.

“Projecting sign” means a sign which projects beyond the building wall surface more than 12 inches.

“Protected solar building line” means a line on a plat or map recorded with the plat that identifies the location on a lot where a point two feet above may not be shaded by structures or nonexempt trees (see Chapter 18.155 CMC, Figure 10).

“Public/semi-public signs” means those signs erected by a governmental body, nonprofit or service organization to identify parks, recreational facilities, churches, schools, governmental buildings, etc. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.170 Q definitions.

Reserved.


18.195.180 R definitions.

“Reader board” means a sign that provides for the manual removal and replacement of lettering, symbols and numbers using such a display face or structure that has been designed for a changing message or advertisement.

“Real estate signs” means those covered under Chapter 18.175 CMC.

“Recreation vehicle” means a boat, camper, motor vehicle, or portable vehicular structure capable of being towed on the highways by a motor vehicle, designed and intended for casual or short-term human occupancy for travel, recreational and vacation uses. If identified in some manner as a recreation vehicle by the manufacturer or registered as such with the state, it is prima facie a recreation vehicle.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vacation trailer or other unit with or without motive power which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational or emergency purposes and has a floor space of less than 220 square feet, excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms. The unit shall be identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

“Residential districts” mean zoning districts that provide for residential use as the primary use. These districts include single-family (R-7 and R-10), multi-family (A-2), and core residential (CR).

“Residential facility” means a residential care, residential training or residential treatment facility, as those terms are defined in ORS 443.400, licensed under ORS 443.400 through 443.460 or licensed under ORS 418.205 through 418.327 by the Department of Human Services that provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six to 15 individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility.

“Residential home” means a residential treatment or training or adult foster home licensed by or under the authority of the department, as defined in ORS 443.400, under ORS 443.400 through 443.825, a residential facility registered under ORS 443.480 through 443.500 or an adult foster home licensed under ORS 443.705 through 443.825 that provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home.

“Residential local street” means a street that is intended to provide direct access to abutting residential properties and discourage through traffic movements not related to the neighborhood in which the local street is located.

“Residential signs” mean signs identifying an apartment, boarding house, convalescent home, etc.

“Residential street” means a public way, lane, cul-de-sac, local street or neighborhood route serving primarily access functions, directly or indirectly, to one or more parcels that are predominantly residential in character or zoned for residential uses.

“Retail store” means a place of sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale.

“Right-of-way” means the horizontal area within the boundary lines of any street, highway, road, or way which provides for public use by means of dedication or deed.

“Road” means a public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, excluding a private way that is created to provide ingress or egress to such land in conjunction with the use of such land for forestry, mining, or agricultural purposes.

“Roof line” means either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette; where a building has several roof levels, this roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of the wall on which the sign is located.

“Roof sign” means any signage erected, maintained, and displayed above the eaves of a building or structure and is wholly upon or over the roof of any building. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2019-10 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019.]


18.195.190 S definitions.

“Security” means an irrevocable letter of credit and/or other financial instrument approved by the city.

“Setback” means the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference to the nearest vertical wall or other element of a principal building or structure as defined herein. The point of line of reference will be the lot line following any required dedication, or a special or reservation line if one is required pursuant to this title.

“Shade” means a shadow cast by the shade point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south.

“Shade point” means the part of a structure or nonexempt tree that casts the longest shadow onto the adjacent northern lot(s) when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south, except a shadow caused by a narrow object such as a mast or whip antenna, a dish antenna with a diameter of three feet or less, a chimney, utility pole, or wire. The height of the shade point shall be measured from the shade point to either the average elevation at the front lot line or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line. If the shade point is located at the north end of a ridgeline of a structure oriented within 45 degrees of a true north-south line, the shade point height computed according to the preceding sentence may be reduced by three feet. If a structure has a roof oriented within 45 degrees of a true east-west line with a pitch that is flatter than five feet (vertical) in 12 feet (horizontal), the shade point will be the eave of the roof. If such a roof has a pitch that is five feet in 12 feet or steeper, the shade point will be the peak of the roof (see Chapter 18.165 CMC, Figures 4 and 5).

“Shade reduction line” means a line drawn parallel to the northern lot line that intersects the shade point (see Chapter 18.165 CMC, Figure 6).

“Shadow pattern” means a graphic representation of an area that would be shaded by the shade point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging between 22.7 degrees east and west of true south (see Chapter 18.165 CMC, Figure 12).

“Sign” means a presentation or representation, other than a house number, by words, letters, figures, designs, pictures, or colors publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a person, a business, an article or merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a solicitation or a request for aid, or other type of advertising. This includes the surface upon which the presentation or representation is displayed. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign.

“Solar access height limit” means a series of contour lines establishing the maximum permitted height for nonexempt vegetation on lots affected by a solar access permit (see Chapter 18.165 CMC, Figure 11).

“Solar access permit” means a document issued by the city that describes the maximum height that nonexempt vegetation is allowed to grow on lots to which a solar access permit applies.

“Solar feature” means a device or combination of devices or elements that does or will use direct sunlight as a source of energy for such purposes as heating or cooling of a structure, heating or pumping of water, and generating electricity. Examples of a solar feature include a window that contains at least 20 square feet of glazing oriented within 45 degrees east and west of true south, a solar greenhouse, or a solar hot water heater. A solar feature may be used for purposes in addition to collecting solar energy, including but not limited to serving as a structural member of part of a roof, wall, or window. A south-facing wall without windows and without other features that use solar energy is not a solar feature for purposes of this title.

“Solar gain line” means a line parallel to the northern property line(s) of the lot(s) south of and adjoining given lot, including lots separated only by a street, that intersects the solar feature on that lot (see Chapter 18.165 CMC, Figure 7).

“Solar-oriented lot” means:

(1) A lot with a front lot line oriented to within 30 degrees of a true east-west line. When the lot line abutting a street is curved, the “front lot line” shall mean the chord or straight line connecting the ends of the curve. For a flag lot, the “front lot line” shall mean the lot line that is most parallel to the closest street, excluding the “pole portion of the flag lot”; or

(2) A lot which, when a straight line is drawn from a point midway between the side lot lines at the required front yard setback to a point midway between the side lot lines at the required rear yard setback, is oriented to within 30 degrees of true north along said line; or

(3) A corner lot with a south lot line oriented to within 30 degrees of a true east-west line, which south lot line adjoins a public street or permanently reserved open space; provided, however, that the abutting street right-of-way or open space has a minimum north-south dimension of at least 50 feet. For the purposes of this definition, “permanently reserved open space” shall include, without limitation, parks, cemeteries, golf courses and other similar outdoor recreation areas, drainage ditches and ponds, irrigation ditches and reservoirs, lakes, ponds, wetlands, open spaces reserved on plats for neighborhood use and other like and similar permanent open space.

“South” or “south facing” means true south, or 20 degrees east of magnetic south.

“Square feet” means the square feet or gross floor area under roof measured from the face of the building or structure, excluding only space devoted to covered off-street parking or loading.

“Storage, self-service” means the provision of separate storage areas for individual (or business) uses. The storage areas may be designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing and removing personal property. Examples include mini-storage units, multistory facilities and recreational vehicle storage.

“Storage yard” means any lot, or portion of a lot, which is used for the sole purpose of the outdoor storage of fully operable vehicles, construction equipment, construction materials, or other tangible materials and equipment.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the top story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above the basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.

“Street” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the placement of utilities and including the terms road, highway, lane, place, avenue, or other similar designations.

“Street side lot line” means a lot line which abuts a public street, alley or way. A given lot may have more than one street side lot line, depending upon the number of lot lines abutting a public street, alley, or way.

“Street side yard” means a yard located between the street side lot line and the nearest point of the building, and between the interior or other streetside lot line or lines of the subject lot.

“Street tree” means any tree located within the public or private right-of-way or easement for vehicular access, or associated public utility.

“Structural alteration” means a change to the supporting members of a structure including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders, or the roof.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground.

“Subdivide land” means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of the year.

“Subdivider” means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under CMC 17.05.040, to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.

“Subdivision” means either an act of subdividing land or an area or a tract of land subdivided into four or more parcels, tracts, or lots as defined in ORS 92.046.

“Substantial construction.” Providing there are buildings on the site, the completion of construction of footings for the building where the principal use will take place shall constitute substantial construction.

“Sunchart” means one or more photographs that plot the position of the sun between 10:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on January 21st, prepared pursuant to guidelines issued by the city manager or his designee. The sunchart shall show the southern skyline through a transparent grid on which is imposed solar altitude for a 45-degree and 30-minute northern latitude in 10-degree increments and solar azimuth from true south in 15-degree increments.

“Surety bond” means an irrevocable letter of credit and/or other financial instrument approved by the city. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 916 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 2018-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.195.200 T definitions.

“Temporary sign” means a sign, banner, pennant or advertising display constructed of fabric, wood, other light materials, not permanently attached to a building, structure, or the ground.

“Temporary sign, off-site” means a temporary sign approved for placement off the site where the primary use, sale, promotion, condition or similar activity is taking place. An off-site temporary sign permit shall be issued for a time period not to exceed 90 days.

“Temporary sign structure” means a sign or a structural support for a sign which is located directly on the ground, or on a foundation imbedded in the ground.

“Through lot” means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street.

“Time-temperature display” means any sign displaying time and temperature to the public.

“Transit route” means any public right-of-way where transit service is currently provided or a location planned for future transit service as identified in the transportation system plan or other adopted city plans.

“Transit route, major” means a transit route which serves areas planned and zoned for higher population and employment densities such as Metro 2040-designated regional centers, town centers, employment centers, main streets, station communities, and corridors.

“Transit stop” means any area posted as a transit stop where transit passengers board or exit.

“Transit stop, major” means an existing transit stop, or one shown in an adopted city plan, located on a major transit route and serving areas planned and zoned for higher population and employment densities such as Metro 2040-designated regional centers, town centers, employment centers, main streets, station communities, and corridors.

“Transit stop, minor” means an existing transit stop not located on a major transit route.

“Tree” means any woody, perennial plant, deciduous, evergreen or coniferous, characterized by having a main trunk of six inches or more in diameter 54 inches above natural grade (dbh). In cases of multi-stemmed or trunked trees, the diameter shall be the sum of diameters of all individual stems or trunks. Trees of less than six inches may be considered under this section if they are designated as historic or significant trees. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003; Ord. 2018-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018.]


18.195.210 U definitions.

“Undevelopable area” means an area that cannot be used practicably for a habitable structure because of natural conditions, such as slopes exceeding 20 percent in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south, severe topographic relief, water bodies, or conditions that isolate one portion of a property from another portion so that access is not practicable to the unbuildable portion, or manmade conditions, such as existing development which isolates a portion of the site and prevents its future development, setbacks or development restrictions that prohibit development of a given area of a lot by law or private agreement, or existence or absence of easements or access rights that prevent development of a given area.

“Use” means the purpose for which land or structure is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.220 V definitions.

“Vegetation” means any perennial plant, deciduous, evergreen or coniferous, which is not defined as a tree.

“Vehicle repair” means the general repair, alteration, rebuilding, maintenance or reconditioning of vehicles, including motor, body, frame, upholstery, interior or paint work.

“Vehicle sales lot” means a lot used for display, sale or rental of new or used vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobiles, boats, trailers and recreational vehicles.

“Vision clearance area” means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, two sides of which are lot lines for a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines at intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. The vision clearance area contains no planting, walls, structures, or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding 30 inches in height, except occasional tree trunks or poles. The vision clearance area shall be measured from the top of the curb or, if there is no curb, from the center line street grade and extend upward 10 feet. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.230 W definitions.

“Wall” means a linear, exposed face of a structure, not projecting more than 12 inches.

“Wall sign” means a sign attached to or painted on the exterior wall of any building or other structure. This includes signs attached to canopies, awnings, marquees or similar structures.

“Wholesale” means the bulk sale of goods generally for resale to a person other than the direct consumer. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.240 X definitions.

Reserved.


18.195.250 Y definitions.

“Yard” means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward. [Code 2000 § 11.60.00; Ord. 841 Exh. 2, 2003.]


18.195.260 Z definitions.

Reserved.

 



-----------------------------

The Cornelius Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 2019-10, passed November 4, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Cornelius Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.ci.cornelius.or.us/ City Telephone: (503) 357-9112

Code Publishing Company